
Carol Stream, IL Code of Ordinances


VILLAGE OF CAROL STREAM, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2019 S-2 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2019-04-15, passed 4-15-2019
State legislation current through 2018 Pam. No. 7



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



VILLAGE OFFICIALS
CAROL STREAM, ILLINOIS



2019



 



MAYOR (VILLAGE PRESIDENT)


Frank Saverino, Sr.


 


VILLAGE CLERK


Laura Czarnecki


 


BOARD OF TRUSTEES


Mary Frusolone


Rick Gieser


John LaRocca


Matthew McCarthy


Greg Schwarze


David Hennessey


 


VILLAGE MANAGER


Robert Mellor




 



CHAPTER 1: GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION



      Article



         1.   ORGANIZATION OF CODE



         2.   SEAL, FISCAL YEAR, OFFICIAL TIME, CHARGES FOR
RECORDS, BUDGET, BAD CHECK SERVICE CHARGE



         3.   VILLAGE PRESIDENT



         4.   BOARD OF TRUSTEES



         5.   RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURES



         6.   VILLAGE CLERK



         7.   USE OF VILLAGE PROPERTY



         8.   ETHICS



         9.   DISCRIMINATORY WORKPLACE HARASSMENT POLICY



ARTICLE 1:  ORGANIZATION OF CODE



Section



   1-1-1   Title



   1-1-2   Acceptance



   1-1-3   Amendments



   1-1-4   Numbering of sections



   1-1-5   Distribution of code



   1-1-6   Construction of words



   1-1-7   Reference to section numbers



   1-1-8   Amendment of section subject to penalty



   1-1-9   General penalty



   1-1-10   Offense having two penalties



   1-1-11   Repeal of general ordinances



   1-1-12   Further effect of repeal



   1-1-13   Repeal of repealing ordinance



   1-1-14   Invalidation of part



   1-1-15   Liability of employers and agents



   1-1-16   Intent



   1-1-17   Waiver to the code of ordinances



Cross-reference:



   Publication of ordinances, see § 1-6-17



§ 1-1-1  TITLE.



   Upon adoption by the Board of Trustees of an ordinance adopting this
code in its entirety, the code and all amendments thereto as are from time to
time passed, shall be declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the
official “Code of Ordinances of the Village of Carol Stream”. The passage
of this code, or portions thereof, shall not effect the continuing validity
of prior ordinances of the village with which this code is not in conflict,
or ordinances which are passed, but not specifically made a part of this
code. Any reference made to the number of any section contained herein shall
be understood to refer to the position of the same under its appropriate
chapter and article heading, and to the general penalty clause relating
thereto, as well as the section itself, when reference is made to this code
of ordinances by title in any legal document.



§ 1-1-2  ACCEPTANCE.



   This code of ordinances, as hereby presented in printed form, shall
hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all
administrative tribunals of the state as the ordinances of the Village of
Carol Stream of general and permanent effect.



§ 1-1-3  AMENDMENTS.



   Any additions or amendments to this code, when passed in such form as
to indicate the intention of the Board of Trustees to make the same a part
hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this code so that a reference
to the “Code of Ordinances of the Village of Carol Stream” shall be
understood as including them.



§ 1-1-4  NUMBERING OF SECTIONS.



   Each section number shall consist of three component parts separated by
a dash. The first figure shall refer to the chapter number, the second figure
to the article number and the third figure shall refer to the position of the
section within the article.



§ 1-1-5  DISTRIBUTION OF CODE.



   (A)   All printed copies of this code belonging to the village shall
be deposited with the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall deliver one copy
thereof to the Village President, each member of the Board of Trustees, the
Village Manager, the Village Attorney, the Village Prosecutor, and copies to
such other persons as the Village Board may direct.



   (B)   The Village Clerk shall sell printed copies of the code or
sections thereof at such price as the Board of Trustees shall fix.



   (C)   The Village President shall have the power to extend or
reciprocate courtesies of other municipalities by presenting a copy of this
code, bound at the expense of the village, as shall seem suitable, and the
Village President shall also have the power to present two copies of this
code to the Illinois Municipal League.



§ 1-1-6  CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS.



   (A)   Whenever in this code the plural number is used in describing
or referring to any matters, parties or persons, it shall also apply to the
singular number unless the context shall indicate otherwise. When any subject
matter, party or person is referred to in this code by words importing the
singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or
persons, and female as well as male, and bodies corporate shall be deemed to
be included. The words PERSON, FIRM or CORPORATION shall be deemed to include
any association or organization of any kind. Words in the present tense shall
be deemed to include the future tense. The words THIS ORDINANCE whenever used
in this code shall be held to mean the entire code, in each and every section
thereof. The word VILLAGE whenever used in this code shall be held to mean
the Village of Carol Stream, Illinois. The words WRITTEN and IN WRITING may
include printing. The word SHALL as used in this code is mandatory. Provided
that, these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this
code which contains any express provisions excluding such construction or
where the subject matter or content of such section may be repugnant thereto
or where the context clearly requires a different interpretation.



   (B)   Whenever reference is made in this code to a village officer
or employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the
words “of the Village of Carol Stream” and shall be taken to mean the
officer or employee of this village having the title mentioned or performing
the duties indicated. No provision of this code designating the duties of any
officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee
liable for any fine or penalty provided in this code for a failure to perform
such duty, unless the intention of the Village Board to impose such a fine or
penalty on such officer or on an employee is specifically and clearly
expressed in the section creating the duty.



§ 1-1-7  REFERENCE TO SECTION NUMBERS.



   Reference to any section of this code shall be understood to refer to
and include the penalty section relating thereto, unless otherwise expressly
provided.



§ 1-1-8  AMENDMENT OF SECTION SUBJECT TO PENALTY.



   In case of the amendment of any section of this code containing
provisions for which a penalty is provided in another section, the penalty so
provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so
amended, whether re-enacted in the amendatory ordinance or not, unless such
penalty is specifically repealed therein.



§ 1-1-9  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Whenever in this code a minimum but not maximum fine or
penalty is imposed, the court may, in its discretion, fine the offender any
sum exceeding the minimum fine or penalty, but not exceeding $750.



   (B)   Whenever in this code the doing of any action or the omission
to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code,
and there shall be no fine or penalty declared for such breach, any person
who shall be convicted of any such breach shall be fined not more than $750
for each offense. Many sections of this code will not state a specific
penalty and it is the intent of the structure of this code that the penalty
set forth herein shall apply. The Prosecuting Officer may suggest a specific
penalty in an amount less than $750.



   (C)   Whenever the violation of a provision of any ordinance of the
village would entitle the village to recover a fine, it shall not be
necessary that such ordinance specifically say that a penalty is recoverable
or specify the amount of such penalty; in all of such cases, the penalty
provision of this section shall be applicable and included automatically in
such ordinance.



   (D)   In addition to, or in lieu of, any fine or penalty which may
be imposed for violation of an ordinance of the village, a disposition of
supervision may be entered by the court upon a plea of guilty or a
stipulation by the defendant of the facts supporting the charge, or a finding
of guilty. Pursuant to such disposition of supervision, the court may defer
further proceedings and the imposition of a sentence, and enter an order for
supervision of the defendant.



   (E)   SUPERVISION means a disposition of conditional and revocable
release without probationary supervision, but under such conditions and
reporting requirements as are imposed by the court, at the successful
conclusion of which disposition the defendant is discharged and a judgment
dismissing the charges is entered.



   (F)   Each day any violation of any provision of this code, or of
any ordinance, shall continue, shall constitute a separate offense.



Cross-reference:



   Index of minimum fines, see § 15-4-5



§ 1-1-10  OFFENSE HAVING TWO PENALTIES.



   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code, the Prosecuting Officer may elect
under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against
the same person for the same offense; provided that the revocation of a
license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar
any other penalty being enforced.



§ 1-1-11  REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES.



   All general ordinances of the village passed prior to the adoption of
this code of ordinances and in conflict with the provisions herein, or which
are in conflict with subsequent amendments to this code shall be repealed by
the passage of the conflicting enactment.



§ 1-1-12  FURTHER EFFECT OF REPEAL.



   (A)   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to
any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done,
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture
or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the
new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall
conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceedings, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the
party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance
takes effect.



   (B)   This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express
words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new
provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.



   (C)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as
abating any action now pending, under or by virtue of any general ordinance
of the village herein repealed; or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or
altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of
any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the village under
any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of
this code of ordinances.



§ 1-1-13  REPEAL OF REPEALING ORDINANCE.



   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such
former ordinance, clause or provision.



§ 1-1-14  INVALIDATION OF PART.



   If any part, section, sentence or clause of this code shall be adjudged
void and of no effect, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portion of this code.



§ 1-1-15  LIABILITY OF EMPLOYERS AND AGENTS.



   When the provisions of any section of this code prohibits the
commission of an act, not only the person actually doing the prohibiting act
or omitting the directed act, but also the employer and all other persons
concerned with or in aiding or abetting the person shall be guilty of the
offense described and liable to the penalty set forth.



§ 1-1-16  INTENT.



   All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in
this code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and
meaning of the Board of Trustees may be fully carried out.



§ 1-1-17  WAIVER TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES.



   The Village Board may grant waivers and/or variances from provisions
within this code of ordinances by motion; except where state statute or this
code require a different or more formal procedure, in which case any waivers
and/or variances granted shall be temporary in nature, and each such motion
shall be limited to the granting of waivers and/or variances for a period not
in excess of 120 days.



(Ord. 2003-11-75, passed 11-17-2003)



ARTICLE 2:  SEAL, FISCAL YEAR, OFFICIAL TIME, CHARGES FOR RECORDS, BUDGET,
BAD CHECK SERVICE CHARGE



Section



   1-2-1   Seal



   1-2-2   Custody of seal



   1-2-3   Private use of seal



   1-2-4   Fiscal year



   1-2-5   Official time



   1-2-6   Charges for copies of village records



   1-2-7   Budget Act adopted



   1-2-8   Bad check service charge



§ 1-2-1  SEAL.



   The seal heretofore provided and used by and for the village, circular
in form, the impression on which are the words “Village of Carol Stream,
Illinois, Corporate Seal” shall be and is hereby established and declared
to be the corporate seal of the village.



§ 1-2-2  CUSTODY OF SEAL.



   The seal shall remain in the custody of the Village Clerk to be used by
the Clerk as required by law and the provisions of this code.



§ 1-2-3  PRIVATE USE OF SEAL.



   No person shall fraudulently forge, deface, corrupt or counterfeit the
seal of the village, nor shall any person, other than the duly authorized
public official, make use of the seal. Any person violating the provision of
this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $100, nor
more than $750, for each offense.



§ 1-2-4  FISCAL YEAR.



   The fiscal year of the village shall commence May 1 of each and every
year, and close on the April 30 of the year following.



§ 1-2-5  OFFICIAL TIME.



   Central standard or central daylight savings time shall be the official
time within the village.



§ 1-2-6  CHARGES FOR COPIES OF VILLAGE RECORDS.



   Except as otherwise provided by law, the charge for all copies of
village ordinances, resolutions or other records shall be such amount as is
established from time to time by motion of the Board of Trustees, the Village
Manager or, in the absence of such a direction, such amount as shall be, in
the discretion of the Village Clerk, sufficient to compensate the village for
its costs in reproducing such material. No additional fee shall be charged
for certification of such records.



§ 1-2-7  BUDGET ACT ADOPTED.



   Pursuant to Ord. 391, the village has adopted 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1 through
8-2-9.11, and shall operate under the budget method provided for therein.



§ 1-2-8  BAD CHECK SERVICE CHARGE.



   Any person who pays any bill, fine, charge, fee or penalty due the
village with any check which is subsequently returned unpaid to the village
because of insufficient funds, account closed, no account or because of a
stop order on such check, shall be liable to the village for a bad check
service charge of $25 for each and every check so returned. Such service
charge shall be in addition to any bill, fine, charge, fee or penalty owed
the village.



ARTICLE 3:  VILLAGE PRESIDENT



Section



   1-3-1   Election and term of office



   1-3-2   Qualification



   1-3-3   Oath of office



   1-3-4   Bond



   1-3-5   Compensation



   1-3-6   Powers and duties



   1-3-7   Presiding officer and vote



   1-3-8   Veto powers



   1-3-9   Reconsideration, passing over veto



   1-3-10   President Pro Tem and Temporary Chairperson



   1-3-11   Vacancy



Cross-reference:



   Liquor Control Commissioner, see § 11-1-1



§ 1-3-1  ELECTION AND TERM OF OFFICE.



   (A)   The President shall be elected by the electors of the village
for a term of four years and until a successor is elected and has qualified.



   (B)   The Village President, if qualified, shall be inaugurated and
take office on the first regular meeting or special meeting of the Board of
Trustees held in the month of May following the general  village election.



§ 1-3-2  QUALIFICATION.



   (A)   No person shall be eligible to hold the office of Village
President unless that person is a qualified elector of the village and has
resided therein at least one year next preceding the person’s election or
appointment.



   (B)   No person shall be eligible to hold the office of Village
President who is a defaulter to the village, in arrears in the payment of any
tax or other indebtedness due to the village.



   (C)   The President shall not be interested in any way in the
manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor within the village as
prescribed by statute.



§ 1-3-3  OATH OF OFFICE.



   Before entering upon the duties of the office of President, whether
elected or appointed, the President shall take and subscribe the oath of
office as prescribed by statute. This oath, so subscribed, shall be filed in
the office of the Village Clerk.



§ 1-3-4  BOND.



   The President, before entering upon the duties of President, shall
execute a bond in the amount of $3,000, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the President’s duties, to be approved by the corporate
authorities and filed with the Village Clerk. The premium of such bond shall
be paid by the village. The bond of the Village President may be part of a
blanket bond.



§ 1-3-5  COMPENSATION.



   The President shall receive as compensation the sum of $7,800 per year.
The compensation of the President shall neither be increased nor decreased
during the term for which the President is elected, nor for the remainder of
the term for which the President is appointed.



(Ord. 95-01-03, passed 1-16-1995)



§ 1-3-6  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The President shall be the official head of the village for
all legal purposes. The President shall, at all times, have the power and
authority to examine and inspect all books and records relating to village
business kept by any village agent, employee or officer. The President shall
sign all proclamations, commissions, resolutions and ordinances issued or
adopted by the Board of Trustees, except as otherwise provided by law or
ordinance.



   (B)   The President shall appoint, with the advice and consent of
the Board of Trustees, all members of boards, commissions, committees or
other agencies as may be authorized by ordinance or resolution of the Board
of Trustees, or as may be authorized by statute.



   (C)   Whenever there is a question as to the respective powers or
duties of any officer of the village who is appointed by the Village
President, this question shall be settled by the Village President. The
President shall have the power to delegate to any such officer any duty which
is to be performed when no specific officer has been directed to perform the
duty.



   (D)   The President shall devote to the duties of the President’s
office whatever time the faithful discharge thereof may require.



   (E)   In addition to the foregoing, the President shall perform all
such other duties and acts and have all additional powers that are or may be
prescribed by the laws of the State of Illinois, or the ordinances of the
village.



§ 1-3-7  PRESIDING OFFICER AND VOTE.



   (A)   The President shall preside at all meetings of the Board of
Trustees. The President shall not vote on any ordinance, resolution or
motion, except:



      (1)   Where the vote of the Trustees has resulted in a tie;



      (2)   Where one-half of the Trustees elected have voted in
favor of an ordinance, resolution or motion, even though there is no tie
vote; or



      (3)   Where a vote greater than a majority of the corporate
authorities is required by statute of the state to adopt an ordinance,
resolution or motion.



   (B)   In each instance specified, the President shall vote.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall deprive an Acting President or
President Pro Tem from voting in his or her capacity as a Trustee, but such
person shall not be entitled to another vote in his or her capacity as Acting
President or President Pro Tem.



§ 1-3-8  VETO POWERS.



   All resolutions and motions which create any liability against the
village, or which provide for the expenditure or appropriation of its money,
or to sell any village property, and all ordinances passed by the Board of
Trustees shall be deposited with the Village Clerk. If the President approves
of them, the President shall sign them. If the President disapproves of any,
the President shall return them to the Board of Trustees, with written
objections, at the next regular meeting of the Board of Trustees occurring
not less than five days after their passage. The President may disapprove of
any one or more sums appropriated in any ordinance, resolution or motion
making an appropriation, or the President may disapprove entirely of an
ordinance, resolution or motion making an appropriation. If the President
fails to return any ordinance or any specified resolution or motions with
written objections within the designated time, it shall become effective
despite the absence of the President’s signature.



§ 1-3-9  RECONSIDERATION, PASSING OVER VETO.



   Every resolution and motion specified in the preceding section, and
every ordinance which is returned to the Board of Trustees by the President
shall be reconsidered by the Board of Trustees at the next regular meeting.
If, after such reconsideration, two-thirds of all the Trustees elected to the
Board of Trustees shall vote to pass an ordinance, resolution or motion,
notwithstanding the President’s refusal to approve it, then it shall be
effective. The vote on a question of passage over the President’s veto
shall be by ayes and nays, and shall be recorded in the journal.



§ 1-3-10  PRESIDENT PRO TEM AND TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON.



   (A)   A temporary absence or disability of the President
incapacitating the President from the performance of the duties of this
office does not create a vacancy in the office. In that case, the Board of
Trustees shall elect one of its members to act as President Pro Tem. The
President Pro Tem, during the President’s absence or disability, shall
perform the duties and possess all the rights and powers of the President. No
additional salary or compensation shall be paid the President Pro Tem for
acting as President Pro Tem.



   (B)   Where the President or President Pro Tem is only temporarily
absent from a meeting, but within the general area of the village and ready
and able to assume the duties of this office upon imminent return, a
Temporary Chairperson shall be elected from among the Trustees. The Temporary
Chairperson shall have only the powers of a presiding officer and the right
to vote as a Trustee.



§ 1-3-11  VACANCY.



   (A)   A vacancy occurs in the office of President by reason of
resignation, failure of one to be elected or to qualify, death, permanent
physical or mental disability, conviction of a disqualifying crime,
abandonment of office or removal from office, or by removal of his or her
residence from the village.



   (B)   If a vacancy occurs in the office of the President during the
President’s term, the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the term
at the next election of Trustees, unless the vacancy is filled by a special
election as provided by statute.



   (C)   During the period from the time that the vacancy occurs until
a President is elected and has qualified, the vacancy may be filled by the
election of an Acting President by the Board of Trustees.



   (D)   The Acting President shall be paid the President’s salary
for the period of time served as Acting President.



ARTICLE 4:  BOARD OF TRUSTEES



Section



   1-4-1   Election, term of office and functions



   1-4-2   Qualification



   1-4-3   Oath of office



   1-4-4   Compensation



   1-4-5   Vacancy



Cross-reference:



   Meetings, see §§ 1-5-1 and 1-5-2



   Order of business, see § 1-5-3



   Procedure and rules, see § 1-5-4



§ 1-4-1  ELECTION, TERM OF OFFICE AND FUNCTIONS.



   (A)   The Board of Trustees, consisting of six members, shall be
elected to office for a four year term and until their successors are elected
and have qualified as is provided by statute.



   (B)   Village Trustees, if qualified, shall be inaugurated and take
office at the first regular meeting or special meeting of the Board of
Trustees held in the month of May following the general village election.



   (C)   The Board, together with the President, shall be the
legislative department of the village government, and shall perform such
duties and have such powers as may be authorized by statute. Wherever herein
the term BOARD or the term BOARD OF TRUSTEES is used, it shall be construed
to mean this legislative department.



§ 1-4-2  QUALIFICATION.



   (A)   No person shall be eligible to hold the office of Village
Trustee unless that person is a qualified elector of the village and has
resided therein at least one year next preceding election or appointment.



   (B)   No person shall be eligible to hold the office of Village
Trustee who is a defaulter to the village, in arrears in the payment of any
tax or other indebtedness due the village, has been convicted in a state
court of malfeasance in office, bribery or other corrupt crimes.



   (C)   No Village Trustee shall be eligible to any office, the salary
of which is payable out of the village treasury, except that of Acting
President or President Pro Tem, if, at the time of appointment, such person
is a member of the Board of Trustees.



   (D)   No Village Trustee shall be interested in any way in the
manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor within the village, as
prescribed by statute.



§ 1-4-3  OATH OF OFFICE.



   Before entering upon the duties of Village Trustee, all persons,
whether elected or appointed, shall take and subscribe the oath of office as
prescribed by statute. This oath, so subscribed, shall be filed in the office
of the Village Clerk.



§ 1-4-4  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The compensation for each Trustee, whether elected or
appointed, shall be increased in the following manner.



      (1)   Effective 5-1-1995 through 5-1-1996, the salary for
Village Trustee will be $650 per year.



      (2)   Effective 5-1-1996 through 5-1-1997, the salary for
Village Trustee will be $1,300 per year.



      (3)   Effective 5-1-1997 through 5-1-1998, the salary for
Village Trustee will be $1,950 per year.



      (4)   Effective 5-1-1998, the salary for Village Trustee will
be $2,600 per year.



   (B)   The compensation of a Trustee shall neither be increased nor
decreased during the term for which the Trustee is elected, nor for the
remainder of the term for which the Trustee is appointed.



(Ord. 95-01-03, passed 1-16-1995)



§ 1-4-5  VACANCY.



   Whenever a vacancy in the office of a Trustee occurs during his or her
term, the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the term at the next
general village election as provided in 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50.



Statutory reference:



   Elections and primary elections to be conducted pursuant to state law,
see Illinois Election Code, 10 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.



ARTICLE 5:  RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE



Section



   1-5-1   Regular Board meetings



   1-5-2   Special meetings



   1-5-3   Order of business



   1-5-4   Procedures and rules



§ 1-5-1  REGULAR BOARD MEETINGS.



   (A)   The regular meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be held on
each of the first and third Monday of each month of the year at the hour of
7:30 p.m. in the boardroom of the Village Hall.



   (B)   No meeting of the Village Board or any other meeting required
to be open to the public shall be held on a legal holiday unless the regular
meeting day falls on that holiday.



   (C)   If there is no quorum present, the meeting shall be held on
the next business day at the same hour and place, unless the members present
shall adjourn to another time.



   (D)   Unless otherwise specified in the call of the meeting, all
meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be held in the Village Hall,
including special and adjourned meetings, and all meetings, except closed
sessions, shall be open to the public as is required by statute.



(Ord. 2013-08-35, passed 8-5-2013)



§ 1-5-2  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   (A)   Special meetings may be called by the President or by any
three Trustees by written request or notice. At least 24-hours’ written
notice shall specify the time and purpose of such meeting and shall be
delivered to each member of the Board of Trustees and the Village Clerk,
personally if he or she can be found, and if he or she cannot be found, then
by leaving a copy of such notice at the home of such Board member and Clerk
in the presence of an adult member of the family of the member of the Board
and the Clerk; provided, however, that, emergency meetings may be called in
the manner provided by statute.



   (B)   If the notice is given by the Village Clerk, the Village Clerk
shall cause an affidavit showing service of such notice to be filed in his or
her office prior to the time fixed for such special meeting, together with a
statement of compliance with the notices to members of the media as provided
by statute. The failure to cause such an affidavit and statement of
compliance to be prepared shall not invalidate any action taken at such
special meeting which is otherwise accomplished in accordance with law.



   (C)   No business may be transacted at the special meeting, except
that for which it is called.



§ 1-5-3  ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   The order of business shall be determined from time to time by the
actions of the Board of Trustees.



§ 1-5-4  PROCEDURES AND RULES.



   The procedures and rules of the Board of Trustees shall be as follows.



   Rule 1. Presiding officer.



      The Village President shall take the chair at the hour appointed,
or to which the Board shall have adjourned, and shall immediately call the
members to order; whereupon, the Clerk shall proceed to call the roll of
members. If a quorum is present, the Clerk shall so announce and the Board
shall proceed with the order of business.



   Rule 2. Quorum.



      (A)   A quorum shall consist of a majority of the entire Board
of Trustees, including the Village President. A quorum shall be necessary to
transact the business of the Village Board.



      (B)   If no quorum is present, the Board shall not thereby
stand adjourned, but the members present shall adjourn or recess the Board by
a majority vote.



   Rule 3. Absence of President.



      At any meeting of the Board where a majority shall be assembled,
and if the President is temporarily absent, but within or near the community,
the Clerk shall preside and call the roll, whereupon the Board shall elect a
Temporary Chairperson from its membership. In the event that the absence of
the President shall be of a more permanent nature, as provided by statute, a
President Pro Tem shall be elected.



   Rule 4. The President.



      (A)   The President shall preserve order and decorum and may
speak to points of order in preference to other members and shall decide all
questions of order subject to appeal.



      (B)   If the President refuses to allow the Trustees to
exercise their right to appeal a decision of the Chair, the Trustees may
consider and pass upon the matter in spite of the Chair’s failure to grant
them appeal.



      (C)   The President shall have the power to require the
boardroom to be cleared, or to have any disorderly person or persons ejected,
in case of any disturbances or disorderly conduct which prevent the meeting
from being continued in an orderly manner.



   Rule 5. Duties of members.



      (A)   While the President is stating the motion, or deciding a
point of order, the members shall be seated and no member shall leave the
boardroom during the session without permission from the presiding officer.



      (B)   Every member, previous to his or her  speaking, making
a motion or seconding the same, shall address the presiding officer and shall
not proceed with his or her remarks until recognized and named by the Chair.



      (C)   A member so recognized by the Chair, shall confine
himself or herself to the question under debate.



      (D)   No member shall speak more than once on the same
question, except by permission of the Chair, and then not until every other
member desiring to speak shall have had an opportunity to do so.



      (E)   No member shall speak longer than five minutes at any
one time, except by consent of the Chair.



      (F)   While a member is speaking, no member shall hold any
private discussion, nor pass between the speaker and the Chair.



      (G)   A member, when called to order by the Chair, shall
thereupon discontinue speaking. The order or ruling of the Chair shall be
binding and conclusive, subject only to the right to appeal.



      (H)   Any member may appeal to the Board from a ruling of the
Chair and, if the appeal is seconded, the member making the appeal may
briefly state his or her reason for the same, and the Chair may briefly
explain his or her ruling; but there shall be no debate on the appeal and no
other member shall participate in the discussion. The Chair shall then put
the question, “Shall the decision of the Chair be overruled?” 
Otherwise, it shall be sustained.



      (I)   The right of a member to address the Board on a question
of personal privilege shall be limited to cases in which his or her
integrity, character or motives are assailed, questioned or impugned.



   Rule 6. Seconding of motions required.



      No motion shall be put or debated in the Board or in committee
unless it be seconded. When a motion is seconded, it shall be stated by the
presiding officer before debate.



   Rule 7. Reading of resolutions, ordinances and correspondence.



      Resolutions, ordinances and correspondence need not be read.



   Rule 8. Withdrawal of motions.



      After a resolution or a motion is stated by the President, it
shall be deemed to be in the possession of the Board, but it may be withdrawn
by the maker thereof with or without the consent of the Trustee seconding the
motion prior to the call for the vote by the President.



   Rule 9. Division of questions.



      If any question under consideration contains several distinct
propositions, the Board, by a majority vote of the members present, may
divide such questions.



   Rule 10. Record of motions.



      In all cases where a resolution or motion is entered in the
journal, the name of the member moving and seconding the same shall be
entered.



   Rule 11. Vote.



      (A)   The ayes and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all
ordinances and on all propositions to create any liability against the
village, or for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, and upon any
question and in all other cases at the request of any member of the Board.
When the Clerk has commenced to call the roll of the Board for the taking of
a vote by “Ayes” and “Nays”, all debate on the question before the
Board shall be deemed concluded, and during the taking of the vote a member
shall be permitted to briefly explain his or her vote and shall respond to
the calling of his or her name by the Clerk by answering “Aye” or
“Nay”, as the case may be.



      (B)   The names of each member of the Board of Trustees shall
be listed on the official copy of every ordinance passed indicating
specifically the names of those voting “Aye” and those voting “Nay”.



      (C)   Every Trustee present shall vote unless he or she has an
interest in the matter, in which event he or she shall disqualify himself. If
a Trustee who has not disqualified himself or herself does not vote, his or
her failure to vote shall, to the extent permitted by law, be construed as
concurring with the majority.



      (D)   The President shall announce the result of the Board’s
vote and such votes shall be entered in the journal of the proceedings, as is
provided by statute.



      (E)   The President shall vote and possess such veto powers as
are prescribed in the state statutes.



   Rule 12. Precedence of motion.



      When a question is before the Board, no motion shall be received,
except as herein specified, and which shall have precedence in the order
herein stated:



      (A)   To fix the time to which to adjourn;



      (B)   To adjourn;



      (C)   To take a recess;



      (D)   To raise a question of privilege;



      (E)   To call for the orders of the day;



      (F)   To lay on the table;



      (G)   To call for the previous question;



      (H)   To postpone to a certain time;



      (I)   To refer to committee;



      (J)   To amend;



      (K)   To postpone indefinitely; and



      (L)   To the main motion.



   Rule 13. Undebatable motions and exceptions to order.



      The motion to adjourn or to lay on the table shall be decided
without debate, and the motion to fix the time to which to adjourn and the
motion to adjourn shall always be in order, except:



      (A)   When a member is in possession of the floor;



      (B)   When the roll call votes are being called;



      (C)   While the members are voting;



      (D)   When adjournment was the last preceding motion; and



      (E)   When it has been decided that the “previous
question” shall be taken.



   Rule 14. Motion to adjourn.



      A motion to adjourn cannot be amended; but a motion to adjourn to
a given day or time shall be open to amendment and debate.



   Rule 15. Motion to postpone indefinitely.



      When a question is postponed indefinitely, it shall not be taken
up again before the next regular meeting.



   Rule 16. Motion to amend.



      A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order, but a motion to
amend an amendment to an amendment shall not be entertained.



   Rule 17. Amendments.



      Only one amendment at a time may be offered to any question
before the Board. The vote shall first be taken on the amendment and, if the
amendment passes, then further amendments may be proposed. Finally, a vote
shall be taken on the principal motion as finally amended.



   Rule 18. Reconsideration.



      (A)   A vote or question may be reconsidered at any time
during the same meeting, or at the first regular meeting held thereafter. A
motion for reconsideration, once having been made and decided in the
negative, shall not be renewed. A matter once having been decided and a
motion to reconsider such matter having been defeated, it may nonetheless
come before the Board at a future time by way of a motion to rescind or as a
new motion. If the Chair determines that new facts are to be presented to the
Board, or that there is a likelihood that the Board will reverse its previous
decision, the Chair shall rule the motion in order. If a motion is
continuously brought before the Board and rejected, the Chair may rule its
reintroduction under a motion to rescind or as a new motion to be out of
order.



      (B)   No motion to reconsider the approval or denial of the
recommendation of an advisory body required to hold public hearings shall be
entertained except at the same meeting at which the original action was taken
or after the matter has been referred to the advisory body for a further
hearing and recommendation.



      (C)   A motion to reconsider must be made and seconded by
members who voted on the prevailing side of the question to be reconsidered,
unless otherwise provided by law; provided, however, that, where a motion has
received a majority vote in the affirmative, but is declared lost solely on
the ground that a greater number of affirmative votes is required by statute
for the passage or adoption of such motion, then in such case a motion to
reconsider may be made and seconded only by those who voted in the
affirmative on such question to be reconsidered, so long as the issue
presented is the same, no new information is forthcoming and the rights of
third parties have not intervened.



   Rule 19. Visitors petitioners and public comment.



      (A)   Village Board meetings constitute legislative sessions
of the Mayor and Board of Trustees of the village providing the opportunity
for the Mayor and Board of Trustees to formally conduct village business and,
as such, are limited public forums held for the specific purpose of
conducting business of the village.



      (B)   Except during the time allotted for public discussion
and comments (referred to as the Listening Post), no person, other than a
member of the Board, shall address that body, except with the consent of a
majority of the members present. During the time allotted for public
discussion and comments, members of the general public may only address the
Board with respect to items listed on the agenda for consideration or with
concerns or comments regarding issues that are relevant to village business.



      (C)   Members of the public shall be called to address the
Board in the following order:



         (1)   Presentations scheduled with the Village Manager
and set forth on the agenda;



         (2)   Written presentations received prior to  the
Board meeting;



         (3)   Presentations by members of the public who have
signed the request to speak form prior to the commencement of the meeting.



      (D)   A person addressing the Board shall be allotted three
minutes to resent his or her comments.



      (E)   All members of the public addressing the Board shall, at
all times, maintain proper decorum. No person shall speak unless recognized
by the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem. All discussion and debate shall be courteous,
respectful, and to the point. Impugning motives; contentions, slanderous or
boisterous statements; obscene or insulting language; threats; or personal
remarks or attacks directed at the members of the Board, staff, speakers or
other members of the public shall be out of order.



      (F)   All public comment shall be addressed to the Mayor and
Board of Trustees as a whole and no comments shall be addressed to individual
members of the Board, village staff or other members of the public.



      (G)   No final action may be taken on any public comment or
concern which requires an ordinance, resolution, or written contract, or
which has the effect of approving any expenditure of funds unless such item
is on the agenda for that meetings. The Board may, however, direct that any
matter raised on these orders be set for a future agenda, including the
preparation of ordinances, resolutions, or other documents for consideration
at such time.



      (H)   Any person who shall disrupt by disorderly conduct a
meeting of the Mayor and Board of Trustees, its committees or any meeting of
a board, commission or advisory body of the village shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750.



   Rule 20. Reports, communications, petitions, and the like.



      All communications, reports, petitions or any other papers
addressed to the Board shall be made available to the Village Clerk prior to
the meeting. The Village Clerk shall endeavor to distribute copies or read
such material to the members of the Board.



   Rule 21. The journal.



      The Village Clerk shall keep the journal of the proceedings of
the Board. Within no more than ten days after each meeting of the Board, the
Clerk shall supply to each member a typewritten copy of the minutes.



   Rule 22. Record of ordinances and documents.



      The Clerk shall keep a record of all ordinances passed in an
ordinance book for such purpose. All reports made by committees and all
resolutions adopted by the Board shall be filed and preserved by the Clerk.



   Rule 23. Publication.



      All ordinances imposing any penalty for a violation thereof or
making any appropriation shall be published as required by statute, either in
a newspaper or in pamphlet form, in which case, the ordinance in its pamphlet
form shall be displayed for a reasonable period in a public place in the
Village Hall.



   Rule 24. Time for taking effect.



      No ordinance which must be published to comply with the foregoing
section shall go into effect until ten days after it is so published unless a
statement of the urgency of the ordinance is contained in it, and it achieves
passage by a two-thirds vote of the Board of Trustees then holding office. In
all other cases, the ordinances shall go into effect upon the passage
thereof, as provided by statute, even though the operation of the ordinance
may not take effect until a later date.



   Rule 25. Adoption of Robert’s Rules of Order, Revised.



      The rules of parliamentary practice comprised in the latest
published edition of Robert’s Rules of Order, Revised shall govern the
Board in all cases to which they are applicable and in which they are not
inconsistent with the ordinances of the village including these rules, or the
statutes of the state.



   Rule 26. Temporary suspension of rules; amendment of rules.



      The rules of the Board may be temporarily suspended, altered or
amended, by concurrence of a majority vote of all the Trustees then in office.



   Rule 27. Expulsion of members.



      Any member acting or appearing in a lewd or disgraceful manner,
or who uses opprobrious, obscene or insulting language to or about any member
of the Board, or who does not obey the order of the Chair, shall be, on
motion, censured by a majority vote of the Board and, with the concurrence of
two-thirds of the Board of Trustees elected, the Board may expel a Trustee,
but not a second time for the same offense.



(Ord. 2013-08-35, passed 8-5-2013)



ARTICLE 6:  VILLAGE CLERK



Section



   1-6-1   Election and term of office



   1-6-2   Qualifications



   1-6-3   Oath of office



   1-6-4   Bond



   1-6-5   Compensation



   1-6-6   Duties



   1-6-7   Custody of seal



   1-6-8   Attesting



   1-6-9   Meetings and minutes



   1-6-10   Notice of meetings



   1-6-11   Money collected



   1-6-12   Accounts



   1-6-13   Records



   1-6-14   Publication of Treasurer’s report



   1-6-15   Documents



   1-6-16   Indices



   1-6-17   Publication of ordinances



   1-6-18   Records and notices of election



   1-6-19   Conduct of elections



   1-6-20   Additional duties



   1-6-21   Vacancy



   1-6-22   Assistance with duties



Cross-reference:



   Duties at meetings, see §§ 1-6-9 and 1-6-10



§ 1-6-1  ELECTION AND TERM OF OFFICE.



   The Village Clerk shall be elected to office and serve for a four-year
term and until a successor is elected and qualified, as provided by statute.



§ 1-6-2  QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall be eligible to hold the office of Village
Clerk unless that person is a qualified elector of the village and has
resided therein at least one year next preceding the person’s election or
appointment.



   (B)   No person shall be eligible to hold the office of Village
Clerk who is a defaulter to the village, in arrears in the payment of any tax
or other indebtedness due to the village, has been convicted in a state court
of malfeasance in office, bribery or other corrupt crimes.



   (C)   The Village Clerk shall hold no other village office during
such person’s term as Village Clerk.



§ 1-6-3  OATH OF OFFICE.



   Before entering upon the duties of this office, the Village Clerk shall
take and subscribe the oath of office as prescribed by statute.



§ 1-6-4  BOND.



   The Village Clerk, before entering upon the duties of this office,
shall execute a bond in the amount of $1,000, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the Village Clerk’s duties, to be approved by the corporate
authorities. The bond of the Clerk shall be filed with the Village Treasurer.
The premium of such bond shall be paid by the village. The bond of the
Village Clerk may be part of a blanket bond.



§ 1-6-5  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The compensation for each Village Clerk shall be increased in
the following manner.



      (1)   Effective 5-1-1995 through 5-1-1996, the salary for
Village Clerk will be $650 per year.



      (2)   Effective 5-1-1996 through 5-1-1997, the salary for
Village Clerk will be $1,300 per year.



      (3)   Effective 5-1-1997 through 5-1-1998, the salary for
Village Clerk will be $1,950 per year.



      (4)   Effective 5-1-1998, the salary for Village Clerk will be
$2,600 per year.



   (B)   The compensation of the Village Clerk shall neither be
increased nor decreased during the term for which the Village Clerk is
elected, nor for the remainder of the term for which the Village Clerk is
appointed.



(Ord. 95-01-03, passed 1-16-1995)



§ 1-6-6  DUTIES.



   (A)   The Village Clerk shall keep all records and reports as
required by statute or ordinance from time to time. It shall be the duty of
the Village Clerk to review all ordinances after codification to determine
that the code of ordinances is a true representation of the ordinance and
that it is not in conflict with other sections of the code of ordinances.



   (B)   The Clerk shall see that all officers required to file a bond
with the village and subscribe to an oath of office shall do so upon
appointment to their respective offices. The bonds of the Village President,
Village Treasurer, all appointed officers and members of the Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners, and all oaths of office, shall be filed with the
Village Clerk.



   (C)   The Village Clerk shall devote such time to this office as the
duties of the office shall require and as may be required by statute or
ordinance.



§ 1-6-7  CUSTODY OF SEAL.



   The Clerk shall be the custodian of the village seal and shall affix
its impression on documents whenever required.



§ 1-6-8  ATTESTING.



   The Clerk shall seal and attest all licenses, permits and such other
documents as shall require this formality.



§ 1-6-9  MEETINGS AND MINUTES.



   The Clerk shall attend all meetings of the Village Board and keep a
full record of its proceedings in the journal which shall be preserved by the
Clerk. The minutes shall be distributed to members of the Board of Trustees
within no more than ten days after each meeting.



§ 1-6-10  NOTICE OF MEETINGS.



   The Clerk, when called upon to do so, shall issue and cause to be
served upon all members of the Board of Trustees notices of all special
meetings of the Board.



§ 1-6-11  MONEY COLLECTED.



   The Clerk shall turn over all money received on behalf of the village
to the Village Treasurer promptly upon receipt of same; and with such money
he or she shall give a statement as to the source thereof.



§ 1-6-12  ACCOUNTS.



   The Clerk shall have such responsibility for accounts as established by
statute.



§ 1-6-13  RECORDS.



   (A)   In addition to the record of ordinances and other records the
Clerk is required by statute to keep, the Clerk shall keep such other records
as may be required from time to time by the Board of Trustees.



   (B)   Upon recording with the County Recorder of Deeds, the original
of all annexation plats, plats of subdivision, easements, vacated properties,
titles, deeds and such other records, and all official contracts and
documents shall be maintained and kept by the Village Clerk in a safe and
secure place in the Village Hall.



§ 1-6-14  PUBLICATION OF TREASURER’S REPORT.



   Upon receipt of the Treasurer’s accounts of all moneys received and
expenditures incurred during the preceding fiscal year, filed with the Clerk
by the Village Treasurer, the Clerk shall cause the Treasurer’s annual
report to be published at least once, in one or more newspapers published
within the village or, if no newspaper is published therein, then in one or
more newspapers having a general circulation within the village, as required
by statute.



Cross-reference:



   Treasurer’s report, see § 2-2-13



§ 1-6-15  DOCUMENTS.



   (A)   The official Clerk’s records include the following:



      (1)   The Minute Book;



      (2)   The Ordinance Book;



      (3)   The Resolution Book;



      (4)   Election materials;



      (5)   Documents presented to the Clerk for further
presentation to the President and Board or to another officer or employee of
the village; and



      (6)   Such other documents as may be required from time to
time by the Board of Trustees.



   (B)   All other documents of the village shall be filed in the
appropriate administrative office by function. This includes copies as
necessary of official documents.



§ 1-6-16  INDICES.



   The Clerk shall keep and maintain a proper index to all documents and
records kept by him or her, so that ready access thereto and use thereof may
be had.



§ 1-6-17  PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES.



   The Clerk shall publish in pamphlet form all ordinances as provided by
statute.



§ 1-6-18  RECORDS AND NOTICES OF ELECTION.



   The Clerk shall keep a record of the election or appointment of all
officers of the village and the record shall exhibit the name of the officer,
to what office elected or appointed, the date or declaration of election, the
date of his or her commission and the date of death, resignation, removal
from office or expiration of term of office. The Clerk shall, within five
days after the result of any election is declared or appointment is made,
notify all persons elected or appointed.



§ 1-6-19  CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS.



   The Clerk shall carry out all duties relating to village elections as
may be authorized by the Village Board or as shall be provided by statute.



§ 1-6-20  ADDITIONAL DUTIES.



   In addition to the duties herein provided, the Clerk shall perform such
other duties and functions as may be required by statute or ordinance.



§ 1-6-21  VACANCY.



   In case the office of Village Clerk shall become vacant for any reason,
the Village President and the Board of Trustees shall appoint an Acting Clerk
to serve until a Clerk is elected for the remainder of the term at the next
election of Trustees, and has qualified, as provided by statute.



§ 1-6-22  ASSISTANCE WITH DUTIES.



   The Village Manager shall assign village staff, at the request of the
Village Clerk and as the Village Manager deems necessary, to assist in the
performance of the duties of Village Clerk. The Village Clerk may authorize
such village staff to affix the seal of the Clerk and to execute documents on
behalf of the Village Clerk, which documents shall have the same effect as if
the documents had been signed by the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 2011-04-10, passed 4-18-2011)



ARTICLE 7:  USE OF VILLAGE PROPERTY



Section



   1-7-1   Use of Village Hall and other public buildings by other
local taxing bodies and quasi-governmental entities



   1-7-2   Use of Village Hall and other public buildings for public
forums events or activities



   1-7-3   Use of village parks and open spaces



§ 1-7-1  USE OF VILLAGE HALL AND OTHER PUBLIC BUILDINGS BY OTHER LOCAL
TAXING BODIES AND QUASI-GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES.



   Groups, organizations or entities permitted to seek permission to hold
events within the Village Hall and other public buildings shall include
overlapping taxing bodies, such as the library or park district and their
committees and commissions, and agencies engaged in work for the village
pursuant to a contract or intergovernmental agreement. These groups may use
available meeting room space within the Village Hall on an “as available”
basis, with priority being given to village governmental boards, committees
and commissions.



(Ord. 2001-04-17, passed 4-2-2001)



§ 1-7-2  USE OF VILLAGE HALL AND OTHER PUBLIC BUILDINGS FOR PUBLIC FORUMS
EVENTS OR ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   The Mayor and Board of Trustees may, on occasion, choose to
sponsor, co-sponsor or make portions of the Village Hall available for public
forums, events or activities which will normally be concluded within one day,
but under no circumstances will extend beyond two consecutive days. Only
public forums, events or activities which conform with all of the following
requirements may be considered for use of the Village Hall. The forum, event
or activity must:



      (1)   Be open to all citizens of the village;



      (2)   Be sponsored or put on by a local not-for-profit group
or organization based within the village;



      (3)   Not be a religious assembly for purposes of prayer or
worship; except that, wedding ceremonies shall be permitted; and



      (4)   Not be a partisan political rally, assembly or meeting.



   (B)   The permitted meeting uses of Village Hall shall have a
priority over public forums, events and activities in terms of scheduling the
use of Village Hall space. Applications for the use of the Village Hall to
conduct a public forum, event or activity shall be delivered to the Village
Manager with all required information no later than 30 days prior to the
scheduled event. The Village Manager may schedule such uses of the Village
Hall, which will, at the Manager’s discretion, be least disruptive to the
normal operations of the Village Hall and the most convenient to the members
of the public in terms of attending the public event. Groups sponsoring or
putting on such public events within the village shall comply with all
applicable village ordinances, regulations and requirements.



(Ord. 2001-04-17, passed 4-2-2001)



§ 1-7-3  USE OF VILLAGE PARKS AND OPEN SPACES.



   (A)   Apart from recreational uses by individual residents and their
guests, village parks and open spaces shall be restricted to public forums,
events or activities which will normally be concluded within one day, but
under no circumstances will extend beyond two consecutive days except as may
be approved for other local taxing bodies or quasi-governmental entities.
Only public forums, events or activities which conform with all of the
following requirements may be considered for use of village parks and open
spaces. The forum, event or activity must:



      (1)   Be sponsored or put on by a local not-for-profit group
or organization based within the village or local taxing body or
quasi-governmental entity;



      (2)   Not be a religious assembly for purposes of prayer or
worship; except that, wedding ceremonies shall be permitted; and



      (3)   Not be a partisan political rally, assembly or meeting.



   (B)   Applications for the use of village parks and open spaces to
conduct a public forum, event or activity shall be delivered to the Village
Manager with all required information no later than 30 days prior to the
scheduled event. Subject to availability of space, public forums, events or
activities shall only be held during daylight hours. Groups sponsoring or
putting on such public events within the village shall comply with all
applicable village ordinances, regulations and requirements.



   (C)   The village reserves the right to deny any use of village
property, parks and open spaces which the Village Board, in its discretion,
determines to be inconsistent with the policy set forth herein. Failure to
abide by the village’s policy and rules of conduct for the use of village
property, parks and open spaces may result in cancellation or refusal of
future reservations.



(Ord. 2001-04-17, passed 4-2-2001)



ARTICLE 8:  ETHICS



Section



   1-8-1   Statement of policy and intent



   1-8-2   Application of laws and policies



   1-8-3   Definitions



   1-8-4   Financial interest in village contracts or
property—Village officers



   1-8-5   Financial interest in village contracts or
property—Employees



   1-8-6   Disclosure of economic interests



   1-8-7   Prohibited political activities



   1-8-8   Gift ban



   1-8-9   Confidential information



   1-8-10   Misuse of office or village property



   1-8-11   Complaints



   1-8-12   Procedure for complaints against village employees



   1-8-13   Procedure for complaints against village officials



   1-8-14   Retaliation



   1-8-15   Penalties



   1-8-16   Copies to village officials and personnel



   1-8-17   Provisions are additional



§ 1-8-1  STATEMENT OF POLICY AND INTENT.



   (A)   All village officials and employees, paid or unpaid, hold
their positions for the benefit of the village. It is the policy of the
village to uphold, promote and demand the highest standards of conduct and
ethics from all officials and employees, and to avoid any actions that might,
to a reasonable person, suggest the appearance of impropriety.



   (B)   All village officials and employees share a commitment to
ethical conduct in service to the community. The purpose of this ethics code
is to ensure that all persons regulated by this code of ethics have clear
guidance for carrying out their roles and responsibilities.



   (C)   In recognition of these expectations, there is hereby
established a code of ethics for all village officials and employees.



(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)



§ 1-8-2  APPLICATION OF LAWS AND POLICIES.



   All covered individuals, as defined herein, are subject to the
provisions of this ethics code as provided herein, and all applicable state
laws addressing ethics. In addition, the actions of covered individuals, to
the extent applicable, shall be subject to the provisions of the Village of
Carol Stream Personnel Manual and any other rules of operation and
performance, including written contracts applicable to the performance of
their duties.



(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)



§ 1-8-3  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE. Any activity in furtherance of an effort
to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any
individual to any federal, state or local public office or office in a
political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of
presidential or vice presidential electors, but does not include activities:



      (1)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action;



      (2)   Relating to collective bargaining;



      (3)   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person's
official duties.



   CANDIDATE. A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to
fill a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the
ballot at a "regular election", as defined in § 1-3 of the Illinois Election
Code (10 ILCS 5/1-3).



   COMMISSIONER/COMMITTEE MEMBER. Individuals appointed by the Mayor to
serve on the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals, Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners, Police Pension Board, or any other village commission
or committee formed by ordinance or resolution duly adopted by the Village
Board of Trustees.



   COMPENSATED TIME. With respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for the purposes of this
article, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal
time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on leave of
absence. With respect to officers, or employees whose hours are not fixed,
COMPENSATED TIME includes any period of time when the officer or employee is
on premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the
officer or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of
location.



   COMPENSATORY TIME OFF. Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an
employee to compensate, in whole or in part, for time worked in excess of the
minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.



   CONTRIBUTION. Has the same meaning as the term defined in § 9-1.4 of
the Illinois Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-1.4).



   COVERED INDIVIDUAL. The Mayor, Trustees, Village Clerk, appointed
officers, village employees, commission members, and committee members.



   ELECTED OFFICIALS. The Mayor, Village Clerk and Village Trustees.



   EMPLOYEE. Any person employed by the village, whether on a full time or
part time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the
direction and control of the village with regard to the material details of
how the work is to be performed, but does not include independent contractors.



   EMPLOYER. The Village of Carol Stream.



   GIFT. Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan,
forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value
including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for
speaking engagement related to or attributable to government employment or
the official position of a covered individual.



   LEAVE OF ABSENCE. Any period during which an employee does not receive:



      (1)   Compensation for employment;



      (2)   Service credit for pension benefits; and



      (3)   Health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.



   OFFICER or OFFICIAL. A person who holds, by election or appointment, an
office created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is
compensated for service in his or her official capacity.



   POLITICAL ACTIVITY. Any activity in support of or in connection with
any campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities:



      (1)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action;



      (2)   Relating to collective bargaining; or



      (3)   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person's
official duties.



   POLITICAL ORGANIZATION. A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a
statement of organization with the State Board of Elections or the County
Clerk under § 9-3 of the Illinois Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-3), but only
with regard to those activities that require filing with the State Board of
Elections or County Clerk.



   PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY.



      (1)   Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any
political meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other
political event.



      (2)   Soliciting contributions including, but not limited to,
the purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for
any political fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.



      (3)   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing
any document or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign
contribution.



      (4)   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public
opinion poll in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf
of a political organization for political purposes or for or against any
referendum question.



      (5)   Surveying or gathering information from potential or
actual voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection
with



a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for
political purposes or for or against any referendum question.



      (6)   Assisting at the polls on Election Day on behalf of any
political organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any
referendum question.



      (7)   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective
office or a political organization or for or against any referendum question
or helping in an effort to get voters to the polls.



      (8)   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating,
reviewing, or filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective
office or for or against any referendum question.



      (9)   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for
elective office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elected
office.



      (10)   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate
questionnaires.



      (11)   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing
campaign literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of
any candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.



      (12)   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against
any referendum question.



      (13)   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office
or for or against any referendum question.



      (14)   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a
political party convention.



      (15)   Participating in any recount or challenge to the
outcome of any election.



   PROHIBITED SOURCE. Any person or entity who:



      (1)   Is seeking official action:



         (a)   By an officer; or



         (b)   By an employee, or by the officer of another
employee directing that employee;



      (2)   Does business or seeks to do business:



         (a)   With an officer; or



         (b)   With an employee, or with the officer or another
employee directing that employee;



      (3)   Conducts activities regulated:



         (a)   By an officer; or



         (b)   By an employee, or with the officer or another
employee directing that employee; or



      (4)   Has an interest that may be substantially affected by
the performance or nonperformance of the official duties of the covered
individual.



(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)



§ 1-8-4  FINANCIAL INTEREST IN VILLAGE CONTRACTS OR PROPERTY—VILLAGE
OFFICERS.



   Prohibited interests.



   (A)   No village officer shall be interested, directly or
indirectly, in his or her own name or in the name of any other person,
association, trust or corporation, in any contract, work or business of the
village, or in the sale of any article, whenever the expense, price or
consideration of the contract, work, business or sale is paid either from the
village treasury or by any assessment levied by statute or village ordinance
as provided in § 3.1-55-10 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS
5/3.1-55-10).



   (B)   No village officer shall be interested, directly or
indirectly, in the purchase of any property which belongs to the village; or
is sold for taxes or assessments; or is sold by virtue of legal process at
the suit of the village, as provided in § 3.1-55-10 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/3.1-55-10).



(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)



§ 1-8-5  FINANCIAL INTEREST IN VILLAGE CONTRACTS OR PROPERTY—EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   Village policy.  It is the policy of the village that it
shall not enter into any contract for goods or services with any village
employee.



   (B)   Prohibited interests.



      (1)   No village employee shall be interested, directly or
indirectly, in his or her own name or in the name of any other person,
association, trust or corporation, in any contract, work or business of the
village, or in the sale of any article, whenever the expense, price or
consideration of the contract, work, business or sale is paid either from the
village treasury or by any assessment levied by statute or village ordinance.



      (2)   No employee shall be interested, directly or indirectly,
in the purchase of any property which:



         (a)   Belongs to the village; or



         (b)   Is sold for taxes or assessments; or



         (c)   Is sold by virtue of legal process at the suit of
the village.



   (C)   For purposes of this section only, a village employee shall
not be interested if the employee owns or holds an interest of 1% or less in
a company whose stock is traded on a nationally recognized securities market.



(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)



§ 1-8-6  DISCLOSURE OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS.



   All elected officials, appointed officers, commissioners, committee
members and employees required to file economic disclosure statements with
the county clerk pursuant to § 4A-101 of the Illinois Governmental Ethics
Act (5 ILCS 420/4A-101) shall be in violation of this code of ethics if they
fail to comply with and fulfill the requirements set forth in said state Act.



(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)



§ 1-8-7  PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   No covered individual shall intentionally perform any
prohibited political activity during any "compensated time", as defined in §
1-8-2. No covered individual shall intentionally use any property or
resources of the village in connection with any prohibited political activity.



   (B)   At no time shall any covered individual intentionally require
any other covered individual to perform any prohibited political activity:



      (1)   As part of that covered individual's duties;



      (2)   As a condition of employment;



      (3)   During any compensated time off (such as holidays,
vacation or personal time off).



   (C)   No covered individual shall be required at any time to
participate in any prohibited political activity in consideration for that
covered individual being awarded additional compensation or any benefit,
whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off,
continued employment or otherwise, nor shall any covered individual be
awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration for his or
her participation in any prohibited political activity.



   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are
permissible for a covered individual to engage in as part of his or her
official duties, or activities that are undertaken by a covered individual on
a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this article.



(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)



§ 1-8-8 GIFT BAN.



   (A)   Prohibitions and exceptions.



      (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section,
no covered individual shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift, prize,
favor or other consideration from any prohibited source as defined herein, or
which is otherwise in violation of any federal or state statute, rule, or
regulation. This ban applies to and includes the spouse of and immediate
family living with the covered individual. No prohibited source shall
intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this division (A)(1).



         (b)   The restriction does not apply to the following:



            1.   Opportunities, benefits, and services that
are available on the same conditions as for the general public.



            2.   Anything for which the covered individual
pays the market value.



            3.   Any:



               A.    Condition that is lawfully made under
the election code or under this section; or



               B.    Activities associated with a
fundraising event in support of a political organization or candidate.



            4.   Educational materials and missions.



            5.   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss
village business.



            6.   A gift from a relative, meaning those people
related to the covered individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother,
sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece,
husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter,
father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law,
sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother,
stepsister, half-brother, half-sister, and including the father, mother,
grandfather, or grandmother of the covered individual's spouse and the
covered individual's fiancé or fiancée.



            7.   Anything provided by an individual on the
basis of a personal friendship unless the covered individual has reason to
believe that, under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the
official position or employment of the covered individual and not because of
the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the
basis of personal friendship, the covered individual shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as:



               A.   The history of the relationship between
the individual giving the    gift and the recipient of the gift, including
any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals;



               B.    Whether, to the actual knowledge of
the covered individual, the individual who gave the gift personally paid for
the gift or sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and



               C.    Whether, to the actual knowledge of
the covered individual, the individual who gave the gift also, at the same
time, gave the same or similar gifts to other covered individuals.



            8.   Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per
person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or
refreshments are: 1) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased
or prepared; or 2) catered. For the purposes of this section, CATERED means
food or refreshments that are purchased ready to eat and delivered by any
means.



            9.   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation,
and other benefits resulting from outside business or employment activities
(or outside activities that are not connected to the duties of the covered
individual as an office holder or employee) of the officer, member, or
employee, or the spouse of the covered individual, if the benefits have not
been offered or enhanced because of the official position or employment of
the covered individual and are customarily provided to others in similar
circumstances.



            10.    Intragovernmental and intergovernmental
gifts. For the purpose of this section, INTRAGOVERNMENTAL GIFT means any gift
given to a covered individual from another covered individual, and
INTERGOVERNMENTAL GIFT means any gift given to a covered individual by a
member, officer, or employee of another government entity.



            11.   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers
at death.



            12.   Any item or items from any one prohibited
source during any calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than
$100.



      (2)   Each of the exceptions listed in this division (A) is
mutually exclusive and independent of one another.



   (B)   Disposition of gifts. A covered individual does not violate
this article if the covered individual promptly takes reasonable action to
return the prohibited gift to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal
to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation
under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or hereafter
amended, renumbered, or succeeded.



(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)



§ 1-8-9  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   No covered individual shall, without proper legal
authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the property,
government, or affairs of the village without the express consent of the
corporate authorities or the Village Manager.



   (B)   The use of confidential information to advance the financial
or any other private interest of any covered individual or any other person
is prohibited.



   (C)   Any discussions of subject matter committed to executive
session shall be confidential. No public disclosure of the corporate
authority's discussions held or any decisions made in executive session shall
be made unless directed by the corporate authorities or the Village Manager;
or until the matter is made public by announcement, publication or official
action by the corporate authorities.



(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)



§ 1-8-10  MISUSE OF OFFICE OR VILLAGE PROPERTY.



   (A)   Misuse of office. No covered individual shall use his or her
position for individual gain rather than for the benefit of the village.



   (B)   Use of public property. No covered individual shall request or
permit the use of village owned vehicles, equipment, materials or any other
property for personal use or personal profit, except when the property is
made available to the public in general, or when provided to the covered
individual for his or her use as part of an approved village policy, adopted
by either the Board of Trustees or the Village Manager.



(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)



§ 1-8-11  COMPLAINTS.



   (A)   Any person who believes that a violation of any portion of
this article has occurred may file a



complaint with the Village Clerk. Any such complaint shall be based on
personal knowledge and shall include a statement of facts and circumstances
sufficient to inform the covered individual of the nature of the alleged
violation.  Each complaint shall be in writing, signed by the person
alleging the violation and shall contain the following certification:    



   The undersigned, ________________, hereby certify and affirm that I
have read the complaint, have knowledge of the contents thereof, and the
statements set forth therein are true and correct in substance and in fact,
to the best of my knowledge.



   ___________________________________



   (Signature of person filing complaint)



   (B)   No person shall intentionally make a false statement in a
complaint filed pursuant to this article.



   (C)   Within two business days of receiving a complaint, the Village
Clerk shall forward a copy to the Village Manager and to the person alleged
to be in violation of this code of ethics.



(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)



§ 1-8-12  PROCEDURE FOR COMPLAINTS AGAINST VILLAGE EMPLOYEES.



   Upon receipt of the complaint, the Village Manager shall cause an
investigation to be conducted, shall review of the evidence and shall prepare
a written report containing his or her findings and conclusions.  If the
Village Manager determines that the complaint is not sustained, he or she
shall so state in the conclusions portion of his or her written report. On
the other hand, if the Village Manager determines that the complaint is
sustained, the report shall include his or her conclusions as to the
appropriate action to be taken against the employee, including but not
limited to suspension, demotion or discharge.  In the event no violation is
found, the Village Manager's complaint files shall not be open for public
inspection except as provided by law or unless requested by the individual
who was the subject of the complaint. However, the person making the
complaint shall be notified in writing by the Village Manager of his or her
decision.



(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)



§ 1-8-13  PROCEDURE FOR COMPLAINTS AGAINST VILLAGE OFFICIALS.



   Upon receipt of the complaint, the Village Manager shall cause an
investigation to be conducted by the Village Attorney or such other attorney
as may be deemed appropriate. The Village Attorney or assigned attorney shall
review of the evidence, and shall prepare a written report and recommendation
for the Board of Trustees. If it is determined that the complaint is not
sustained, he or she shall so state in the recommendation portion of his or
her written report. On the other hand, if he or she determines that the
complaint is sustained, the report shall include recommendations for such
administrative or legal action as deemed appropriate. The Board shall then
review the report and recommendations and, by majority vote including the
Mayor, determine what action, if any, is to be taken in accordance with the
provisions of this article. If it is a member of the Mayor and Board of
Trustees who is accused, that member shall not participate in the vote. In
the event no violation is found, the complaint files shall not be open for
public inspection except as provided by law or unless requested by the
individual who was the subject of the complaint. To the extent that it is
practical to do so, an elected official should use his or her best efforts to
notify, in writing, other elected village officials prior to filing a
complaint or charges against any village official.



(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)



§ 1-8-14  RETALIATION.



   No covered individual shall retaliate against any person because that
person has opposed that which he or she reasonably and in good faith believes
to be in violation of this code of ethics or any federal or state statute,
rule, or regulation. No covered individual shall retaliate against any person
because that person has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified,
assisted, or participated in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing.



(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)



§ 1-8-15  PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any person who intentionally violates §§ 1-8-4, 1-8-5 or
1-8-7 may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other
than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days, and may be fined
in any amount not to exceed $2,500.



   (B)   Any person who intentionally violates §§ 1-8-6, 1-8-8,
1-8-9, or 1-8-14 shall be subject to a fine in the amount of not less than
$1,000 and not more than $5,000.



   (C)   Any person who intentionally makes a false report or complaint
alleging a violation of any provision of this article to the village, State's
Attorney or any other law enforcement official may be punished by a term of
incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period
of not more than 364 days, and may be fined in any amount not to exceed
$2,500.



   (D)   A violation of §§ 1-8-4, 1-8-5, 1-8-7 or 1-8-11(B) shall be
prosecuted as a criminal offense by the Village Prosecutor. The prosecution
shall be under the Rules of Criminal Procedure. Conviction shall require the
establishment of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.



   (E)   A violation of §§ 1-8-6, 1-8-8, 1-8-9, 1-8-10 or 1-8-14
shall be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by the Village Prosecutor and
shall require the establishment of guilt by a preponderance of the evidence.



   (F)   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable,
whether criminal or civil, an officer who intentionally violates any
provision of this article shall be subject to censure or removal from office
as may be provided by law.



   (G)   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable,
whether criminal or civil, an employee who intentionally violates any
provision of this article shall be subject to discipline, including but not
limited to suspension, demotion or discharge.



(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)



§ 1-8-16  COPIES TO VILLAGE OFFICIALS AND PERSONNEL.



   A copy of this code of ethics shall be provided to all elected
officials, appointed officers and appointed commissioners/committee members
upon beginning their term of office. A copy of this code of ethics shall be
provided to all employees upon its passage and to new employees upon
employment. All appointed officers, employees, and commission and committee
members shall sign a receipt acknowledging delivery of the code of ethics in
a manner to be determined by the Village Manager.



(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)



§ 1-8-17  PROVISIONS ARE ADDITIONAL.



   Nothing in this article shall be deemed to in any way restrict the
application of any state, local or common law provision with respect to
conflict of interest, malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or
employment which would otherwise be applicable to any individual subject to
the provisions of this article. The provisions of this article shall be
deemed to be additional requirements and shall in no way be construed as a
derogation of present statutory penalties and other local remedies for acts
prohibited in this article.



(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)



ARTICLE 9:  DISCRIMINATORY WORKPLACE HARASSMENT POLICY



Section



   1-9-1   Purpose



   1-9-2   Policy



   1-9-3   Definitions



   1-9-4   Complaint procedure



   1-9-5   Legal rights under the law



   1-9-6   Prohibition on retaliation



   1-9-7   False reports of harassment



   1-9-8   Consequences of violating the harassment policy



§ 1-9-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this policy is to establish the village's commitment to
provide a work environment free from harassment, to define discriminatory
harassment, and to set forth the procedure for investigating and resolving
internal complaints of harassment.



(Ord. 2017-12-73, passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 2019-04-15, passed 4-15-2019)



§ 1-9-2  POLICY.



   (A)   All village employees and village officials have a right to
work in an environment free from harassment. It is critical that all village
employees and village officials treat all other village employees and village
officials with dignity and respect. It is the responsibility of each and
every village official, employee, supervisor and department head to make sure
that there is no inappropriate behavior occurring in the workplace.
Inappropriate behavior that impacts the village work environment, or has the
potential to impact the work environment will not be tolerated.



   (B)   Harassment of a village official or employee by any village
official or employee on the basis of race, religion, color, national origin,
ancestry, disability, medical condition, marital status, pregnancy, sexual
orientation, gender, age, or other protected characteristic violates this
policy, may be in violation of state and/or federal law and will not be
tolerated by the Village of Carol Stream. Harassment within the work
environment of the village by a contractor, business invitee guest or
customer and harassment within the work environment of the village of a
contractor business, invitee, guest or customer by a village employee or
official shall be prohibited by this policy.



(Ord. 2017-12-73, passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 2019-04-15, passed 4-15-2019)



§ 1-9-3  DEFINITIONS.



   Harassment in violation of this policy includes but is not limited to
the following behaviors set forth below. For purposes of this definition,
"working environment" or "workplace" is not limited to a physical location a
person covered by this policy is assigned to perform his or her duties and
does not require an employment relationship.



   EMPLOYEE. Any full time, part-time or contractual employee.



   OFFICIAL. Any elected or appointed official regardless of wheher the
official is compensated.



   PHYSICAL HARASSMENT. Assault, impeding or blocking movement, leering,
or the physical interference with normal work, privacy or movement. PHYSICAL
HARASSMENT includes but is not limited to uninvited and/or unwanted touching,
pinching, patting, hugging, kissing, grabbing, inappropriate behavior in any
area of the village, or making explicit or implied threats or promises in
return for submission to physical acts.



   SEXUAL HARASSMENT. Any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual
favors or any conduct of a sexual nature when:



      (1)   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or
implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment,



      (2)   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an
individual is used as the basis for an employment decision, or



      (3)   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially
interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an
intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment.



   VERBAL HARASSMENT. Nicknames, derogatory or suggestive comments,
innuendos, slurs, insults, threats, derogatory or discriminatory jokes,
propositioning, or otherwise offensive words, comments or gestures on the
basis of race, status, pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender, age, or other
protected characteristic, whether made in general or directed to an
individual, regardless of whether the behavior was intended to harass. This
includes but is not limited to persistent unwelcome flirting, pressure for
dates, inappropriate sexually related comments, sexual rumors, jokes, code
words and stories.



   VISUAL FORMS OF HARASSMENT. Derogatory, prejudicial, stereotypical or
otherwise offensive posters, signs, photographs, cartoons, e-mails, texting,
cyber stalking, notes, bulletins, drawings, pictures, online postings, blogs,
or social network site postings.



(Ord. 2017-12-73, passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 2019-04-15, passed 4-15-2019)



§ 1-9-4  COMPLAINT PROCEDURE.



   The village will investigate any allegations of discriminatory village
work environment harassment, sexual harassment or retaliation. All
allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted and investigated
regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the village. However,
because of the difficulties associated with the investigation of workplace
harassment, the claimant's willing cooperation is a vital component of an
effective investigation. The following procedure has been instituted for
making complaints about conduct in violation of this policy.



   (A)   Any person covered by this policy observing an act of
harassment or who is the object of harassment shall report the suspected
harassment by a village employee, village official, contractor, business
invitee, customer or village guest to their immediate supervisor, department
head or the Human Resources Director The report may be made initially either
orally or in writing, but the village may require a written statement as a
part of the investigation.



   (B)   Any person covered by this policy who is experiencing what he
or she believes to be an act of harassment must not assume that the village
is aware of the conduct. If there are no witnesses and a victim of harassment
fails to notify the village as provided herein, the village will not be
presumed to have knowledge of the harassment.



   (C)   The immediate supervisor department head informed of the
complaint will notify the Human Resources Department within 24 hours. An
investigation of the suspected harassment will be initiated at the direction
of the Human Resources Department, generally within five working days of
notification. If deemed necessary, additional individuals may assist in the
investigation. The investigation will include an interview with the person(s)
who made the initial report and the person(s) toward whom the suspected
harassment was directed. Any other person who may have information regarding
the alleged harassment may also be interviewed.



   (D)   The individual conducting the investigation is responsible for
preparing a written report within ten working days of his or her completion
of the investigation, unless extenuating circumstances prevent him or her
from doing so. The report shall include a finding that the harassment has
been substantiated or the harassment cannot be substantiated.



   (E)   Every effort shall be made to keep all matters related to the
investigation and various reports as confidential as possible.



(Ord. 2017-12-73, passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 2019-04-15, passed 4-15-2019)



§ 1-9-5  LEGAL RIGHTS UNDER THE LAW.



   Any person covered by this policy who believes he or she has been
subjected to discriminatory harassment has the right to file a complaint with
the Illinois Department of Human Rights, 100 West Randolph Street, Chicago,
Illinois 60601; (312) 814-6200 and/or the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, 500 West Madison, Suite 2000, Chicago, Illinois 60661;
1-800-669-4000. The Illinois Human Act provides that complaints harassment
must be filed within 300 days of the alleged incident. A complaint with the
EEOC must be filed within 300 days of the alleged incident.



(Ord. 2017-12-73, passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 2018-11-41, passed 11-5-2018; Ord.
2019-04-15, passed 4-15-2019)



§ 1-9-6  PROHIBITION ON RETALIATION.



   (A)   Any person filing a report of harassment and any person who
cooperates in a harassment investigation have the right to be protected from
retaliation. The Whistleblower Act, 740 ILCS 174/15(a) and the Illinois Human
Rights Act, 775 ILCS 5/6-101, prohibit retaliation against a person because
he or she has reported any act which he or she reasonably and in good faith
believes to be unlawful harassment, or because he or she has made a charge,
filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in an investigation,
proceeding, or hearing with respect to any alleged harassment. Any form of
retaliation, if established, is subject to administrative and/or disciplinary
action.



   (B)   Any person covered by this policy who believes he or she has
experienced or witnessed retaliation should report such conduct immediately
to his or her immediate supervisor, department head, except where such person
is the one accused of retaliation. In such case, the complaint should be
reported to the Human Resources Director. The complaint procedures in this
policy will also apply to complaints of retaliation.



(Ord. 2017-12-73, passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 2019-04-15, passed 4-15-2019)



§ 1-9-7  FALSE REPORTS OF HARASSMENT.



   Complaints of harassment are taken seriously by the village. The
village also recognizes that making false accusations of harassment in bad
faith can have serious consequences for those who are wrongly accused.
Submitting an allegation of harassment, reporting or providing information
that is intentionally false or misleading is a severe offense and a violation
of this policy.



(Ord. 2017-12-73, passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 2019-04-15, passed 4-15-2019)



§ 1-9-8  CONSEQUENCES OF VIOLATING THE HARASSMENT POLICY.



   Any person who violates this policy, the prohibition on sexual
harassment contained in 5 ILCS 430/5-65, or makes a false report of
harassment shall be subject to discipline including but not limited to
suspension, demotion or discharge and any applicable fines and penalties
established pursuant to ordinance, state law or federal law. Each violation
shall constitute a separate offense. Any discipline imposed shall be separate
and distinct from any fine or penalties imposed by a court of law or a state
or federal agency.



(Ord. 2017-12-73, passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 2019-04-15, passed 4-15-2019)



CHAPTER 2: APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY



      Article



         1.   VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR



         2.   VILLAGE TREASURER



         3.   FINANCE DIRECTOR



         4.   RESERVED



         5.   VILLAGE ATTORNEY



         6.   VILLAGE PROSECUTOR



         7.   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY



ARTICLE 1:  VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR



Section



   2-1-1   Authorization to employ Administrator; appointment



   2-1-2   Bond



   2-1-3   Compensation



   2-1-4   Chief Administrator



   2-1-5   Acting Administrator



   2-1-6   Appointment powers



   2-1-7   Administrator to serve as Budget Officer



   2-1-8   Powers and duties of Budget Officer



   2-1-9   Authority to revise budget



   2-1-10   Powers and duties of Administrator



   2-1-11   Matters directed to Administrator’s attention



Cross-reference:



   Purchasing and contracting, see Ch. 5, Art. 8



§ 2-1-1  AUTHORIZATION TO EMPLOY ADMINISTRATOR; APPOINTMENT.



   The President and Board of Trustees are hereby authorized to employ a
Village Administrator. Such Administrator shall be appointed by the
President, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. The
Village Administrator may also be referred to or be known as the Village
Manager.



§ 2-1-2  BOND.



   The Village Manager shall furnish a bond in such amount and with such
surety as may be approved by the corporate authorities, such bond to be
conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her duties. The cost of
the bond shall be paid by the village. The bond of the Village Manager may be
part of a blanket bond.



§ 2-1-3  COMPENSATION.



   The Village Manager shall receive such compensation as the corporate
authorities shall, from time to time, establish.



§ 2-1-4  CHIEF ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Village Manager, under and subject to the direction of the
corporate authorities, shall be the Chief Administrator of the village, and
shall be responsible to the corporate authorities for the proper
administration of the affairs of the village.



§ 2-1-5  ACTING ADMINISTRATOR.



   If, because of a temporary absence, disability or illness, the Manager
is unable to carry out the functions of this office, the corporate
authorities may appoint an Acting Administrator to carry out the duties of
the Village Manager during the Village Manager’s absence.



§ 2-1-6  APPOINTMENT POWERS.



   The Village Manager may appoint such assistants, department heads or
employees as are necessary to the proper functioning of the village; except
that, the Village Manager may not appoint those officers which are by law or
ordinance required to be appointed by the Village President.



§ 2-1-7  ADMINISTRATOR TO SERVE AS BUDGET OFFICER.



   The Village President and Board of Trustees shall appoint the Budget
Officer who is the Village Manager.



§ 2-1-8  POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUDGET OFFICER.



   The Village Manager shall have all the powers and duties provided for
in 65 ILCS 5/ now in effect and as hereafter amended.



§ 2-1-9  AUTHORITY TO REVISE BUDGET.



   The Village Manager has the authority to approve budget transfers where
the amount, in total, does not exceed $5,000 and the transfer is within the
same department. Any transfers in excess of $5,000 and/or transfers between
departments must be presented to the Village Board for its approval. Any
increase or decrease to the budget, in the form of a budget amendment must
also be presented to the Village Board for its approval. Pertaining to
program budgets, the Village Manager has the authority to approve budget
transfers, in any amount, between programs within the same department as long
as the total amount of the department’s budget does not change.



(Ord. 2009-10-59, passed 10-19-2009)



§ 2-1-10  POWERS AND DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Village Manager shall have the following powers and duties:



   (A)   Enforce all laws and ordinances of the village;



   (B)   Attend all meetings of the Board of Trustees. The Village
Manager shall have the right to take part in the discussion of all matters
coming before the Board, but shall have no right to vote. The Village Manager
shall be entitled to notice of all special and regular meetings of the Board
of Trustees;



   (C)   Recommend to the Board such measures as, in his or her
judgment, he or she deems to be in the best interest of the village;



   (D)   Appoint all village employees, except for those covered by the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners;



   (E)   The Village Manager shall present to the Board of Trustees
personnel rules and regulations to be adopted by motion of the Board of
Trustees. These rules may cover procedures and policies to govern the
following phases of the personnel program:



      (1)   The administration of the position classification and
pay plans;



      (2)   Procurement, promotion, evaluation, transfer and
separation of village personnel;



      (3)   Establishment of hours of work, attendance, leave
regulations and working conditions;



      (4)   Rules covering the outside employment, nepotism and
political activity of village personnel;



      (5)   Maintenance and use of necessary records and forms; and



      (6)   System of handling all grievances.



   (F)   Conduct the collective bargaining process of the village;



   (G)   Exercise control of all departments and divisions thereof now
in existence or that may hereafter be created by the Board, except as limited
or restricted by ordinance;



   (H)   Recommend to the Board the creating, consolidating and
combining of offices, positions, departments or units of the administrative
and executive departments of the village;



   (I)   Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning
the administration of the government of the village and services maintained
by the public utilities in the village, and see that all franchises, permits
and privileges granted by the village are faithfully observed;



   (J)   Sign on behalf of the village any contract authorized by the
Board of Trustees, except where the Board or state statutes direct that some
other officer shall do so. It shall be the duty of the Village Manager to see
that all terms of any contract to which the village is a party are fully
performed by all parties hereto;



   (K)   Keep a current inventory of all real and personal property of
the village and location of such property. The Village Manager shall be
responsible for the care and custody of all village property which is not
assigned to some other officer or body for care and control;



   (L)   Devote his or her entire time to the discharge of his or her
official duties; and



   (M)   The Village Manager shall perform such other duties as may be
required by the Board of Trustees consistent with law and the ordinances of
the village.



§ 2-1-11  MATTERS DIRECTED TO ADMINISTRATOR’S ATTENTION.



   All offices and departments shall submit all matters requiring Board of
Trustees’ action or attention to the Village Manager, who shall submit them
to the Board with recommendations as may be deemed necessary. All
departmental or employee requests shall be submitted to the Village Manager
and shall receive instruction as to policy and departmental operation from
the Manager.



ARTICLE 2:  VILLAGE TREASURER



Section



   2-2-1   Office established, appointment and term of office



   2-2-2   Qualifications



   2-2-3   Oath of office



   2-2-4   Bond



   2-2-5   Compensation



   2-2-6   General duties



   2-2-7   Deposit of funds; private use of funds



   2-2-8   Records



   2-2-9   Accounting



   2-2-10   Special assessment funds



   2-2-11   Warrants and transfer of funds



   2-2-12   Report of funds



   2-2-13   Annual report of Treasurer



   2-2-14   Additional duties



§ 2-2-1  OFFICE ESTABLISHED, APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE.



   There is hereby established the office of Village Treasurer, who shall
be appointed by the Village President, with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees. The Village Treasurer shall serve an indefinite term which
shall not be longer than that of the appointing authority, and shall
immediately relinquish the office and its records to such person as may be
named by the Village President as the Village Treasurer’s successor.



§ 2-2-2  QUALIFICATIONS.



   No person shall be eligible to hold the office of Village Treasurer
unless he or she is a qualified elector of the village and has resided
therein at least one year next preceding his or her appointment, and who is
not a defaulter to the village. The Village Treasurer shall hold no other
village office during his or her term as Treasurer.



§ 2-2-3  OATH OF OFFICE.



   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the Village
Treasurer shall take and subscribe the oath of office as prescribed by
statute. This oath, so subscribed, shall be filed in the office of the
Village Clerk.



§ 2-2-4  BOND.



   (A)   The Village Treasurer shall give a bond, before entering upon
the duties of the office, in the sum required by the Board of Trustees, but
the amount shall not be less than that required by statute. This bond shall
be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the Village Treasurer’s
duties and shall be conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss by
reason of any neglect of duty or any act of the Treasurer.



   (B)   Such bond shall be approved by the corporate authorities and
filed with the Village Clerk. The premium of such bond shall be paid by the
village.



§ 2-2-5  COMPENSATION.



   The Village Treasurer shall receive such compensation as may, from time
to time, be prescribed.



§ 2-2-6  GENERAL DUTIES.



   The Village Treasurer shall receive all money collected by other
officers or employees. The Treasurer shall pay out money only on vouchers or
orders properly signed by the Village President and Village Clerk.



§ 2-2-7  DEPOSIT OF FUNDS; PRIVATE USE OF FUNDS.



   The Village Treasurer shall deposit the village funds in such
depositories as may be selected from time to time by ordinance, by the
corporate authorities and in accordance with statutes. The Treasurer shall
keep the deposit of the village money separate and distinct from the
Treasurer’s own money, and shall not make private or personal use of any
village money.



§ 2-2-8  RECORDS.



   The Village Treasurer shall keep records showing all money received,
showing the source from which it is received and the purpose for which it is
paid, and the Treasurer shall keep records at all times showing the financial
status of the village.



§ 2-2-9  ACCOUNTING.



   The Village Treasurer shall keep such books and accounts and in such
manner as required by statute or ordinance.



§ 2-2-10  SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUNDS.



   (A)   All moneys received on any special assessment shall be held by
the Village Treasurer in special funds, one for each assessment, to be
applied only to the payment of the improvement, or bonds and vouchers issued
therefor, together with interest thereon, for which the assessment was made,
and such money shall be used for no other purpose, unless to reimburse the
village for money expended for such improvement.



   (B)   Payment on bonds or vouchers shall be made in accordance with
statutes, and the Village Treasurer shall keep books and accounts in such a
manner that proper prorations in payments of principal and interest can be
made and ascertained.



§ 2-2-11  WARRANTS AND TRANSFER OF FUNDS.



   All warrants drawn on the Village Treasurer must be signed by the
Village President and countersigned by the Village Clerk, stating the
particular fund or appropriation to which the same is chargeable, and the
person to whom payable; and no money shall be otherwise paid, except as may
be provided by statute. Money shall not be transferred by the Village
Treasurer from one fund to another after it has been received by the
Treasurer, nor appropriated to any purpose other than that for which it has
been collected or paid, except as may be ordered by the President and Board
of Trustees in the manner and form prescribed by statute.



§ 2-2-12  REPORT OF FUNDS.



   The Village Treasurer or the Finance Director shall render an account
under oath to the Village Board, monthly, showing the state of the treasury
at the date of the account and the balance of the money in the treasury.
There shall accompany such account a statement of all moneys received into
the treasury and on what account, together with all warrants, bonds,
vouchers, redeemed and paid by the village.



§ 2-2-13  ANNUAL REPORT OF TREASURER.



   The Village Treasurer, prior to September 1 of each year, shall prepare
and file with the Village Clerk an account of all moneys received and
expenditures incurred during the preceding fiscal year as prescribed by
statute. A copy of the annual account of the Treasurer shall also be filed
with the County Collector of Taxes who collects taxes levied by the village,
together with an affidavit of the Village Clerk certifying its publication as
required by law and its correctness.



Cross-reference:



   Publication of report by Clerk, see § 1-6-14



§ 2-2-14  ADDITIONAL DUTIES.



   In addition to the duties herein provided, the Village Treasurer shall
perform such other duties and functions as may be required by statute or
ordinance.



ARTICLE 3:  FINANCE DIRECTOR



Section



   2-3-1   Position established; appointment



   2-3-2   Bond



   2-3-3   Duties



   2-3-4   Endorsement of instruments payable to the village



   2-3-5   Signing of checks, orders for payment of money



   2-3-6   Procedure for bad debt write-off



Cross-reference:



   Taxation and Finance, see Ch. 5



§ 2-3-1  POSITION ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT.



   The position of Finance Director is hereby created as an employment
with the village and shall be appointed by the Village Manager. At the
Village Manager’s discretion, the Finance Director may be removed. In the
absence of the appointment of a Village Treasurer, the Finance Director shall
perform all duties and shall possess all powers authorized or established by
the ordinances of the village or the statutes of the state for the office of
Village Treasurer. If a Village Treasurer is appointed, the Finance Director
shall perform such duties as are assigned by ordinance, the corporate
authorities, the Village Manager or the Treasurer with permission of the
Village Manager.



§ 2-3-2  BOND.



   (A)   The Finance Director shall give a bond, before entering upon
the duties of employment, in the sum required by the Board of Trustees. This
bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of
Finance Director, and shall be conditioned to indemnify the village for any
loss by reason of any neglect of duty or any act of the Finance Director. The
bond of the Finance Director may be a blanket bond.



   (B)   Such bond shall be approved by the corporate authorities and
filed with the Village Clerk. The premium of such bond shall be paid by the
village.



§ 2-3-3  DUTIES.



   The Finance Director shall report directly to the Village Manager. In
addition to such duties which may be assigned to the Finance Director by the
corporate authorities, Village Manager or the Treasurer with permission of
the Village Manager, the Finance Director shall have the following
responsibilities:



   (A)   Maintenance and custody of all payroll and general personnel
records, except the Board of Fire and Police Commissioner’s records;



   (B)   Keeping the general ledger and accounts of the village;



   (C)   Keeping a record of all liens which may accrue on behalf of
the village and filing such liens with the appropriate governmental body;



   (D)   Receiving all revenue to the village;



   (E)   Performing all utility billing on behalf of the village;



   (F)   Working with the Village Manager and Budget Officer in
preparation of the village budget;



   (G)   Providing financial planning analysis, forecasting and
investment advice to the village; and



   (H)   Reporting to the Village Manager and the Board of Trustees on
the financial status of the village.



§ 2-3-4  ENDORSEMENT OF INSTRUMENTS PAYABLE TO THE VILLAGE.



   The Finance Director is hereby authorized to endorse for deposit any
and all checks, drafts, notes, bills of exchange and orders payable to the
order of the village.



§ 2-3-5  SIGNING OF CHECKS, ORDERS FOR PAYMENT OF MONEY.



   The Mayor or a Trustee and the Manager, Finance Director or Treasurer
must sign all checks for the withdrawal of funds so that each check shall
have the signature of an elected official or employee of the village.
However, a facsimile signature of the Mayor and the Finance Director or
Treasurer may be affixed to such documents by the Finance Director or his or
her designee by means of engraving, imprinting or other means of reproducing
the manual signatures.



(Ord. 97-07-44, passed 7-7-1997)



§ 2-3-6  PROCEDURE FOR BAD DEBT WRITE-OFF.



   (A)   All payments and debts due to the village and deemed
uncollectible shall be reported to the corporate authorities in an annual
report within 90 days after the conclusion of each fiscal year. If such debts
or payments deemed uncollectible shall in any fiscal year amount to less than
$2,500 in the aggregate with no single amount in excess of $500, the unpaid
amount may be written off the books and records of the village as “bad
debts” by administrative action. In such case, the amount “written off”
shall be reported to the Village Manager. All payments or debts deemed
uncollectible which shall in any fiscal year amount to an aggregate total of
more than $2,500 and any individual amount of more than $500 may only be
“written off” the books and records of the village by the Finance
Director after such action is approved by motion of the corporate authorities.



   (B)   If the “write-off” is the result of a bankruptcy, the
approval of the corporate authorities is not necessary and the amount written
off shall be included in the report that is given to the Village Manager.



(Ord. 99-03-21, passed 3-15-1999)



ARTICLE 4:  RESERVED



Editor’s note:



   This article, formerly “Deputy Village Clerk”, was repealed by Ord.
2011-04-10, passed 4-18-2011. It was reserved for future use at the
discretion of the editor.



ARTICLE 5:  VILLAGE ATTORNEY



Section



   2-5-1   Employment of Village Attorney



   2-5-2   Compensation



   2-5-3   Duties



   2-5-4   Suits and actions



   2-5-5   Special assessments



   2-5-6   Additional legal counsel



§ 2-5-1  EMPLOYMENT OF VILLAGE ATTORNEY.



   The corporate authorities shall employ an attorney or firm of attorneys
as the Village Attorney for the village, either as an officer or as an
independent contractor. If serving as an officer, the Village Attorney shall
take an oath of office and post a bond in the amount of $1,000. The cost of
such bond shall be paid by the village.



§ 2-5-2  COMPENSATION.



   The Village Attorney shall receive such compensation as may, from time
to time, be provided by contract, motion or ordinance.



§ 2-5-3  DUTIES.



   (A)   The Village Attorney shall advise the President and Board of
Trustees or any officer of the village in all matters of law in which the
interests of the corporation are involved and, when required by the President
or Board of Trustees, shall furnish written opinions upon any subject
submitted to him or her pertaining to the village and its interests.



   (B)   When requested by the President or Board of Trustees, and upon
such financial arrangement as shall prevail, the Village Attorney shall
prepare all ordinances and resolutions, contracts, leases and other documents
or instruments to which the village may be a party, and shall attend all
regular and special meetings of the Board and such other village meetings at
which the Village Attorney’s attendance is required.



   (C)   The Village Attorney shall assist the Village Prosecutor upon
his or her request.



§ 2-5-4  SUITS AND ACTIONS.



   Except for the prosecution of ordinance violation cases, which he or
she shall perform only when specifically so directed, the Village Attorney,
upon such financial arrangement as shall prevail, shall prosecute or defend
any and all suits or actions at law or equity to which the village may be a
party, or in which it may be brought against, or by, any officer of the
village on behalf of the village, or in the capacity of such person as an
officer of the village.



§ 2-5-5  SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.



   Upon such financial arrangement as shall prevail, it shall be the duty
of the Village Attorney to carry out the legal work involved in all special
assessment proceedings and condemnation proceedings.



§ 2-5-6  ADDITIONAL LEGAL COUNSEL.



   The corporate authorities may, from time to time, employ additional
lawyers to perform specialized, consultant or advisory services to the
Village Attorney or the village.



ARTICLE 6:  VILLAGE PROSECUTOR



Section



   2-6-1   Employment of Village Prosecutor



   2-6-2   Compensation



   2-6-3   Duties



§ 2-6-1  EMPLOYMENT OF VILLAGE PROSECUTOR.



   The corporate authorities shall employ an attorney or firm of attorneys
as the Village Prosecutor for the village, either as an officer or as an
independent contractor.



§ 2-6-2  COMPENSATION.



   The Village Prosecutor shall receive such compensation as may, from
time to time, be provided by contract, motion or ordinance.



§ 2-6-3  DUTIES.



   (A)   The Village Prosecutor shall prosecute all ordinance
violations of the village unless the corporate authorities shall assign the
prosecution of certain cases to some other attorney.



   (B)   The Village Prosecutor shall notify the Village Attorney of
any notice of appeal served in connection with the imposition of any fine or
other penalty for a violation of a village ordinance. The Village Attorney
shall, when directed and upon such financial arrangement as shall prevail,
represent the village in such appeal.



ARTICLE 7:  OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY



Section



   2-7-1   Provisions



   2-7-2   Term of office



   2-7-3   Vacancy



   2-7-4   Oath of office



   2-7-5   Bond



   2-7-6   Compensation



   2-7-7   Assignment of duties



   2-7-8   Inspection of records



   2-7-9   Delivery of records upon termination



   2-7-10   Moneys received



   2-7-11   Resignation



   2-7-12   Conservators of peace



   2-7-13   Police powers of certain employees



   2-7-14   Holding other offices prohibited



   2-7-15   Declaration of employment policy



   2-7-16   Coverage and application of personnel rules and regulations



   2-7-17   Amendments of personnel rules and regulations



   2-7-18   Emergency interim successors



§ 2-7-1  PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this article shall apply to all officers and
employees of the village, regardless of the time of the creation of the
office or position or the time of the appointment of the officer or employee.



§ 2-7-2  TERM OF OFFICE.



   Every appointed officer of the village shall hold office for an
indefinite term, or until his or her successor is appointed and qualified,
unless otherwise provided by ordinance. Any officer appointed by the Village
President for an indefinite term may be removed by the Village President at
any time without cause.



§ 2-7-3  VACANCY.



   In the event a vacancy occurs, it shall be filled in the same manner in
which appointments are made in the absence of provisions to the contrary.



§ 2-7-4  OATH OF OFFICE.



   Every officer of the village shall, before entering upon his or her
duties, take the oath prescribed by statute. This oath, so subscribed, shall
be filed with the Village Clerk.



§ 2-7-5  BOND.



   Unless otherwise specified by this code, or by statute, the bond
required of any appointed officer shall be $1,000. All bonds, except the bond
for the Village Treasurer, may be under a blanket bond.



§ 2-7-6  COMPENSATION.



   All appointed officers and employees of the village shall receive such
compensation as may, from time to time, be provided by the corporate
authorities.



§ 2-7-7  ASSIGNMENT OF DUTIES.



   The Village President and Board of Trustees shall have the power to
establish by ordinance any additional duties, rules and regulations for
appointed officers.



§ 2-7-8  INSPECTION OF RECORDS.



   All records kept by any officer or employee of the village shall be
open to inspection by the President, or any member of the Board of Trustees,
at all reasonable times whether or not such records are required to be kept
by statute or ordinance.



§ 2-7-9  DELIVERY OF RECORDS UPON TERMINATION.



   (A)   Every officer of the village, upon the expiration of his or
her term, for whatever cause, shall deliver to his or her successor all
property, books, records and effects belonging to the village, or pertaining
to the office he or she has held, within five days after notification and
request to do so. If no successor has been appointed, such property shall be
delivered to the Village Clerk or Village Treasurer.



   (B)   Any officer or employee violating the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $100, nor more than
$500.



§ 2-7-10  MONEYS RECEIVED.



   Every officer and employee of the village shall, within seven days,
turn over all money received by him or her in his or her official capacity to
the Village Treasurer with a statement showing the source from which the same
was received.



§ 2-7-11  RESIGNATION.



   Any officer of the village may resign from his or her office. If such
officer resigns, he or she shall continue in office until his or her
successor has been chosen and has qualified. If there is a failure to appoint
a village officer, or the person appointed fails to qualify, the person
filling the office shall continue in office until his or her successor has
been chosen and has qualified.



§ 2-7-12  CONSERVATORS OF PEACE.



   The Village President, members of the Board of Trustees and all sworn
personnel of the Police Department, are hereby declared to be conservators of
the peace with such powers as are given to conservators of the peace by
statute.



§ 2-7-13  POLICE POWERS OF CERTAIN EMPLOYEES.



   For the purpose of enforcing this code of ordinances, the Subdivision
Code, Zoning Code and Building Construction and Maintenance Codes of the
village, the following employees shall be vested with police powers in the
enforcement of code compliance and issuance of citations for ordinance
violations:  Community Service Technicians, Engineering Services Director,
Assistant Village Engineer, Civil Engineer II, Stormwater Administrator,
Engineering Inspectors, Community Development Director, Planning and Economic
Development Manager, Development Services Manager, Code Professionals, Public
Works Director and Superintendent of Operations. For the purpose of enforcing
the Fire Code, the above officials and employees shall all be vested with
police powers as shall employees of the Carol Stream Fire Protection District
acting under an intergovernmental agreement with the village.



(Ord. 2009-05-20, passed 5-4-2009; Ord. 2018-07-29, passed 7-16-2018)



§ 2-7-14  HOLDING OTHER OFFICES PROHIBITED.



   The Village President, Village Trustees, Village Clerk and the Village
Treasurer shall hold no other village office during their respective terms as
President, Trustees, Clerk or Treasurer.



§ 2-7-15  DECLARATION OF EMPLOYMENT POLICY.



   It is the intent of the corporate authorities of the village that
employment in the village shall be based upon merit and shall be free of
personal and political considerations. Just and equitable incentives and
conditions of employment shall be established and maintained to promote
efficiency and economy in operation of the village government. Positions
shall be classified and compensated for on a rational basis. Appointments and
promotions, where possible, shall be based on systematic tests and
evaluations. Every effort shall be made to stimulate high morale by fair
administration and consideration of the rights and interest of the persons
affected, consistent with the best interests of the public and the village.



§ 2-7-16  COVERAGE AND APPLICATION OF PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The personnel rules and regulations adopted by the corporate
authorities shall apply to all appointed officers and employees of the
village, except members of citizens’ boards and commissions, the Village
Manager, volunteer personnel and persons appointed to serve without pay,
consultants and counsel rendering professional service and such positions
involving seasonal or part-time temporary employment. If a matter is not
covered within the personnel rules and regulations adopted by the corporate
authorities, that matter shall be governed by the general provisions of state
law governing the power of municipal governments to deal with its officers
and employees.



§ 2-7-17  AMENDMENTS OF PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   Amendments of personnel rules and regulations may be proposed by the
Village Manager and shall become effective upon approval by motion of the
President and Board of Trustees.



§ 2-7-18  EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSORS.



   The emergency interim successors for the Office of Mayor shall be that
Trustee who is currently serving as Mayor Pro Tem and, thereafter the Trustee
who has served the longest continuous period. In the event that two Trustees
shall have assumed office at the same time, the person to be chosen shall be
selected in alphabetical order. The emergency interim successors shall take
office in the event of the occurrence of those conditions and in the manner
provided for in the Emergency Interim Executive Succession Act, 5 ILCS
275/1-1 et seq.



(Ord. 97-07-45, passed 7-7-1997)



CHAPTER 3: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



      Article



         1.   BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS



         2.   BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS



         3.   BOARD OF TRUSTEES, POLICE PENSION FUND



         4.   ELECTRICAL COMMISSION



         5.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (EMA)



         6.   PLAN COMMISSION



         7.   ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS



         8.   HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION



         9.   COLLEGE OF DU PAGE-CAROL STREAM REGIONAL CENTER
ADVISORY COMMITTEE



ARTICLE 1:  BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS



Section



   3-1-1   Establishment



   3-1-2   Duties



   3-1-3   Secretary



§ 3-1-1  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is hereby established a Board of Local Improvements as follows: 
the Village President shall serve as President of the Board of Local
Improvements and the Village Trustees shall serve as members of the Board.



§ 3-1-2  DUTIES.



   The Board of Local Improvements shall have all the powers conferred and
all the duties prescribed by the provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes
pertaining to local improvements.



§ 3-1-3  SECRETARY.



   The Village Clerk shall serve as ex-officio Secretary of the Board of
Local Improvements. The Clerk shall attend all meetings of the Board and
shall keep minutes of its proceedings. The Clerk shall preserve and file all
petitions, resolutions, papers and documents and other official actions of
the Board. The Clerk shall mail and post all estimates and notices which are
required by law to be made by the Board to the corporate authorities. The
Secretary shall perform all other acts and duties required by statute and by
the Board of Local Improvements.



ARTICLE 2:  BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS



Section



   3-2-1   Establishment, appointments and term of office



   3-2-2   Qualifications



   3-2-3   Oath of office



   3-2-4   Bond and compensation



   3-2-5   Removal of office



   3-2-6   Secretary



   3-2-7   Appointments by the Board



   3-2-8   Rules



   3-2-9   Publication of rules



   3-2-10   Annual report and budget request



   3-2-11   Attorney for Board



   3-2-12   Rooms and funds



   3-2-13   Additional powers and duties



Cross-reference:



   Police Department, see Ch. 4, Art. 1



§ 3-2-1  ESTABLISHMENT, APPOINTMENTS AND TERM OF OFFICE.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners, consisting of three members, each of whose term of office
shall be three years and until their respective successors are appointed and
have qualified.



   (B)   Members shall be appointed by the Village President, with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees; provided, however, that, no
appointment shall be made by the President within 30 days before the
expiration of the President’s term of office.



§ 3-2-2  QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The members of the Board shall be considered officers of the
village. No person is eligible to hold an appointed village office who has 
not been a qualified voter of the village and has not resided therein at
least one year next preceding his or her appointment, or who is a defaulter
to the village.



   (B)   No person holding an office under a municipality shall be a
member of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the village, or the
Secretary thereof.



   (C)   No person shall be appointed a member of the Board who is
related, either by blood or marriage up to the degree of first cousin, to any
elected official of the village.



   (D)   No more than two members of the Board may be members of the
same municipal political party or, if there is none, then national political
parties shall be considered in making such appointments. Party affiliation
shall be determined by affidavit.



§ 3-2-3  OATH OF OFFICE.



   Each member of the Board shall take and subscribe the oath of office as
prescribed by statute.



§ 3-2-4  BOND AND COMPENSATION.



   (A)   Each member of the Board shall execute a bond in the amount of
$1,000, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of a Fire and
Police Commissioner. The bonds shall be approved by the corporate authorities
and filed with the Village Clerk. The premium of such bonds shall be paid by
the village. The bonds may be part of a blanket bond.



   (B)   Commencing 5-1-2010, the members of the Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners shall receive compensation of $10 per meeting attended,
and the Chairperson shall receive $20 per meeting attended.



(Ord. 2001-11-55, passed 11-5-2001; Ord. 2001-12-59, passed 12-3-2001; Ord.
2010-03-07, passed 3-15-2010)



§ 3-2-5  REMOVAL OF OFFICE.



   Members of the Board shall not be subject to removal, except for cause,
upon written charges and after an opportunity to be heard within 30 days in
his, her or their own defense, before a regular meeting of the Board of
Trustees. A majority vote of the Board of Trustees shall be required to
remove such members from office.



§ 3-2-6  SECRETARY.



   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners may employ a Secretary or
may designate one of its own members to act as such. The Secretary shall keep
the minutes of the Board’s proceedings, shall be custodian of all records
pertaining to the business of the Board, shall keep a record of all
examinations held and shall perform such other duties as the Board shall
prescribe. The Secretary shall receive such compensation as may be
established by the corporate authorities.



§ 3-2-7  APPOINTMENTS BY THE BOARD.



   The Board shall appoint all sworn officers of the Police Department,
which does not include Community Service Technicians and civilian employees
of the Police Department of the village, except the Chief of Police;
provided, however, that, all appointments to the Department other than that
of the lowest rank shall be from the rank next below that to which the
appointment shall be made, except in the appointment of the Chief of Police,
who shall be appointed by the Village Manager; provided further that, such
appointment of Chief of Police need not be from among the members of the
Police Department.



§ 3-2-8  RULES.



   The Board shall make such rules for the appointment and removal of all
sworn officers of the Police Department; however, these rules shall apply
only to the conduct of examinations for original appointments and promotions,
and to the conduct of hearings on charges brought against all sworn officers
of the Department. Appointments and promotions shall be made after an
examination as provided by statute.



§ 3-2-9  PUBLICATION OF RULES.



   All rules and regulations and any charges therein shall be printed
immediately for distribution, and notice shall be given of where the printed
rules and regulations may be obtained and of the date, not less than ten days
subsequent to the time of printing, when the rules or changes therein shall
go into effect. This notice shall be published in one or more newspapers with
a general circulation within the village.



§ 3-2-10  ANNUAL REPORT AND BUDGET REQUEST.



   On or before April 1 of each year, the Board shall submit to the
Village President a report of its activities for the previous calendar year.
The Board shall also submit, on or before March 1 of each year, an annual
budget request to the Village President and Board of Trustees.



§ 3-2-11  ATTORNEY FOR BOARD.



   The Village Attorney shall serve as counsel for the Board.



§ 3-2-12  ROOMS AND FUNDS.



   The corporate authorities shall provide suitable rooms for the Board
and shall allow reasonable use of public buildings for holding examinations
by the Board and shall further provide adequate funds in the annual
appropriation ordinance for the operation of the Board.



§ 3-2-13  ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Board shall have such other powers and duties as prescribed by the
statutes of the state.



ARTICLE 3:  BOARD OF TRUSTEES, POLICE PENSION FUND



Section



   3-3-1   Establishment, appointment and election



   3-3-2   Meetings, organization, duties and powers



Cross-reference:



   Police Department, see Ch. 4, Art. 1



§ 3-3-1  ESTABLISHMENT, APPOINTMENT AND ELECTION.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Board of Trustees of the Police
Pension Fund, consisting of five members, a majority of whom shall be
residents of the village. Two of the Board members shall be appointed by the
Village President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, for
a term of two years each. However, members appointed by the Board of Trustees
shall be appointed to staggered terms so that the term of one member shall
expire each year.



   (B)   The third and fourth Board members shall be elected from the
regular police force by the active sworn officers thereof. The fifth member
shall be elected by the beneficiaries of the Fund. The elected members shall
serve for a term of two years. Their term of election shall be at the time
and in the manner provided by statute.



§ 3-3-2  MEETINGS, ORGANIZATION, DUTIES AND POWERS.



   The Board shall elect such officers, hold such meetings, keep such
records and submit such reports as shall be required by statutes and, in
addition, shall  make all necessary rules and regulations and perform such
duties and have such powers as are conferred upon it by the statutes of the
state.



ARTICLE 4:  ELECTRICAL COMMISSION



Section



   3-4-1   Establishment, appointments and term of office



   3-4-2   Functions



Cross-reference:



   Electrical Code, see Ch. 6, Art. 2



   Electrical Contractors, see Ch. 10, Art. 3



§ 3-4-1  ESTABLISHMENT, APPOINTMENTS AND TERM OF OFFICE.



   (A)   There is hereby established an Electrical Commission, which
shall consist of six members as follows: the Chief Electrical Inspector shall
be ex-officio Chairperson of the Commission; and five other members who shall
be such persons as are available within the village possessing the
qualifications established by statute.



   (B)   All of the members of the Commission shall be appointed by the
Village President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. The
members shall serve until their successors are duly appointed.



§ 3-4-2  FUNCTIONS.



   The Electrical Commission shall recommend:



   (A)   Safe and practical standards and specifications for the
installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment to meet the
necessities and conditions of the village;



   (B)   Reasonable rules and regulations governing the issuance of
permits by the Electrical Inspection Department; and



   (C)   Reasonable fees to be paid for inspection by the Inspection
Department of all electrical equipment installed or altered within the
village; provided that, such standards and specifications, rules and
regulations and such fees shall not become effective until adopted by
ordinance by the Board of Trustees. All such fees shall be paid to the
village.



ARTICLE 5:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (EMA)



Section



   3-5-1   Policy and procedures



   3-5-2   Limitations



   3-5-3   Definitions



   3-5-4   Organization and appointments



   3-5-5   Duties



   3-5-6   Powers of the Mayor and village officials



   3-5-7   Local disaster declarations



   3-5-8   Financing



   3-5-9   Personnel injury or death compensation



   3-5-10   Immunity



Cross-reference:



   Civil Emergencies, see Ch. 15, Art. 1



§ 3-5-1  POLICY AND PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Because of the possibility of the occurrence of disasters of
unprecedented size and destructiveness resulting from the explosion in this
or in a neighboring municipality of atomic (devices) or other means from
without, or by means of sabotage or other disloyal actions within, or from
fire, flood, earthquake, tornado or other natural or technological causes,
and in order to ensure that the village will be prepared to and will
adequately deal with any such disasters, preserve the lives and the property
of the people of the village and protect the public peace, health and safety
in the event of such a disaster, it is found and declared necessary to:



      (1)   Create a Village of Carol Stream Emergency Management
Agency (EMA);



      (2)   Confer upon the Mayor the extraordinary powers provided
herein; and



      (3)   Provide mutual aid to other municipalities and political
subdivisions and promote an all-hazard emergency management program.



   (B)   Whenever the Mayor determines after an investigation that a
dangerous situation or potentially dangerous situation exists which could
cause death to individuals or serious injury to property or the health and
welfare of the public, the Mayor may declare that a state of emergency (or
disaster) exists. The extraordinary powers may not be exercised until a
formal declaration has been issued by the Mayor, finding that such standards
have been met, setting forth facts to substantiate such findings, describing
the nature of the emergency (or disaster) and declaring that a state of
emergency (or disaster) exists. This statement shall be filed with the
Village Clerk as soon as practical. A state of emergency (or disaster) shall
expire no later than seven days from the original declaration or at the
adjournment of the first regular meeting of the Village Board after the state
of emergency (or disaster) is declared. A subsequent state of emergency (or
disaster) may be declared if necessary.



   (C)   It is further declared to be the purpose of this article and
the policy of the village that all emergency management functions be
coordinated to the maximum extent with comparable functions of federal and
state governments, including their various departments and agencies, those of
other municipalities and localities and private agencies of every type, to
the end that the most effective preparation and use may be made of the
nation’s manpower, resources and facilities for dealing with any disaster
that may occur.



(Ord. 2008-11-64, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 3-5-2  LIMITATIONS.



   Nothing in this article shall be construed to:



   (A)   Interfere with the course or conduct of a labor dispute,
except those actions otherwise authorized by this article or other laws may
be taken when necessary to mitigate imminent or existing danger to public
health and safety;



   (B)   Interfere with dissemination of news or comment of public
affairs; but any communications facility or organization (including, but not
limited to, radio and television stations, wire services and newspapers) may
be required to transmit or print public service messages furnishing
information or instructions in connection with a disaster;



   (C)   Affect the jurisdiction or responsibilities of police forces,
firefighting forces, units of the armed forces of the United States, or of
any personnel thereof, when on active duty; but state, local and
inter-jurisdictional emergency operation plans shall place reliance upon
forces available for performance of functions related to emergency
management; or



   (D)   Limit, modify or abridge the authority of the Mayor and the
Village Board to exercise any other powers vested in them under the
constitution, statutes or common law of the state, independent of or in
conjunction with any provisions of this article or prohibit any contract or
association pursuant to Art. VII, § 10, of the Illinois Constitution.



(Ord. 2008-11-64, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 3-5-3  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this article, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed.



   ACT. The Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, as from time to time
amended.



   DISASTER. An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage,
injury or loss of life or property from any natural or technological cause,
including, but not limited to, fire, flood, earthquake, tornado, wind, storm,
hazardous materials spill or other water contamination requiring emergency
action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, blight, air contamination,
extended periods of severe and inclement weather, drought, infestation,
critical shortages of essential fuels and energy, riot, explosion or hostile
military or paramilitary action or an act of terrorism.



   DISASTER TRAINING EXERCISE. A planned event designed specifically to
simulate an actual disaster which will provide emergency operations training
for emergency response personnel.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The efforts of the municipality to develop, plan,
analyze, conduct, provide, implement and maintain programs for disaster
mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT CO-ORDINATOR. The Emergency Management Coordinator
of the Emergency Management Agency appointed as provided by this article.



   EMERGENCY OPERATING PLAN. The written plan of the municipality
describing the organization, mission and functions of the government and
supporting services for responding to and recovering from disasters.



   EMERGENCY SERVICES. The coordination of such functions by the
municipality, other than functions for which military forces are primarily
responsible, as may be necessary or proper to prevent, minimize, repair and
alleviate injury and damage resulting from any natural or technological
causes. These functions include, but are not limited to, firefighting
services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering,
warning services, communications, radiological, chemical and other special
weapons defense, evacuation of persons from stricken or threatened areas,
emergency assigned functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of
public utility services and other functions related to civilian protection,
together with all other activities necessary or incidental to protecting life
and property.



   MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM. The utilization of personnel to be dispatched by
the governor or, if he or she so authorizes, by the Director of the Illinois
Emergency Management Agency to supplement the state and political
subdivisions for emergency management programs in response to a disaster.



   MUNICIPALITY. Any city, village or incorporated town.



   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. The County of DuPage or any municipality with
whom the village has a signed mutual aid agreement.



   PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER. The Mayor of the village or, in his or her
absence or disability, the interim successor pursuant to § 2-7-18 of the
Village of Carol Stream Code of Ordinances.



   VILLAGE OF CAROL STREAM EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY. The agency
established by this act within the village municipal government responsible
for implementation and coordination of the overall emergency management
program of the village and with private organizations, other local political
subdivisions, taxing districts, the state and federal governments under the
direction of the Emergency Management Coordinator as appointed by this
article.



   VOLUNTEER. Any individual, group, corporation, agency or other entity
contributing service, equipment or facilities to the Village Emergency
Management Agency without remuneration.



(Ord. 2008-11-64, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 3-5-4  ORGANIZATION AND APPOINTMENTS.



   (A)   The Village Manager is hereby authorized and directed to
create a Village Emergency Management Agency utilizing to the fullest extent
the existing agencies within the village and shall be responsible for their
emergency organization, administration and operations.



   (B)   The organization shall consist of the following:



      (1)   A Village Emergency Management Agency within the
executive branch of the village government and under the general direction of
the Village Manager which shall be organized and staffed as from time to time
as determined by the Village Manager within budgetary limits;



      (2)   An Emergency Management Coordinator, appointed by the
Village Manager. The Emergency Management Coordinator shall have such powers
and duties as set forth herein, as provided pursuant to the act for the
Coordinator, and as from time to time designated by the Village Manager;



      (3)   Deputy Emergency Management Coordinators, designated as
the Village Manager deems appropriate, to assume the emergency duties of
Emergency Management Coordinator in the event of the Emergency Management
Coordinator’s absence or inability to act;



      (4)   Employees, equipment and facilities of all village
departments, boards, institutions and commissions, shall participate in the
emergency services activity;



      (5)   Volunteers as deemed necessary by the Emergency
Management Coordinator under direction of the Village Manager; and



      (6)   Mutual aid agreements entered into by the village with
any other political subdivision, municipality, taxing district or
quasi-municipality, or as provided by the Illinois Emergency Management
Agency Act, 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq. (1994), as amended.



(Ord. 2008-11-64, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 3-5-5  DUTIES.



   The Village Emergency Management Agency shall:



   (A)   Continuously update the Village Emergency Operations Plan with
new information, changes and guidelines for compliance;



   (B)   Coordinate employee training related to emergency management,
ensuring that employees meet all local, state and national requirements in a
timely manner;



   (C)   Prepare a budget that addresses the needs of the village in
dealing with mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery efforts;



   (D)   Maintain the village’s primary and secondary Emergency
Operations Centers (EOC) in a state of readiness in the event of activation;



   (E)   Conduct exercises to measure the effectiveness of the
village’s Emergency Operations Plan;



   (F)   Establish relationships with other local, county, state and
federal emergency management agencies, attending regular meetings with
emergency management officials;



   (G)   Actively seek federal, state and local funding through
available grants and donations;



   (H)   Promote disaster preparedness and resilience within the
residential and business community;



   (I)   Prepare, for issuance by the Mayor, ordinances, proclamations
and regulations necessary or appropriate in coping with disasters;



   (J)   Facilitate the implementation and maintenance of a
community-wide warning system; and



   (K)   Perform such other duties as may be provided under the act or
from time to time designated by the Village Manager.



(Ord. 2008-11-64, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 3-5-6  POWERS OF THE MAYOR AND VILLAGE OFFICIALS.



   (A)   The Mayor and village officials shall have such emergency
powers as provided under the law.



   (B)   The Mayor may exercise the emergency power and authority
necessary to fulfill his or her general powers and duties as defined by law.
The judgment of the Mayor shall be the sole criteria necessary to invoke
emergency powers provided by this article. The Village Board may convene to
perform its legislative and administrative powers as the situation demands,
and shall receive reports relative to the emergency service activities.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as abridging or curtailing the
powers or restrictions of the Mayor and/or Village Board as defined by law.



   (C)   The Village Board may authorize any purchase or contracts
necessary to place the village in a position to combat effectively any
disaster, and to protect the public health and safety, protect property and
provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of such disaster. In the
event of any disaster, the Village Manager is authorized, on behalf of the
village, to procure such services, supplies, equipment or materials, as may
be necessary for such purposes in view of exigency, without formalities
normally prescribed by law. If the Village Board meets at the time of such
disaster, the Village Manager shall act subject to the directions and
restrictions imposed by the Village Board.



(Ord. 2008-11-64, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 3-5-7  LOCAL DISASTER DECLARATIONS.



   (A)   A local disaster may only be declared by the Mayor, or his or
her interim emergency successor. It shall not be continued or renewed for a
period in excess of seven days, except by or with the consent of the Village
Board. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local
disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed with
the Village Clerk.



   (B)   The effect of a declaration of a local disaster is to activate
the Village Emergency Operations Plan and to authorize the furnishing of aid
and assistance as provided for in the plan.



   (C)   A local disaster emergency may not be declared by an official
(Fire Chief, Police Chief and the like) from another jurisdiction who is
operating in the village under a mutual aid agreement.



   (D)   During a local disaster emergency, the Mayor may suspend the
provisions of any municipal ordinance prescribing procedures for the conduct
of village business, or the orders, rules and regulations of the village, if
strict compliance with the provisions of any ordinance, rule or regulation
would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the
emergency, as authorized by the Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster
Agency Act of 1988, being 20 ILCS 3305/1; provided that, after the Village
Board meets at such time, the Mayor shall act subject to the directions and
restrictions imposed by the Village Board.



(Ord. 2008-11-64, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 3-5-8  FINANCING.



   (A)   Funds to prepare for and meet disasters may be made available
as from time to time designated by the Village Board within budgetary limits.



   (B)   It is the Village Board’s intent that the first recourse
shall be to fund operations from those moneys regularly allocated to the
agency. If the Mayor finds that demands placed upon budgeted funds in coping
with a particular disaster are unreasonably great, he or she may make
application for funds from the state disaster relief fund. If moneys
available from the fund are insufficient, and if the Mayor finds that other
sources of money to cope with the disaster are not available or are
insufficient, he or she shall issue a call for an immediate session of the
Village Board for the purpose of enacting ordinances as the Board may deem
necessary to transfer and expend moneys appropriated for other purposes, or
borrow moneys from the United States government or other public or private
sources. If less than a quorum of the members of the Board is capable of
convening in session to enact such ordinances for the transfer, expenditure
or loan of such moneys, the Mayor is authorized to carry out these decisions
until such time as a quorum of the Board can convene.



   (C)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to limit
the Mayor’s authority to apply for, administer and expend grants, gifts or
payments in aid of disaster mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery.



   (D)   The Village Board may make appropriations for emergency
management operations in the manner provided by law for making appropriations
for the ordinary expenses of the village.



(Ord. 2008-11-64, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 3-5-9  PERSONNEL INJURY OR DEATH COMPENSATION.



   (A)   Village Emergency Management Agency personnel who, while
engaged in a disaster or disaster training exercise, suffer disease, injury
or death shall, for the purposes of benefits under the Workers’
Compensation Act or Workers’ Occupational Diseases Act only, be deemed to
be employees of the state, if: the claimant is duly qualified and enrolled
(sworn in) as a volunteer of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency or an
Emergency Management Agency accredited by the Illinois Emergency Management
Agency; and, if the claimant was participating in an actual “disaster”,
as defined in § 3-5-3 or the exercise participated in was specifically and
expressly approved by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency. The Illinois
Emergency Management Agency shall use the same criteria for approving an
exercise and utilizing state volunteers as required for any political
subdivision. The computation of benefits payable under either of these acts
shall be based on the income commensurate with comparable state employees
doing the same work or income from the person’s regular employment,
whichever is greater.



   (B)   If any person who is entitled to receive benefits through the
application of this section receives in connection with the disease, injury
or death giving rise to such entitlement, benefits under an act of Congress
or federal program, benefits payable under this section shall be reduced to
the extent of the benefits received under that other act or program.



(Ord. 2008-11-64, passed 11-17-2008)



§ 3-5-10  IMMUNITY.



   Neither the village, nor, except in cases of negligence or willful
misconduct, the Mayor, the Village Manager, or the officers, employees,
volunteers, or representatives engaged in any emergency management response
or recovery activities, while complying with or attempting to comply with
this article or any rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to this
article, are liable for the death of or any injury to persons, or damage to
property, as a result of such activity. This section does not, however,
affect the right of any person to receive benefits to which he would
otherwise be entitled under this article under the Workers’ Compensation
Act or the Workers’ Occupational Disease Act, or under any pension law, and
this section does not affect the right of any such person to receive any
benefits or compensation under any act of Congress.



(Ord. 2008-11-64, passed 11-17-2008)



ARTICLE 6:  PLAN COMMISSION



Section



   3-6-1   Establishment, appointments and term of office



   3-6-2   Vacancy



   3-6-3   Powers and duties



   3-6-4   Meetings and rules



   3-6-5   Compensation



   3-6-6   Removal of office



Cross-reference:



   Administration of Zoning Code, see § 16-15-3



   Zoning Code generally, see Ch. 16



§ 3-6-1  ESTABLISHMENT, APPOINTMENTS AND TERM OF OFFICE.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Plan Commission consisting of
seven members. The Chairperson of the Plan Commission shall be the
Chairperson of the Zoning Board. Each member shall serve a term of five years
and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. It is
noted that under prior ordinances, the terms of Plan Commission members have
been staggered over seven years.



   (B)   The Plan Commission shall also serve as the members of the
Zoning Board of Appeals.



Cross-reference:



   Zoning Board of Appeals, see Ch. 3, Art. 7



§ 3-6-2  VACANCY.



   If a vacancy occurs in the office of any commission member, a successor
shall be appointed to serve for the unexpired term.



§ 3-6-3  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Plan Commission shall have the following powers and duties:



   (A)   To prepare reports of its planning observa-tions and
recommendations on applications for zoning certificates, amendments and
special uses and thereafter submit its reports to the Board of Trustees in
the manner prescribed by the Zoning Code of the village;



   (B)   To initiate, direct and review, from time to time, studies of
the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan and the Zoning Code of the village,
and to make reports of its recommendations relative to proposed amendments to
the Board of Trustees;



   (C)   To hear applications for textual amendments to the Zoning
Code, special uses and requests for planned unit developments and thereafter
to submit its recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees;



   (D)   To hear all other matters upon which it is authorized or
required to review under the Zoning Code or other ordinances of the village;
and



   (E)   To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers
germane to the powers granted by the Board of Trustees and the statutes of
the state.



§ 3-6-4  MEETINGS AND RULES.



   (A)   All meetings of the Plan Commission shall be held at the call
of the Chairperson, and at such other times as the Plan Commission may
determine. All hearings conducted by the Plan Commission under the provisions
of the Zoning Code of the village shall be in accordance with state statutes.
In all proceedings of the Plan Commission provided for in the Zoning Code of
the village, the Chairperson and, in his or her absence, the Acting
Chairperson, shall have the power to administer oaths. The Plan Commission
shall keep minutes of its proceedings, and shall also keep records of its
hearings and other official actions.



   (B)   No hearing shall be conducted without a quorum of the
Commission being present, which shall consist of at least four of the
members. The Plan Commission may make recommendations upon the vote of a
majority of a quorum.



   (C)   All meetings of the Plan Commission shall be open to the
public, except those parts of meetings authorized to be held in closed
session.



   (D)   The Plan Commission shall adopt its own rules and procedures,
not in conflict with the ordinances of the village or with applicable state
statutes.



§ 3-6-5  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Plan Commission shall receive such compensation as may
be established, from time to time, by ordinance.



§ 3-6-6  REMOVAL OF OFFICE.



   If a member of the Plan Commission is removed as a member of the Zoning
Board of Appeals, that member’s term as a Plan Commission member shall also
cease.



ARTICLE 7:  ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS



Section



   3-7-1   Establishment, appointments and term of office



   3-7-2   Vacancy



   3-7-3   Powers and duties



   3-7-4   Meetings and rules



   3-7-5   Compensation



   3-7-6   Removal of office



Cross-reference:



   Administration of Zoning Code, see § 16-15-4



   Zoning Code generally, see Ch. 16



§ 3-7-1  ESTABLISHMENT, APPOINTMENTS AND TERM OF OFFICE.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Appeals
consisting of seven members, one of whom shall be designated as Chairperson
at the time of his or her appointment, to be appointed by the Village
President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. Each member
shall serve a term of five years and until his or her respective successors
are appointed and qualified. It is noted that under prior ordinances, the
terms of Zoning Board members have been staggered over seven years.



   (B)   The Zoning Board members shall also serve as the members of
the Plan Commission.



Cross-reference:



   Plan Commission, see Ch. 3, Art. 6



§ 3-7-2  VACANCY.



   If a vacancy occurs in the office of any Board member, a successor
shall be appointed to serve for the unexpired term. In the event that the
office of Chairperson is vacated for any reason, the Village President, with
the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, shall immediately appoint
either one of the remaining members of the Zoning Board of Appeals, or any
member who is appointed to fill such vacancy of the Zoning Board of Appeals
as the new Chairperson.



§ 3-7-3  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties:



   (A)   To hear and decide appeals from and review any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Community Development
Director under the Zoning Code of the village;



   (B)   To hear applications for variations and to hold public
hearings on applications for amendments and special uses and thereafter
submit reports of findings and recommendations to the Board of Trustees that
it vary the application of the rules and regulations of the Zoning Code of
the village;



   (C)   To hear all other matters upon which it is authorized or
required to review under the Zoning Code or other ordinances of the village;
and



   (D)   To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers
germane to the powers granted by the Board of Trustees and the statutes of
the state.



§ 3-7-4  MEETINGS AND RULES.



   (A)   All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at
the call of the Chairperson, and at such other times as the Board may
determine. All testimony by witnesses at any hearing provided for in the
Zoning Code of the village shall be given under oath. The Chairperson or, in
his or her absence, the Acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel
the attendance of witnesses.



   (B)   All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The
Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member
upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact,
and shall also keep records of its examinations and other official actions.
Every rule, regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and every order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Board shall immediately be
filed in the office of the Village Clerk and shall be a public record.



   (C)   No hearing shall be conducted without a quorum of the Board
being present, which shall consist of at least four of all the members.



   (D)   A concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be
necessary on any matter it is authorized to decide under the provisions of
the Zoning Code of the village.



   (E)   The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of an
administrative officer, or to decide in favor of the applicant upon any
matter upon which it is required to pass under the Zoning Code of the village
or to recommend any variation to the Board of Trustees.



§ 3-7-5  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall receive such compensation
as may be established, from time to time, by ordinance.



§ 3-7-6  REMOVAL OF OFFICE.



   If a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals is removed as a member of
the Plan Commission, that member’s term as a Zoning Board of Appeals member
shall also cease.



ARTICLE 8:  HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION



Section



   3-8-1   Establishment



   3-8-2   Functions and duties



   3-8-3   Funds



   3-8-4   Meetings and rules



§ 3-8-1  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   There is hereby re-established a Human Services Commission,
consisting of five members, each of whose term of office shall be three years
and until their respective successors are appointed and have qualified.
However, to create staggered terms with the number of members established by
this section, the Mayor shall re-appoint existing members and shall appoint
new members to terms which will be as follows: the term of two members shall
expire two years from the date of appointment; the term of three members
shall expire three years from the date of appointment.



   (B)   In making appointments, the Mayor shall endeavor to name some
members who possess experience in problems of providing social services.



   (C)   Members shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of
the Board of Trustees; provided, however, that, no appointment shall be made
by the Mayor within 30 days before the expiration of the Mayor’s term of
office. The Commission Chairperson shall be chosen by the members of the
Commission and shall serve as Chairperson for a one-year term. The Chair of
the Commission shall not be filled by any elected public official. The
Chairperson may also appoint an executive sub-commission which shall consist
of three members and which can be assigned by the Chairperson any duties or
functions which could be carried out by the Commission.



(Ord. 98-10-67, passed 10-5-1998)



§ 3-8-2  FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES.



   The Human Services Commission shall have the following functions and
duties:



   (A)   To represent the community at large in matters of social
service and social policy and to advise the Village President and Board of
Trustees in regard to these matters;



   (B)   To identify the social service needs of the residents of the
village and to work with existing entities to address these needs in the most
meaningful way;



   (C)   To promote community involvement in addressing the various
social service concerns within the village;



   (D)   To work with local organization to coordinate and publicize
the use of all social, recreational and assistance facilities available to
the residents of the village;



   (E)   To submit annually, prior to January 1 of each year, and in
its first year, prior to March 1, a written program for human services with a
recommended budget sufficient to administer such program, in a form
satisfactory to the Village Manager; and



   (F)   Upon the approval of the President and Board of Trustees of
the recommended program and budget, the Human Services Commission shall
monitor or undertake the implementation of the human services program.



§ 3-8-3  FUNDS.



   The Human Services Fund is hereby established. All funds allocated by
the village and all funds donated to the village for human services shall be
deposited in a special fund to be known as the Human Services Fund.



§ 3-8-4  MEETINGS AND RULES.



   (A)   All meetings of the Human Services Commission shall be held at
such times as the Human Services Commission may determine. The Human Services
Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, and shall also keep records
of its hearings and other actions. A member of the Human Services Commission
may receive a stipend, in an amount established by the Village Board, for the
preparation of the minutes of its proceedings.



   (B)   No meeting of the Commission shall be conducted without a
quorum of the Commission being present which shall consist of at least three
of the members. A quorum of the executive sub-commission shall consist of at
least two of the members. The Human Services Commission and its executive
sub-commission may make recommendations upon the vote of a majority of the
quorum.



   (C)   All meetings of the Human Services Commission shall be open to
the public, except for such portions of meetings as may be lawfully held in
closed session.



   (D)   The Human Services Commission may adopt its own rules and
procedures not in conflict with the ordinances of the village or with state
statutes.



(Ord. 96-03-20, passed 3-18-1996; Ord. 98-10-67, passed 10-5-1998)



ARTICLE 9:  COLLEGE OF DUPAGE-CAROL STREAM REGIONAL CENTER ADVISORY COMMITTEE



Section



   3-9-1   Establishment



   3-9-2   Functions and duties



   3-9-3   Funds



   3-9-4   Meetings and rules



§ 3-9-1  ESTABLISHMENT.



   (A)   There is hereby established a College of DuPage-Carol Stream
Regional Center Advisory Committee consisting of up to 11 members, each of
whose term of office, except as provided for below, shall be for three years
or until their respective successors are appointed and are qualified.



   (B)   The Mayor shall appoint 60% of the members of the committee
and those appointments shall be confirmed by the Village Board.



      (1)   The Mayor shall, from time to time, establish the number
of members on the Committee, which shall determine how many members shall be
selected by the College of DuPage in the manner established by that
governmental body.



      (2)   The Mayor may also, for the Carol Stream appointees and
for the College of DuPage appointees, establish staggered terms so that not
all of the appointees’ terms shall terminate in the same year.



      (3)   This information shall be communicated to the President
of the College of DuPage in writing.



      (4)   The Mayor shall specifically name the Chairperson of the
Committee.



(Ord. 2002-07-44, passed 7-15-2002)



§ 3-9-2  FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The College of DuPage-Carol Stream Regional Center Advisory
Committee shall provide a written report at least twice a year to the College
of DuPage Director of Academic Services and the Village Manager of the
Village of Carol Stream to identify needed programs and services, including
those that address the digital divide which may exist within the village.



   (B)   It may suggest needed changes in the physical facilities and
equipment utilized, as well as the level of facilities and equipment
utilized, as well as the level of staffing needs.



(Ord. 2002-07-44, passed 7-15-2002)



§ 3-9-3  FUNDS.



   (A)   The Village Board may, from time to time, allocate funds to
the College of DuPage-Carol Stream Regional Center Advisory Committee.



   (B)   The Committee, if funding is required, will also seek funding
from the College of DuPage.



(Ord. 2002-07-44, passed 7-15-2002)



§ 3-9-4  MEETINGS AND RULES.



   (A)   All meetings of the College of DuPage-Carol Stream Regional
Center Advisory Committee shall be held at such times as the Committee may
determine.



      (1)   The Committee shall keep minutes of its proceedings.



      (2)   The Committee shall fully comply with the provisions of
the Illinois Open Meetings Act.



   (B)   No meeting of the Committee shall be conducted without a
quorum of the Committee being present.



      (1)   Such a quorum shall consist of at least five members,
without regard to the total number of Committee members in office.



      (2)   A quorum of a subcommittee shall consist of at least two
of the members.



   (C)   All meetings of the College of DuPage-Carol Stream Regional
Center Advisory Committee shall be open to the public, except for such
portions of the meeting as may be lawfully held in closed session.



   (D)   The College of DuPage-Carol Stream Regional Center Advisory
Committee may adopt its own rules and procedures not in conflict with village
ordinances or state statutes.



(Ord. 2002-07-44, passed 7-15-2002)



CHAPTER 4: POLICE



      Article



         1.   POLICE DEPARTMENT



         2.   POLICE ALARM SYSTEMS



ARTICLE 1:  POLICE DEPARTMENT



Section



   4-1-1   Department established



   4-1-2   Appointments



   4-1-3   Employees of the village



   4-1-4   Authority of Police Chief; rules and regulations



   4-1-5   Qualifications and residency requirements



   4-1-6   Duties of Police Chief



   4-1-7   Duties of members



   4-1-8   Witness fees



   4-1-9   Serving processes



   4-1-10   Disposition of abandoned and/or unclaimed property



   4-1-11   Administrative fees



Cross-reference:



   Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, see Ch. 3, Art. 2



   Board of Trustees, Police Pension Fund, see Ch. 3, Art. 3



§ 4-1-1  DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby established a Police Department of the village for the
protection of lives and property within the limits of the village, the
enforcement of federal and state statutes, village ordinances and related
police functions.



§ 4-1-2  APPOINTMENTS.



   (A)   The Police Chief shall be appointed by the Village Manager
with the advice of the Village President and Board of Trustees. The Police
Chief shall serve an indefinite term or until a successor is appointed and
qualified, but may be removed by the Village Manager.



   (B)   (1)   Two Deputy Police Chiefs and three Commanders shall
be appointed by the Village Manager after the Manager considers the
recommendations of the Police Chief. The recruitment of candidates for the
position of Deputy Police Chief shall first be offered to Carol Stream police
officers above the rank of patrol officer, who may apply for the position by
a posted application deadline. The recruitment of candidates for the position
of Commander shall first be offered to Carol Stream police officers below the
rank of Deputy Police Chief, who may apply for the position by a posted
application deadline. The Village Manager may exercise absolute discretion in
choosing the persons to serve in these positions. Should no applicants be
chosen for the Deputy Chiefs’ or Commanders’ positions, the recruitment
of candidates will proceed by recruiting qualified candidates from outside
the village’s Police Department. Once selected, Deputy Chiefs and
Commanders shall serve indefinite terms and may be removed at the absolute
discretion of the Village Manager. If a Deputy Chief or Commander is
appointed from within the village’s Police Department, that police officer,
upon removal, shall revert to the prior rank held. The reversion shall occur
even if there is not then available an authorized position of Sergeant or
Lieutenant.



      (2)   The sworn personnel of the Carol Stream Police
Department shall be composed of one Police Chief; two Deputy Police Chiefs;
three Commanders; six Sergeants, (except for additional Sergeants and
Lieutenants who may be reduced in rank from a higher position), and such
patrol officers as shall from time to time be authorized by the Village Board.



   (C)   All original appointments to the Police Department and
promotions within the Department, other than the Police Chief, Deputy Police
Chiefs, Commanders and non-sworn personnel, shall be made and effected by the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, in accordance with law.



(Ord. 95-06-27, passed 5-15-1995; Ord. 2008-12-71, passed 12-15-2008; Ord.
2010-03-13, passed 3-15-2010)



§ 4-1-3  EMPLOYEES OF THE VILLAGE.



   The members of the Police Department shall be considered employees of
the village for salary, workers’ compensation and employment benefit
purposes.



§ 4-1-4  AUTHORITY OF POLICE CHIEF; RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Police Chief shall make such rules and regulations for the conduct
and guidance of the Police Department personnel as the Police Chief shall
deem advisable, and such rules and regulations, when approved by the Village
President and the Board of Trustees, shall be binding on such members. Police
Department personnel are also covered by the personnel rules and regulations
of the village.



§ 4-1-5  QUALIFICATIONS AND RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Sworn police officers of the Police Department shall possess
qualifications as are required by statute and shall, in addition, be citizens
of the United States. Sworn police officers shall reside within 20 miles of
the intersection of North Avenue and Gary Avenue before the end of their
probationary period. The Village Manager, upon recommendation of the Chief of
Police, may grant a temporary fixed-term exemption of the residency
requirement upon a sworn police officer’s petition claiming exigent
circumstances preventing residency compliance.



   (B)   Any sworn police officer who, within the time specified above,
does not move into the geographical area established as a mandatory residence
zone in this section, or who does not serve, except in the case of
involuntary discharge instituted by the village, at least one year after the
termination of probation as a sworn police officer shall, at the time of
termination or within 60 days thereafter, repay to the village actual costs
incurred by the village in education, training and providing uniforms for the
officer.



   (C)   Provided, however, that, in the event that such police officer
resigns and the resignation is accepted, and that officer does not begin
employment with a governmental Police Department within one year of the
termination of employment with the village, such repayment shall not be
required from police officers who have been hired by the village prior to
1-1-2000.



   (D)   Any sworn police officer, who without exemption, fails to meet
or comply with the residency requirements established in this article shall
be subject to discipline, including suspension or discharge.



(Ord. 99-12-70, passed 12-6-1999; Ord. 2004-08-46, passed 8-16-2004; Ord.
2007-03-10, passed 3-19-2007; Ord. 2007-04-16, passed 3-19-2007)



§ 4-1-6  DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF.



   The Police Chief shall be responsible for the performance of the Police
Department, of all its functions, and all persons who are members of the
Department shall serve subject to the orders of the Police Chief. The Police
Chief shall perform those duties prescribed by the rules and regulations
governing the Police Department, as approved by the Village President and the
Board of Trustees, and shall in addition perform the following duties:



   (A)   He or she shall be the keeper of the Village Jail, and shall
have custody of all persons incarcerated therein;



   (B)   Keep such books and records and make such reports concerning
the activities of the Police Department as may be required by statute or by
the President and Board of Trustees;



   (C)   Provide for the custody, care and control of the public
property of the Department, including all vehicles, firearms and other
equipment of the Department, and have custody and control of all lost,
abandoned or stolen property within the village;



   (D)   Preserve the peace, order and safety of the village;



   (E)   Execute and enforce the state and federal laws, all village
ordinances, police regulations and orders of the corporate authorities;



   (F)   Protect the rights of persons and property within the village;



   (G)   Study police problems in matters of public welfare and
administration as related to crime and law enforcement and make
recommendations thereon to the corporate authorities; and



   (H)   Investigate, study and recommend to the corporate authorities,
upon such request, traffic regulations, routines and changes therein for
improvements of traffic and safety conditions within the village.



§ 4-1-7  DUTIES OF MEMBERS.



   It shall be the duty of all sworn officers of the Police Department to
see to the enforcement of all ordinances of the village and all statutes
applicable therein, and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law
and arrest violators thereof. Each member shall obey the orders and
directions of his or her superior and shall perform the duties as prescribed
by the rules and regulations governing the Police Department.



§ 4-1-8  WITNESS FEES.



   Every member of the Police Department shall appear as witness whenever
this is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of an ordinance or of any
state or federal law. No such member shall retain any witness fee for service
as witness in any action or suit to which the village is a party; any fees
paid for such services shall be turned over to the Police Chief, who shall
deposit the same with the Village Treasurer.



§ 4-1-9  SERVING PROCESSES.



   The Police Chief shall be authorized to serve writs, summons and other
processes, but no officer or patrol officer shall serve such summons or
processes except on the order of the Police Chief.



§ 4-1-10  DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED AND/OR UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.



   (A)   All abandoned or unclaimed property, including bicycles, which
have come into the possession of the Police Department and the identity or
location of the owner or other person entitled to possession of the property
has not been ascertained within six months after the Police Department
obtains such possession, shall be sold by the Police Department for cash to
the highest bidder at public auction. Any abandoned or unclaimed property,
the disposal of which is otherwise provided by statute, shall be sold in
accordance with such statute.



   (B)   Property offered but not sold at such public auction may be
offered and sold at a subsequent public auction without such notice.



   (C)   The proceeds of the sale of any abandoned or unclaimed
property, less reimbursement to the Police Department of the reasonable
expenses incurred, shall be paid into the village treasury.



   (D)   The owner or other person entitled to possession of such
property may claim and recover possession of the property at any time before
its sale at public auction, upon providing reasonable and satisfactory proof
of ownership or right to possession and reimbursing the Police Department for
all reasonable expenses incurred with the custody thereof.



§ 4-1-11  ADMINISTRATIVE FEES.



   (A)   The village hereby determines to establish administrative fees
for certain services provided by the Police Department.



   (B)   The schedule of fees and services shall be as follows:



 

Administrative fee for Stop Teen Alcohol Abuse Together Program
 
$50


Fingerprinting
 
Carol Stream residents and citizens employed within Carol Stream shall be $15
for a maximum of 2 cards, $7.50 for each additional card. All other
applicants shall be charged $20 for a maximum of 2 cards, $7.50 for each
additional card


Reconstruction traffic accident reports
 
$20


Subpoena processing
 
$25


Traffic accident reports
 
$5


Vehicle release for arrestees
 
$25



 



(Ord. 2009-05-18, passed 5-4-2009)



ARTICLE 2:  POLICE ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



   4-2-1   Purpose and definitions



   4-2-2   Administrative rules



   4-2-3   Alarm systems and businesses; regulations and standards



   4-2-4   Alarm systems; standards and inspection



   4-2-5   Inspection of alarm devices and businesses



   4-2-6   Testing of equipment



   4-2-7   Notice of disruption in service



   4-2-8   False alarms; disconnection from system



   4-2-9   False alarms; response charges



   4-2-10   Alarm activations



   4-2-11   Violations



§ 4-2-1  PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards
and regulations applicable to burglar alarm systems, holdup alarm systems,
alarm businesses and alarm users as defined in this article.



   (B)   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ALARM BUSINESS. Any business operated by a person for a profit
which engages in the activity of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining,
repairing, replacing, selling, servicing or responding to a burglar or holdup
alarm system, or which causes any of these activities to take place.



      ALARM SYSTEM. An assembly of equipment and devices (or a single
device such as a solid state unit which plugs directly into a 110-volt AC
line) arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention
and to which the Police Department may be expected to respond. The term ALARM
SYSTEM shall include the terms AUTOMATIC HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM, as that term is
hereinafter defined, excluding smoke detectors and automobile alarms.



      ALARM USER. Any person on whose premises an alarm system is
maintained within the village, except for proprietary systems. If such a
system, however, employs an audible signal emitting sounds or a flashing
light or beacon designed to signal persons outside the premises, such system
shall be within the definition of “alarm system”, and shall be subject to
this article.



      ANNUNCIATOR. The instrumentation on an alarm console at the
receiving terminal of a signal line which, through both visual and audible
signals, shows when an alarm device at a particular location has been
activated, and it shall also indicate line trouble.



      ANSI. Stands for the American National Standards Institution.



      AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE. Refers to an alarm system which
automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or
otherwise, a pre-recorded voice message indicating the existence of the
emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.



      AUTOMATIC HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM. An alarm system in which the
signal transmission is initiated by the action of the robber.



      BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEM. Refers to an alarm system signaling an
entry or attempted entry into the area.



      DIRECT CONNECT. An alarm system which has the capability of
transmitting system signals to and receiving them at an agency maintained by
the local government, for example, a police communications center.



      DIRECT LINE. A telephone line leading directly from a central
station to the communications center of the Police Department that is for use
only to report emergency signals on a person to person basis.



      FALSE ALARM. The activation of an alarm system through mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the owner
or lessee of an alarm system or of his employees or agents. Such terminology
does not include, for example, alarms caused by tornadoes, storms, lightning,
telephone line failure or other violent conditions.



      HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM. Refers to an alarm system signaling a
robbery or attempted robbery.



      INTERCONNECT. To connect an alarm system to a communication link,
either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a standard
telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit an
emergency message upon the activation of the alarm system.



      LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM. Refers to a signaling system which, when
activated, causes an audible and/or visual signaling device to be activated
in or on the premises within which the system is installed.



      MANUAL HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM. Refers to an alarm system in which
the signal transmission is initiated by the direct action of the person
attacked or by an observer of the attack.



      PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.



      POLICE or POLICE DEPARTMENT. The publicly supported Police
Department of the village, or any authorized agent thereof.



      POLICE CHIEF. The Chief of the Police Department of the village,
or his or her designated representative.



      PRIMARY TRUNKLINE. A telephone line leading directly into the
communications center of the Police Department.



      PROPRIETARY SYSTEM. An alarm system sounding and/or recording
alarm and supervisory signals at a control center located within the
protected premises, the control center being under the supervision of the
proprietor of the protected premises. If a PROPRIETARY SYSTEM includes a
signal line connected directly or by means of an automatic dialing device to
a central station, modified central station or answering service, it thereby
becomes an “alarm system”, as defined in this article.



      REMOTE SIGNALING SYSTEM. An alarm signaling system which, when
activated by an alarm device, transmits a signal from an alarm signaling
device to the Police Department, where appropriate action is taken to
investigate and respond to the signal.



      SIGNAL LINE. Refers to the transmission line through which the
signal passes from one of the elements of the signal transmission to another.



      SPECIAL TRUNKLINE. A telephone line leading into a communications
center of an intermediary service and having the primary purpose of handling
emergency signals or messages.



      SUBSCRIBER. A person who buys and/or leases or otherwise obtains
an alarm signaling system and thereafter contracts with or hires an alarm
business to monitor and/or service the alarm device.



      TELEPHONE COMPANY. The utility that furnishes telephone services
to the village.



      UL. Stands for Underwriter’s Laboratories.



      VILLAGE or MUNICIPALITY. The Village of Carol Stream, Illinois.



§ 4-2-2  ADMINISTRATIVE RULES.



   The Police Chief shall promulgate such rules as may be necessary for
the implementation of this article, and for determination of grounds for
clerical suspension or revocation of any license or permit required by this
article. The rules shall be approved by the Village Manager and shall be open
to inspection.



§ 4-2-3  ALARM SYSTEMS AND BUSINESSES; REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS.



   (A)   No automatic dialing device shall be interconnected to a
police communications center.



   (B)   All automatic dialing devices interconnected to a police
communications center shall be disconnected therefrom.



   (C)   Persons owning or leasing an automatic dialing device may have
the device interconnected to a telephone line transmitting directly to:



      (1)   A central station;



      (2)   A modified central station; or



      (3)   A licensed answering service.



   (D)   The relaying of messages by intermediate services to central
stations may relay messages over a direct line.



   (E)   Automatic dialing devices may also be interconnected to one or
more telephone numbers available to the owner or lessee of the devices, or
his, her or their designated representatives, at another location.



   (F)   This article shall apply only to those automatic dialing
devices interconnected to intermediary service centers.



   (G)   Every alarm business which has inter-connected any automatic
dialing device in the village to a telephone line serviced directly by an
inter-mediary service shall maintain and submit a current list of such
installations for inspection by the Police Chief during the course of his or
her official duties and include in such list:



      (1)   The name of the principal operator of the entity where
the device is installed;



      (2)   The address of the location where the device is
installed and the telephone number of that location; and



      (3)   The name and telephone number of at least one other
person who can be reached at any time, day or night, and who is authorized to
respond to an emergency signal transmitted by the automatic dialing device,
and who can open the premises wherein the device is installed.



   (H)   The information contained in the lists required by this
article shall be restricted to inspection only by the Police Chief in the
course of his or her official duties.



§ 4-2-4  ALARM SYSTEMS; STANDARDS AND INSPECTION.



   (A)   All alarm systems installed in commercial or public buildings
shall utilize equipment and methods of installation substantially equivalent
to or exceeding the current UL and/or ANSI standards of the alarm industry.



   (B)   All alarm systems installed in residences shall utilize
equipment which shall be substantially equivalent to or exceed the current UL
and/or ANSI standards of the alarm industry.



   (C)   The equipment or hardware used and/or the manner of
installation of the alarm system may correspond to any of the several levels
of protection or grades of service listed in the applicable standards;
provided, however, that, alarm system users shall not be required to provide
protection for all of the areas or openings which may be required to be
protected by the applicable standards.



   (D)   The standards referred to in this article are hereby adopted
as part of this code subject to the modifications and qualifications set
forth herein.



   (E)   In those instances where UL and/or ANSI have not established
standards for categories of equipment or where new equipment is undergoing
field testing, the Police Chief may require that the alarm system be
inspected at the expense of the alarm user by a qualified representative of
the industry who shall certify whether the alarm system appears to be safe
and reliable.



   (F)   Alarm systems which input an automatic dialing device are
subject to the provisions of this article.



§ 4-2-5  INSPECTION OF ALARM DEVICES AND BUSINESSES.



   (A)   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article,
the Police Chief, or his or her designee, may seek to inspect, at reasonable
times and upon reasonable oral notice, any premises in the village in or upon
which alarm systems subject to this article are located, and to inspect the
installation and/or operation of such alarm systems on official business.



   (B)   If such inspection reveals any violations of the provisions of
this article, a written report detailing such violations shall be promptly
sent to the owner, lessee, or other person responsible for the alarm system
or business in violation of this article. Such report shall require the
correction within ten days after receipt of the notice of the violation
discovered, and shall state that a failure to comply may result in the
suspension of response by the village until the system is repaired.



§ 4-2-6  TESTING OF EQUIPMENT.



   No alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages directly to the
Police Department shall be tested or demonstrated without first obtaining
permission from the Police Chief. Permission is not required to test or
demonstrate alarm devices not transmitting emergency signals directly to the
Police Department unless the signals are to be relayed to the Police
Department.



§ 4-2-7  NOTICE OF DISRUPTION IN SERVICE.



   When an alarm business service to its subscribers is disrupted for any
reason by the alarm business, or the alarm business becomes aware of such
disruption, it shall promptly notify its subscriber by telephone that
protection is no longer being provided.



§ 4-2-8  FALSE ALARMS; DISCONNECTION FROM SYSTEM.



   (A)   More than five false alarms in a calendar year from any alarm
system may constitute grounds for a disconnect of the alarm system.



   (B)   The Police Chief may cause an alarm user to be disconnected
from the authorized alarm panel located in the police communications center
after giving written notice to the subscriber. The subscriber will be given
the opportunity to be heard on appeal to the Village Manager within seven
days, upon a determination that the subscriber’s alarm system has been
installed, maintained or operated in violation of any of the provisions of
this article, or for failure to pay any applicable fees or charges.



(Ord. 94-02-18, passed 2-22-1994)



§ 4-2-9  FALSE ALARMS; RESPONSE CHARGES.



   (A)   When the village’s Police Department responds to false
alarms received from the same premises more than three times in a 12-month
period of a calendar year (January through December), which are not due to
factors beyond the control of the alarm user, the alarm user or subscriber
shall pay the village the following amount within 30 days after receiving
notification of the fourth false alarm:



 

4 to 9 responses occurring in a calendar year
 
$50 each


10 to 19 responses occurring in a calendar year
 
$100 each


20 or more responses in a calendar year
 
$250 each



 



   (B)   If payment is not received within the 30-day period, as
provided above, the charge for such response shall be increased to double the
amount of the initial response charge.



(Ord. 94-02-18, passed 2-22-1994; Ord. 2003-11-76, passed 11-17-2003)



§ 4-2-10  ALARM ACTIVATIONS.



   (A)   Nothing in this article is to be construed that the Police
Department will assume any responsibility for providing any watch or guard
service over the property or premises which is equipped with an alarm system.



   (B)   When any alarm has been activated for any reason, it is the
responsibility of the alarm user to provide someone with access to the alarm
system to appear on the scene of the activation to turn off or reset the
alarm, within one hour after being notified by the Police Department to do so.



   (C)   Exterior alarms such as lights, bells, sirens, whistles,
buzzers and the like must be equipped to automatically shut off after
one-half hour.



§ 4-2-11  VIOLATIONS.



   A violation of this article shall occur when any person shall fail to:



   (A)   Have current information on persons available to respond to
alarm activations as required in this article;



   (B)   Obey the provisions as required in this article;



   (C)   Appear and turn off or rest any alarm as required in this
article;



   (D)   Obey any legal order of the Police Chief; and/or



   (E)   Install or fail to disconnect an automatic dialing device
connected to a trunkline answered by the Police Department communications
center.



CHAPTER 5: TAXATION AND FINANCE



      Article



         1.   MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX



         2.   MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX



         3.   MUNICIPAL USE TAX



         4.   MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX



         4.1.   MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX



         5.   MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION AND USE TAX



         6.   ATHLETIC CONTESTS AND EXHIBITIONS FOR GAIN



         7.   MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE



         8.   PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS



         9.   HOTEL/MOTEL USE TAX



         10.   REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX



         11.   PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF CH. 5



         12.   MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX



         13.   MUNICIPAL MOTOR FUEL TAX



         14.   MUNICIPAL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE TAX



ARTICLE 1:  MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX



Editor’s note:



   This article relating to the Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax has
been superseded by Illinois state statutes. However, specific percentages and
tax amounts were amended by Ord. 2003-04-18, passed 4-21-2003, Ord.
2010-04-15, passed 4-5-2010, and Ord. 2018-03-08, passed 3-5-2018.



ARTICLE 2:  MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX



Editor’s note:



   This article relating to the Municipal Service Occupation Tax has been
superseded by Illinois state statutes. However, specific percentages and tax
amounts were amended by Ord. 2003-04-18, passed 4-21-2003, Ord. 2010-04-15,
passed 4-5-2010, and Ord. 2018-03-08, passed 3-5-2018.



ARTICLE 3:  MUNICIPAL USE TAX



Editor’s note:



   This article relating to the Municipal Use Tax has been superseded by
Illinois state statutes.



ARTICLE 4:  MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX



Section



   5-4-1   Definitions



   5-4-2   Tax imposed



   5-4-3   Businesses excluded from tax



   5-4-4   To be in addition to street use tax



   5-4-5   Tax remittance and return



   5-4-6   Overpayment of tax



   5-4-7   Limitation on actions to recover tax due



   5-4-8   Collection of tax



   5-4-9   Resales



   5-4-10   Books and records



Cross-reference:



   Municipal Gas Use Tax, see Ch. 5, Art. 12



§ 5-4-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GROSS RECEIPTS. The consideration received for distribution, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas or electricity for use or consumption and not for
resale, as the case may be; and for all services rendered in connection
therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including
cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all
services rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on
account of the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other
expenses whatsoever. GROSS RECEIPTS shall not include receipts from the
village for the sale to the village of any utility products or services.



   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of the state, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.



   PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. Any person having
or maintaining within the state, directly or by a subsidiary or other
affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility,
transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any
employee, agent or other representative operating within the state under the
authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of
whether such place of business or agent or other representation is located in
the state permanently or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary
other affiliate is licensed or qualified to do business in the state.



   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for
purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in § 8-11-2 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2), directly in the generation,
production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.



   PURCHASER. Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits
of the village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.



   TAX COLLECTOR. The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.



(Ord. 93-12-113, passed 12-14-1993; Ord. 98-07-54, passed 7-20-1998)



§ 5-4-2  TAX IMPOSED.



   (A)   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the occupation or
privilege of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling electricity for
use or consumption within the corporate limits of the village and not for
resale, at the rate of 5% of the gross receipts therefrom. The tax imposed
under this section shall not apply with respect to gross receipts pertaining
to bills for the distribution, supply, furnishing or sale of electricity
where the use or consumption of electricity is subject to the tax imposed
under division (B) below.



   (B)   Pursuant to § 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS
5/8-11-2) and any and all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon
the privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at
retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the village at the
following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:



      (1)   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month, 0.564 cents per kilowatt-hour;



      (2)   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month, 0.386 cents per kilowatt-hour;



      (3)   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used on consumed in a
month, 0.383 cents per kilowatt-hour;



      (4)   For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in
a month, 0.320 cents per kilowatt-hour;



      (5)   For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in
a month, 0.319 cents per kilowatt-hour;



      (6)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed
in a month, 0.273 cents per kilowatt-hour;



      (7)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed
in a month, 0.250 cents per kilowatt-hour;



      (8)   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed
in a month, 0.230 cents per kilowatt-hour;



      (9)   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed
in a month, 0.210 cents per kilowatt-hour; and



      (10)   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of
20,000,000 kilowatt-hours in a month; 0.190 cents per kilowatt-hour.



(Ord. 93-12-113, passed 12-14-1993; Ord. 98-07-54, passed 7-20-1998; Ord.
2003-04-17, passed 4-21-2003)



§ 5-4-3  BUSINESSES EXCLUDED FROM TAX.



   No tax is imposed by this article with respect to any transaction to
interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may
not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made
subject to taxation by the state or any political subdivision thereof; nor
shall any persons engaged in the business of selling gas or electricity be
subject to taxation under the provisions of this article for such
transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of
65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.



(Ord. 93-12-113, passed 12-14-1993)



§ 5-4-4  TO BE IN ADDITION TO STREET USE TAX.



   The tax established by this article shall be in addition to the payment
of money, or value of products or services furnished to this village by the
taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public
places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of
poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the
taxpayer’s business.



§ 5-4-5  TAX REMITTANCE AND RETURN.



   (A)   (1)   Every Tax Collector shall on a monthly basis file a
return in a form prescribed by the village.



      (2)   The return and accompanying remittance shall be due on
or before the last day of the month following the month during which the tax
is collected or is required to be collected under this chapter.



   (B)   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax
from the purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under this chapter,
then the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the village,
and pay the tax directly to the village on or before the last day of the
month following the month during which the electricity is used or consumed.



(Ord. 98-07-54, passed 7-20-1998)



§ 5-4-6  OVERPAYMENT OF TAX.



   If it shall appear that an amount of tax due under this article has
been paid which was not in fact due, whether as the result of a mistake of
face or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this article from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment. However, no amount erroneously paid more than three years
prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.



§ 5-4-7  LIMITATION ON ACTIONS TO RECOVER TAX DUE.



   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this
article shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of such
amount.



§ 5-4-8  COLLECTION OF TAX.



   (A)   (1)   Subject the provisions of § 5-4-9 regarding the
delivery of electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this chapter
shall be collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of
business in the state who delivers electricity to such purchasers.



      (2)   This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the
person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser, and is recoverable at
the same time and in the same manner as the original charge for delivering
the electricity.



   (B)   Any tax required to be collected by this chapter, and any tax
in fact collected, shall constitute a debt owned to the village by the person
delivering the electricity; provided that:



      (1)   The person delivering the electricity shall be allowed
credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity he or she charges
for which are written off as uncollectible; and



      (2)   If such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering
supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax.



   (C)   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the
purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the
electricity.



      (1)   Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized
to add such gross charge an amount equal to 3% of the tax they collect to
reimburse them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing
customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data
to the village upon request.



      (2)   For purposes of this chapter, any partial payment of a
billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to
be for the delivery of electricity.



(Ord. 98-07-54, passed 7-20-1998)



§ 5-4-9  RESALES.



   (A)   Electricity that is delivered to a person in the village shall
be considered to be for use and consumption by that person, unless the person
receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the village
and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity, and
certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially
non-taxable as a sale for resale.



   (B)   (1)   If a person who receives electricity in the village
claims to be an authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply
to the village for a resale number.



      (2)   The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not
liable for the tax imposed by this chapter on any purchases of electricity,
and shall furnish such additional information as the village may reasonably
require.



   (C)   Upon approval of the application, the village shall assign a
resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.



   (D)   The village may cancel the resale number of any person, if the
person fails to pay any tax payable under this chapter for electricity used
or consumed by the person, or if the number:



      (1)   Was obtained through misrepre-sentation; or



      (2)   Is no longer necessary because the person has
discontinued making resales.



   (E)   (1)   If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use
or consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed
by this chapter directly to the village pursuant to § 5-4-2 on the amount of
electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall collect the tax
pursuant to § 5-4-8 and remit the tax pursuant to § 5-4-5 on the amount of
electricity delivered by the reseller to a purchaser.



      (2)   Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having
an active resale number and complying with all other conditions of this
section shall be excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion
of the electricity delivered to the reseller; provided that, the person
reports to the village the total amount of electricity delivered to the
reseller, and such other information that the village may reasonably require.



(Ord. 98-07-54, passed 7-20-1998)



§ 5-4-10  BOOKS AND RECORDS.



   (A)   Every Tax Collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the
tax imposed by this article, shall keep accurate books and records of its
business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting
the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability
under this chapter.



   (B)   The books and records shall be subject to and available for
inspection at all times during business hours of the day.



(Ord. 98-07-54, passed 7-20-1998)



ARTICLE 4.1:  MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX



Section



   5-4.1-1   Tax imposed



   5-4.1-2   Collection of tax



   5-4.1-3   Definitions



   5-4.1-4   Resale of telecommunications



   5-4.1-5   Tax return



   5-4.1-6   Overpayment of tax



   5-4.1-7   Limitation on actions to recover tax due



§ 5-4.1-1  TAX IMPOSED.



   A tax is imposed on the following acts or privileges:



   (A)   The act or privilege of originating in the village or
receiving in the village intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate
of 5% of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail
from a retailer by such person. However, such tax is not imposed on such act
or privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the
Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of
taxation by municipalities in the state; and



   (B)   The act or privilege of originating in the village or
receiving in the village interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate
of 5% of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail
from a retailer by such person. To prevent actual multi-state taxation of the
act or privilege that is subject to taxation under this division (B), any
taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on
such event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to
this article to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in
such other state which was not previously allowed as a credit against any
other state or local tax in the state. However, such tax is not imposed on
the act or privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the
Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of
taxation by municipalities in the state.



(Ord. 93-10-90, passed 10-12-1993)



§ 5-4.1-2  COLLECTION OF TAX.



   (A)   The tax authorized by this article shall be collected from the
taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in the state and
making or effectuating the sale at retail and shall be remitted by such
retailer to the village. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this
article and any such tax collected by such retailer shall constitute a debt
owed by the retailer to the village. Retailers shall collect the tax from the
taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use. The tax
authorized by this article shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the
retailer who provides such taxable services until paid and, if unpaid, is
recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such taxable
services. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then
the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax direct to the village.



   (B)   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this article shall,
when collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the
gross charge for telecommunications.



(Ord. 93-10-90, passed 10-12-1993)



§ 5-4.1-3  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of the taxes authorized by this article, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   AMOUNT PAID. The amount charged to the taxpayer’s service address in
the village regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.



   GROSS CHARGE. The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating
or receiving telecommunications in the village and for all services rendered
in connection therewith, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise,
including cash, credits, services and property of every kind or nature, and
shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such
telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs or
any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof
shall be included only as and when paid. However, GROSS CHARGE shall not
include:



      (1)   Any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a
charge made pursuant to the tax imposed by this article, additional charges
added to a purchaser’s bill pursuant to the Public Utilities Act, 220 ILCS
5/9-222, the tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, 35 ILCS
630/1 et seq., or the tax imposed by the Internal Revenue Code at 26 U.S.C.
§ 4251;



      (2)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received
outside of the village;



      (3)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the
storage of data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of
data or information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment
includes, but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also
includes the usage of computers under a timesharing agreement;



      (4)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment
that is leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such
charges are disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;



      (5)   Charges to business enterprises certified under the
Public Utilities Act, 220 ILCS 5/9-222.1, to the extent of such exemption and
during the period of time specified by the Department of Commerce and
Community Affairs;



      (6)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the
tax imposed under this section has already been paid to a retailer and only
to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense
allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the
corporation rendering such service;



      (7)   Bad debts ( BAD DEBT means any portion of a debt that is
related to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise
deductible or excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as
determined under applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of
the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and
pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment
is made); or



      (8)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated
telecommunication devices.



   INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that either
originate or terminate outside the state.



   INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that originate
and terminate within the state.



   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation or a receiver,
trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court,
the federal and state governments, including state universities created by
statute,  or any city, town, county or other political subdivision of the
state.



   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. The acquisition, consumption or use of
telecommunications through a sale at retail.



   RETAILER. Every person engaged in the business of making sales at
retail as defined in this section. A municipality may, in its discretion,
upon application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any
retailer not maintaining a place of business within the state, who to the
satisfaction of the village, furnishes adequate security to insure collection
and payment of the tax. Such RETAILER shall be issued, without charge, a
permit to collect such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such
RETAILER to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for
telecommunications in such municipality in the same manner and subject to the
same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business within such
municipality.



   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. This phrase, or
any like term or phrase, means and includes any retailer having or
maintaining within the state, directly or by a subsidiary, an office,
distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or
other place of business, or any agent or other representative operating
within the state under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary,
irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other
representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such
retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in the state.



   SALE AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a
consideration, to persons other than the federal and state governments, and
state universities created by statute and other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries, when the tax has already been paid to a retailer and the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not
greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for resale.



   SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of telecommunications equipment from
which telecommunications services are originated or at which
telecommunications services are received by a taxpayer. If this is not a
defined location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, maritime
systems, air-to-ground systems and the like, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the
location of a taxpayer’s primary use of the telecommunication equipment as
defined by telephone number, authorization code or location in the state
where bills are sent.



   TAXPAYER. A person who individually or through his or her agents,
employees or permittees engages in the act of privilege of originating in the
village receiving telecommunications and who incurs a tax liability under
this article.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. In addition to the usual and popular meaning,
includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through
use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services,
telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange services,
cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio
services, paging service or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or
two-way communications,  or any other transmission of messages or
information by electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire,
cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or  similar
facilities. The definition of TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value
added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on
the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other
than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications.
Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
inter-company facilities and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision  used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end
telecommunications service shall be non-taxable as sales for resale.



(Ord. 93-10-90, passed 10-12-1993)



§ 5-4.1-4  RESALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS.



   (A)   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications in
the village claims to be a reseller of such telecommunications, such person
shall apply to the village for a resale number. Such applicant shall state
facts which will show the village why such applicant is not liable for tax
under any ordinance authorized by this article on any of such purchases and
shall furnish such additional information as the village may reasonably
require.



   (B)   Upon approval of the application, the village shall assign a
resale number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the
applicant. The village may cancel any number which is obtained through
misrepresentation, or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication
tax-free when such actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer
applies because of the person’s having discontinued the making of resales.



   (C)   Except as provided above in this section, the act or privilege
of sending or receiving telecommunications in the state shall not be made
tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an
active resale number from the village and furnishes that number to the
retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such
person is non-taxable because at being a sale for resale.



(Ord. 93-10-90, passed 10-12-1993)



§ 5-4.1-5  TAX RETURN.



   (A)   Each taxpayer shall make a tax return as required by this
article to the Village Treasurer on or before the first day of each month,
stating:



      (1)   The name of the taxpayer;



      (2)   The principal place of business of the taxpayer;



      (3)   The gross receipts during the prior month upon the basis
of which the tax is imposed;



      (4)   Amount of tax; and



      (5)   Such other reasonable and related information as the
corporate authorities may require.



   (B)   The taxpayer making the return shall, at the time of making
such return, pay to the Village Treasurer the amount of tax herein imposed.
In connection with any return the taxpayer may, if taxpayer so elects, report
and pay an amount based upon total billings of business subject to the tax
during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts
previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any
differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts.



(Ord. 93-10-90, passed 10-12-1993)



§ 5-4.1-6  OVERPAYMENT OF TAX.



   If it shall appear that an amount of tax due under this article has
been paid which was not in fact due, whether as the result of a mistake of
face or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this article from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment. However, no amount erroneously paid more than three years
prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.



(Ord. 93-10-90, passed 10-12-1993)



§ 5-4.1-7  LIMITATION ON ACTIONS TO RECOVER TAX DUE.



   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this
article shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of such
amount.



(Ord. 93-10-90, passed 10-12-1993)



ARTICLE 5:  MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION AND USE TAX



Section



   5-5-1   Automobile renting occupation tax imposed



   5-5-2   Automobile renting use tax imposed



§ 5-5-1  AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED.



   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of renting automobiles in this village at the rate of 1% of the
gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
article is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-7.



   (B)   Every such person engaged in such business in the village
shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month the report to the
State Department of Revenue required by 35 ILCS 120/3, as amended.



   (C)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the
State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of
the renting of automobiles during the preceding month.



§ 5-5-2  AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX IMPOSED.



   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in this
village an automobile which is rented from a renter outside the state and
which is titled or registered with an agency of the state’s government in
this village at the rate of 1% of the rental price of such automobile while
this article is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS
5/8-11-8.



   (B)   Every such person engaged in such business in the village
shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month the report to the
State Department of Revenue required by 35 ILCS 120/3, as amended.



   (C)   The tax provided for in this article shall be collected from
the persons whose state address for titling or registration purposes is given
as being in the village.



   (D)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the
State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of
the renting of automobiles during the preceding month.



ARTICLE 6:  ATHLETIC CONTESTS AND EXHIBITIONS FOR GAIN



Section



   5-6-1   License required



   5-6-2   Gross receipt tax imposed



   5-6-3   Manner of payment



   5-6-4   Records required



§ 5-6-1  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, firm or corporation shall conduct an athletic contest or
exhibition for gain without first obtaining a license as required in Ch. 10,
Art. 2, of this code.



§ 5-6-2  GROSS RECEIPT TAX IMPOSED.



   A tax is imposed upon all persons conducting an athletic contest or
exhibition for gain based on the gross receipts derived from the sale of
admission tickets at a rate of 3% of the gross receipts.



§ 5-6-3  MANNER OF PAYMENT.



   Any person conducting an athletic contest or exhibition shall submit to
the Village Clerk a statement, verified under oath, of the gross receipts of
each such contest or exhibition, within one week after such contest or
exhibition has occurred. The statement shall be accompanied by the payment of
a sum equal to 3% of the gross receipts.



§ 5-6-4  RECORDS REQUIRED.



   For the purpose of enabling the village to inform itself of such gross
receipts, the person liable for the tax shall keep complete and accurate
books, records and accounts in detail of all such gross receipts. The Village
Clerk, or his or her designated agent, may examine on demand all such books,
records and accounts pertaining to such contest or exhibition so held.



ARTICLE 7:  MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE



Section



   5-7-1   Definitions



   5-7-2   License required



   5-7-3   New vehicles or new residents



   5-7-4   Partial year licenses



   5-7-5   Late charges



   5-7-6   Applications; issuance of license



   5-7-7   License fees



   5-7-8   Attaching license



   5-7-9   Transfer of license



   5-7-10   Replacement licenses



   5-7-11   Payment of accrued fees required



§ 5-7-1  DEFINITIONS.



   The following definitions shall apply to all vehicle licensing unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT. Any person or his or her agent applying for a license
hereunder.



   LATE APPLICATION. Application for a license as set forth herein on or
after July 1 of any odd numbered year by a person who was otherwise subject
to this article on the preceding June 30.



   LEASE. To have the right to use and possess a vehicle through a
leasehold interest.



   LICENSE PERIOD. The two year period beginning July 1 of any odd
numbered year and ending June 30 of the following odd numbered year.



   OWN. To have title to any vehicle as evidenced by a state certificate
of title.



   PARTIAL YEAR. The period between July 1 of any even numbered year and
the following June 30, both dates inclusive.



   PERSON. Any person, firm, business or corporation residing in, or
conducting business or operations at a fixed location within the village
boundaries of the village as they now exist or may be altered hereafter.



   VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle or motorcycle for which license plates are
required and issued by the state and as defined by state statute.



(Ord. 92-04-39, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2001-03-12, passed 3-5-2001; Ord.
2016-12-49, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2019-02-04, passed 2-19-2019)



§ 5-7-2  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   The following provisions shall be applicable to all vehicle licensing.



   (A)   Every person who owns or leases a vehicle shall license said
vehicle with the village as provided herein.



   (B)   Every person who owns or leases a vehicle registered with the
Illinois Secretary of State to an address within the village shall license
said vehicle with the village as provide herein.



   (C)   Any person who is obligated to license a vehicle under the
terms of this article shall display the current license sticker on such
vehicle.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to license a
vehicle or to display a current vehicle sticker as required under the terms
of this article.



(Ord. 92-04-39, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2001-03-12, passed 3-5-2001; Ord.
2016-12-49, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2019-02-04, passed 2-19-2019)



§ 5-7-3  NEW VEHICLES OR NEW RESIDENTS.



   (A)   Any person who owns or leases a specific vehicle for the first
time, or shall for the first time, as to that vehicle, become subject to the
provisions of this article through a change in residence, shall have 60 days
after such acquisition or event to apply for a license or license transfer as
otherwise set forth herein. If such application is made after more than 60
days, the late charge set forth herein shall apply beginning on the
sixty-first day.



   (B)   A vehicle required to be licensed under the terms of this
article but licensed under the ordinances of another municipality shall be
allowed to continue to be licensed under the ordinances of the other
municipality until the license from that other municipality expires, but in
no case more than a period of one year. After such period, the vehicle shall
become subject to the provisions of this article and shall be required to be
licensed with the village.



(Ord. 92-04-39, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2001-03-12, passed 3-5-2001; Ord.
2016-12-49, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2019-02-04, passed 2-19-2019)



§ 5-7-4  PARTIAL YEAR LICENSES.



   Any person who is required to purchase a vehicle license under the
provisions of this article after June 30 of any even numbered year shall
purchase a partial year license. The fees for a partial year license shall be
50% of the fees set forth in this article.



(Ord. 92-04-39, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2001-03-12, passed 3-5-2001; Ord.
2016-12-49, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2019-02-04, passed 2-19-2019)



§ 5-7-5  LATE CHARGES.



   (A)   Any person who becomes obligated to purchase a vehicle license
under the provisions of the ordinances of the village, and does not purchase
that license within the time established by ordinance, shall be obligated to
pay an amount for such license which shall be 150% of the amount which would
have otherwise been paid if the license had been promptly purchased.



   (B)   In addition to payment of any other fees specified in this
section, any person who fails to properly display a current village vehicle
sticker shall be fined $20 for violations that occur between July 1, 2008 and
July 31, 2008 and $100 for violations that occur after July 31, 2008. Every
year thereafter, any person who fails to properly display a current village
vehicle sticker by July 1 shall be fined $100.



(Ord. 92-04-39, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 94-03-23, passed 3-8-1994; Ord.
2001-03-12, passed 3-5-2001; Ord. 2003-12-87, passed 12-15-2003; Ord.
2008-06-27, passed 6-2-2008; Ord. 2016-12-49, passed 12-19-2016; Ord.
2019-02-04, passed 2-19-2019)



§ 5-7-6  APPLICATIONS; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   Any person desiring a license for any vehicle shall sign a written
application upon a form provided by the village, setting forth the name and
address of the applicant and a description of the vehicle for which the
license is desired. Such application shall be filed with the village, and
upon the payment of the license fee hereinafter provided, the village shall
issue a license authorizing the licensee to use such vehicle within the
village until the expiration of such license.



(Ord. 92-04-39, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2001-03-12, passed 3-5-2001; Ord.
2016-12-49, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2019-02-04, passed 2-19-2019)



§ 5-7-7  LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   Biennial fee.  Except for the provisions set forth in
divisions (B) through (E) of this section, the biennial fees to be paid for
vehicle licenses shall be as follows:



 



Buses designed to carry more than ten passengers
 

$1 per passenger seat, but not less than $65 each vehicle



Freight carrying vehicles, or vehicles designed to carry goods or merchandise
or other articles of a gross weight (including weight of vehicle and maximum
load) of:


   “B” Truck and Recreational Vehicles
 

$65



   “D” Truck
 

$110



   “F” Truck
 

$185



   “H - Z” Truck
 

$260



Motorcycles (this category shall include all two-wheeled motor driven
vehicles for which a state license plate is required)
 

$30 each



Private passenger automobiles designed to carry less than ten passengers
 

$50 each





 



   (B)   Persons over 65 years of age. Any person 65 years of age at
the time of application shall pay a biennial license fee of $10 for his or
her passenger automobile, as defined herein, subject to the following:



      (1)   Only one vehicle sticker per senior shall be allowed to
be licensed under this provision.



      (2)   The vehicle so licensed must be for the personal use of
the applicant or spouse.



      (3)   A state certificate of title must be registered in the
name of the applicant and spouse.



      (4)   The village may require such evidence as deemed
necessary for the issuance of such license, in keeping with the above
restrictions.



   (C)   Active duty military personnel. All active duty military
personnel for whom a license would otherwise be required shall receive a
vehicle license without charge for each vehicle owned by such military
personnel.



   (D)   Taxing bodies. The village’s Park District and the
village’s Fire Protection District shall receive a vehicle license without
charge for each vehicle owned by such taxing body.



(Ord. 92-04-39, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 92-07-83, passed 7-14-1992; Ord.
2001-03-12, passed 3-5-2001; Ord. 2016-12-49, passed 12-19-2016; Ord.
2019-02-04, passed 2-19-2019)



§ 5-7-8  ATTACHING LICENSE.



   (A)   Passenger vehicles, freight carrying vehicles, buses. Upon
application for a vehicle license and proper payment therefor, the village
shall deliver to the licensee of a passenger automobile, a bus or a freight
carrying vehicle a self-voiding adhesive sticker. It shall be the duty of the
licensee to affix the sticker in the lower right-hand comer, on the inside of
the glass part of the windshield approximately one inch from the right and
lower sections of the frame of such windshield.



   (B)   Motorcycles. Upon application for a motorcycle license, and
proper payment therefor, the village shall deliver to the licensee of such
motorcycle a metal tag which shall be affixed to the real' state license
plate.



   (C)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any motorized vehicle,
although duly licensed, to be used upon the streets, avenues or alleys of the
village unless such license is attached thereto as set forth herein.



(Ord. 92-04-39, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2001-03-12, passed 3-5-2001; Ord.
2016-12-49, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2019-02-04, passed 2-19-2019)



§ 5-7-9  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Any person who has owned or operated a vehicle for which a
license has been purchased, pursuant to this article, and who trades, sells
or otherwise disposes of the licensed vehicle and subsequently comes to own
or operate a substitute vehicle, shall deliver to the village sufficient
proof of the former registration (or the physical destruction of same) and
complete an application for license for the substitute vehicle. A $5 transfer
fee shall be charged for such transfer of village vehicle license.



   (B)   Any license issued hereunder is not transferable upon a change
in ownership of the subject vehicle, and must be removed or destroyed.
Purchasers, subject to this article, shall apply for a new license as set
forth herein.



(Ord. 92-04-39, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2001-03-12, passed 3-5-2001; Ord.
2016-12-49, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2019-02-04, passed 2-19-2019)



§ 5-7-10  REPLACEMENT LICENSES.



   If a vehicle license becomes lost before affixing such license to the
vehicle, or if such license is damaged or destroyed because of an accident or
broken windshield, such license shall be replaced by the village for a fee of
$5; provided that, the owner of such vehicle shall deliver to the village
sufficient proof of registration and proof of the loss or damage to such
license.



(Ord. 92-04-39, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2001-03-12, passed 3-5-2001; Ord.
2016-12-49, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2019-02-04, passed 2-19-2019)



§ 5-7-11  PAYMENT OF ACCRUED FEES REQUIRED.



   All owners or operators of vehicles required to be licensed under this
article who have not paid license fees for previous required years shall not
be entitled to a license for the license period applied for until the license
fees for previous license periods have been paid.



(Ord. 92-04-39, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2001-03-12, passed 3-5-2001; Ord.
2016-12-49, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2019-02-04, passed 2-19-2019)



ARTICLE 8:  PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS



Section



   5-8-1   Purchasing agent



   5-8-2   Contractual liabilities; limitations



   5-8-3   Purchasing, contracts, soliciting bids and change orders



   5-8-4   Bidder’s list and pre-qualification



   5-8-5   Bid opening procedure



   5-8-6   Award of bid



   5-8-7   Rejection of bids



   5-8-8   Bid deposits



   5-8-9   Tie bids



   5-8-10   Independent contractors agreement



   5-8-11   Labor and material bond required for public works contract



   5-8-12   Performance bond required



   5-8-13   Execution of contract



   5-8-14   Contracts or purchases without bid



   5-8-15   Disposition of village property



   5-8-16   Records



   5-8-17   Emergency purchases



   5-8-18   Joint purchase agreements



Cross-reference:



   Village Manager, see Ch. 2, Art. 1



§ 5-8-1  PURCHASING AGENT.



   The Village Manager, or such person designated by him or her, shall
have among his or her duties the purchasing of all supplies, materials, fuel,
equipment and services for use by all departments, commissions and agencies
of the village, except where provisions to the contrary are made by the
corporate authorities. Such purchases shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of this article.



§ 5-8-2  CONTRACTUAL LIABILITIES; LIMITATIONS.



   No contract shall be made by the corporate authorities, or by any
committee or member thereof, and no expense shall be incurred by any of the
officers, employees or departments of the village, whether the object of the
expenditure has been ordered by the corporate authorities or not, unless the
expenditure is consistent with the budget ordinance as amended concerning
that contract or expense. Any contract made, or any expense otherwise
incurred, in violation of the provisions of this section shall be null and
void as to the village, and no money belonging thereto shall be paid on
account thereof. However, pending the passage of the annual budget for any
fiscal year, the corporate authorities may authorize the Village Manager to
make necessary expenditures for the support thereof upon the basis of the
budget ordinance of the preceding fiscal year. However, if it is determined
by two-thirds vote of the corporate authorities then holding office, at a
regularly scheduled meeting of the corporate authorities, that it is
expedient and in the best public interest to begin proceedings for the
construction of a needed public work, then the provisions of this section
shall not apply to the extent that the corporate authorities may employ or
contract for professional services necessary for the planning and financing
of such public work.



§ 5-8-3  PURCHASING, CONTRACTS, SOLICITING BIDS AND CHANGE ORDERS.



   The procedures of the village regarding purchasing of goods and
services, letting of contracts, soliciting bids for those goods and services
and change orders shall be as follows.



   (A)   (1)   The Purchasing Agent shall develop administrative
procedures for purchases of up to and including $25,000 by contract or
otherwise for public works construction projects, and any Motor Fuel Tax
funded expenditures, and $25,000 for supplies, materials, fuel, equipment and
services and other items utilized by all departments, commissions and boards
of the village.



      (2)   All vendors or contractors who sell goods or perform
services to the village shall conform with the requirements of this article
as shall govern the furnishing of goods and services to the village. The
Purchasing Agent will promptly report to the Board all financial transactions
other than matters handled through the petty cash fund. The Board shall
consider and, where appropriate, approve the transactions entered into under
the procedures developed by the Purchasing Agent. Contracts entered into by
the Purchasing Agent where all funds have not been paid can be canceled by
the Board of Trustees.



   (B)   Except as provided in § 5-8-14, contracts for public works
construction projects or Motor Fuel Tax funded expenditures for more than
$25,000 and purchases of goods or services for more than $25,000, except
those for professional services, shall be made on the basis of awarding of
contracts to the lowest responsible bidder after advertising for bids has
taken place.  By a two-thirds vote of the trustees elected, this requirement
of bidding may be waived.



   (C)   (1)   Notice inviting bids shall be published at least once
in a newspaper generally circulated within the village at least five days
prior to the date set for receiving such proposals; provided, however, that,
where the goods to be purchased are of a specialized nature, the notice may
be published in a publication pertaining to those particular goods. Such
notice shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased or
the services to be performed, shall state where bid blanks and specifications
may be secured, including the cost, if any, of the specifications, the amount
of bid deposit required, and the time and location for opening bids.



      (2)   In calling for bids of public works projects, the notice
shall provide that the general prevailing rate of wages shall be paid for
each craft or type of worker needed to perform such work, as provided by
statute.



      (3)   The notice shall be placed in a prominent place in the
village building.



   (D)   The Purchasing Agent may approve increases in public works
construction contract amounts due to change orders not to exceed in total 5%
of the awarded contract amount and change orders extending the time of
completion of public works construction contracts for not more than 30 days
without prior Village Board approval. However, no single change order shall
exceed $10,000, except where a delay in approving such change order would
result in a financial penalty or would create a serious emergency within the
village which would endanger the health or safety of its citizens. In such
event, the provisions of § 5-8-17 shall be used. The Purchasing Agent shall
report his or her actions in making such approvals at the next regular
scheduled Village Board meeting.



(Ord. 91-09-65, passed 9-10-1991; Ord. 2005-11-61, passed 11-21-2005; Ord.
2016-07-34, passed 7-18-2016; Ord. 2017-09-55, passed 9-18-2017)



§ 5-8-4  BIDDERS’ LIST AND PRE-QUALIFICATION.



   (A)   The Purchasing Agent shall also solicit sealed bids from all
responsible prospective suppliers who have requested their names to be added
to a “Bidders’ List”, which the Agent shall maintain, by sending them a
copy of such newspaper notice or such other notice as will acquaint them with
the proposed purchase or sale.



   (B)   In any case, invitations sent to the vendors on the bidders’
list shall be limited to commodities or services typically provided by them.



   (C)   The Purchasing Agent may establish pre-qualification standards
and procedures and may require prospective bidders to pre-qualify themselves
for bidding on village contracts. The purpose of such pre-qualification shall
be to save the time of bidders who would be found unqualified before they
prepare individual bids. Another purpose for such pre-qualification shall be
to save the time of the village in reviewing the bids of unqualified entities
and to allow for a more expeditious bidding procedure. The standards for such
pre-qualification shall be the same as those used to award a bid, except for
the absence of any bid price. If a bidder participates in a pre-qualification
process and is found to be unqualified, the bidder shall be notified in
writing of this determination and shall be given an opportunity to respond in
writing and may be accorded a hearing. The Purchasing Agent may determine
that for any purchase or class of purchases, only bidders which have been
pre-qualified shall be permitted to submit bids.



§ 5-8-5  BID OPENING PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Bids shall be submitted sealed to the Purchasing Agent and
shall be identified as bids for the specific proposal or project submitted.



   (B)   Bids shall be opened in public at the time and location stated
in the notice inviting bids.



   (C)   A tabulation of all bids received shall be made by the
Purchasing Agent and forwarded to the corporate authorities.



§ 5-8-6  AWARD OF BID.



   (A)   The corporate authorities shall award the bid to the lowest
responsible bidder.



   (B)   In determining “lowest responsible bidder”, in addition to
price, the corporate authorities shall consider the following:



      (1)   The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform
the contract or provide the service required;



      (2)   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide
the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or
interference;



      (3)   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment,
experience and efficiency of the bidder;



      (4)   The quality of performance of previous contracts or
services;



      (5)   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with
laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service;



      (6)   The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability
of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service;



      (7)   The quality, availability and adaptability of the
supplies, or contractual services to the particular use required;



      (8)   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance
and service for the use of the subject of the contract; and



      (9)   The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.



§ 5-8-7  REJECTION OF BIDS.



   The corporate authorities shall have the authority to reject all bids,
parts of bids or all bids for any one or more supplies or contractual
services included in the proposed contract, when the public interest will be
served thereby.



§ 5-8-8  BID DEPOSITS.



   Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to the return of bid deposits
immediately after action is taken on the bids by the corporate authorities or
sooner if authorized by the Purchasing Agent. The corporate authorities may
hold the bid deposit of a bidder chosen as the alternate successful bidder
until the successful bidder has signed the contract, but no longer than 30
days after the award of the bid. A successful bidder shall forfeit any bid
deposit upon failure on his or her part to enter into a contract with the
village within ten days after the award of the bid.



§ 5-8-9  TIE BIDS.



   If any bids are received for the same total amount or unit price,
quality, service and all other pertinent facts being equal, the contract may
be awarded by drawing lots in public.



§ 5-8-10  INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS AGREEMENT.



   All contracts by independent contractors shall either contain therein
approximately the following terms and conditions or shall, as a result of
their enactment, have such terms and conditions made a part thereof as if
they were contained therein:



   “The independent contractor hereby agrees:



   (A)   To comply with all laws, regulations and rules promulgated by
any federal, state, county, municipal and/or other governmental unit or
regulatory body now in effect, or which may be in effect during the
performance of the work to which reference is made above. Included within the
scope of the laws, regulations and rules referred to in this paragraph, but
in nowise to operate as a limitation, are all forms of traffic regulations,
public utility and Intrastate and Interstate Commerce Commission regulations,
Workers’ Compensation Laws, the Social Security Act of the Federal
Government and any of its titles, FEPC or FEOC statutory provisions and rules
and regulations.



   (B)   To protect, indemnify, hold and save harmless and defend the
village against any and all claims, costs, causes, actions and expenses,
including but not limited to attorney’s fees incurred by reason of a
lawsuit or claim for compensation arising in favor of any person, including
the employees or officers of independent contractors or subcontractors of the
first and second parties, on account of personal injuries or death, or
damages to property occurring, growing out of, incident to, or resulting
directly or indirectly from the performance by the independent contractor
hereunder, whether such loss, damage, injury or liability is contributed to
by the negligence of the village or by premises themselves or any equipment
thereon whether latent or patent, or from other causes whatsoever, except
that the independent contractor shall have no liability or damages or the
costs incident thereto caused by the sole negligence of the village.



   (C)   To keep in force, to the satisfaction of the village, at all
times during the performance of the work referred to above, public liability
insurance and automobile liability insurance with bodily injury limits of not
less than $500,000, and property damage insurance with limits of not less
than $300,000. The independent contractor shall furnish proof of such
insurance coverage and may be required to cause the village to be named as an
additional insured prior to execution of any contract. The village may, in
specific bid documents, require higher levels of insurance coverage. The
independent contractor may seek to have the village waive this requirement of
conventional insurance if it has established a self-insurance program
supported by reasonable reserves.



   (D)   To furnish any affidavit or certificate, in connection with
the work covered by this agreement as provided by law.



   (E)   To indemnify the village for any loss it may sustain by theft
or other cause from the acts of negligence of the employees of the
independent contractor or of the subcontractors.”



§ 5-8-11  LABOR AND MATERIAL BOND REQUIRED FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACT.



   (A)   In making contracts for public work of any kind to be
performed in the village, the contractor for such work shall furnish, supply
and deliver a bond with good and sufficient sureties to the village in the
amount determined by the corporate authorities. Such bond shall be
conditioned for the completion of the contract, for the payment of material
used in such work and for all labor performed in such work, whether by
subcontractor or otherwise.



   (B)   Each bond is deemed to contain the following provisions
whether such provisions are inserted in such bond or not:



      “The principal and sureties on this bond agree that all the
undertakings, covenants, terms, conditions and agreements of the principal
and the village will be performed and fulfilled and to pay all persons, firms
and corporations having contracts with the principal or with sub-contractors,
all just claims due them under the provisions of such contracts for labor
performed or materials furnished in the performance of the contract on
account of which this bond is given, when such claims are not satisfied out
of the contract price of the contract on account of which this bond is given,
after final settlement between the village and the principal has been made.”



   (C)   The bond required by this section may be acquired from the
company, agent or broker of the contractor’s choice, subject to the right
of reasonable approval or disapproval by the corporate authorities.



§ 5-8-12  PERFORMANCE BOND REQUIRED.



   (A)   In making contracts for public work of any kind to be
performed in the village, the contractor for such work shall furnish, supply
and deliver a performance bond in the full amount of the contract to the
corporate authorities.



   (B)   Such bond may be required to further stipulate such provisions
as will guarantee the faithful performance that the general prevailing rate
of wages will be paid to all laborers, workers and mechanics employed by or
on behalf of the village engaged in the construction of public works, as
provided by statute.



§ 5-8-13  EXECUTION OF CONTRACT.



   The Village President and the Village Clerk, or any other person
designated and authorized by the corporate authorities, may execute any
contract on behalf of the village.



§ 5-8-14  CONTRACTS OR PURCHASES WITHOUT BID.



   The provisions of § 5-8-3(B) and (C), and §§ 5-8-4 through 5-8-9 and
any requirement to contract for goods or services based upon bids shall not
apply to the following:



   (A)   Contracts for professional services, including but not limited
to contracts with architects, attorneys, engineers, physicians,
psychologists, and surveyors;



   (B)   Contracts for services with individuals possessing a high
degree of skill where the ability or fitness of the person is an important
requirement, such as construction manager;



   (C)   Purchases which may only be made economically from a single
source;



   (D)   Contracts for the maintenance or servicing of, or the
provision of repair parts for equipment where the provision of such parts,
maintenance or servicing can best or must be performed by the manufacturer or
an authorized service agent;



   (E)   Purchases of personal property which must be compatible with
the existing equipment or systems owned by the village;



   (F)   Purchases and contracts for the use, purchase, movement, or
installation of data processing equipment, software, hardware, or tele-
communications and interconnect equipment, software and services;



   (G)   Contracts for the purchase and servicing of duplicating
machines and supplies;



   (H)   Purchases made through a public auction, close-out sale,
bankruptcy sale or other similar sale at a cost below the market cost in the
community;



   (I)   Purchases made through the use of a trade in of village
property;



   (J)   Contracts for the printing of bonds, tax warrants and other
evidences of indebtedness;



   (K)   Contracts for services through job order contract created or
established by the village or another governmental unit and which is
determined would result in an equal or better opportunity for the furnishing
of such services than through competitive bid by the village;



   (L)   Contracts for the purchase of personal property or services
though a joint purchase agreement with or through other governmental units,
when determined that the intergovernmental purchase, whether accomplished
with or without bid, would result in an equal or better opportunity for the
furnishing of such goods or services than through competitive bid by the
village;



   (M)   Purchases, which because of the unique characteristics of the
personal property or the needs of the village are not susceptible to
competitive bidding;



   (N)   Contracts extended pursuant to options to renew for additional
periods of time at a fixed price; and



   (O)   Extension of contracts that have originally been bid and can
be renewed for an additional period of time at a competitive fixed price.



(Ord. 2016-07-34, passed 7-18-2016)



§ 5-8-15  DISPOSITION OF VILLAGE PROPERTY.



   (A)   Disposition of village property under $1,000 in value.



      (1)   The Village Manager is authorized to dispose of any
personal property of the village with an original purchase value under
$1,000, when in his or her opinion such personal property is no longer
necessary or useful to the village. The disposition of such property may be
completed by any of the following methods:



         (a)   Sale of the personal property in such a manner as
the Village Manager may designate including, but not limited to auction,
internet auction, direct sale, internet direct sale, or sale through an agent
or broker. Such sale may be made with or without advertising the sale.



         (b)   Conversion of the personal property into some
other form that is useful to the village by using materials or parts from the
personal property.



         (c)   A trade-in or conveyance of the personal property
as part of the purchase price on the purchase of any similar new article,
provided however, that no property shall be used as a trade-in for any
purchase of an article over $25,000 in value except upon the receipt of a
competitive bid unless such competitive bidding is waived or not applicable,
as provided by ordinance.



      (2)   When the original purchase value of the personal
property is less than $500, approved by resolution passed by a simple
majority of the corporate authorities then holding office, or when the
Village Manager has attempted to dispose of the personal property as provided
herein and has been unable to do so, the Village Manager is authorized to
donate such personal property to another governmental agency, not-for-profit
or charitable organization.



      (3)   The Village Manager is authorized to dispose of any
village personal property that is no longer necessary or useful to the
village and has a value under $100.



      (4)   Whenever any personal property is disposed of under
divisions (A)(1), (2) or (3) above, the Village Manager shall report such
disposition to the corporate authorities in writing within seven days of
disposition. The Village Clerk shall maintain a list of all surplus property
disposed of pursuant to this section.



   (B)   Disposition of village property over $1,000 in value.



      (1)   When, in the opinion of the Village Board of Trustees,
any village-owned personal property with an original purchase value over
$1,000 is no longer necessary or useful to the village, such personal
property may be disposed of by resolution passed by a simple majority of the
Village Board then holding office.



      (2)   The disposition of such personal property may be
completed in any of the following ways:



         (a)   Sale of the personal property in such a manner as
the Village Board may designate including, but not limited to auction,
internet auction, direct sale, internet direct sale, or sale through an agent
or broker. Such sale may be made with or without advertising the sale as the
Village Board may direct.



         (b)   Conversion of the personal property into some
other form that is useful to the village by using materials or parts from the
personal property.



         (c)   A trade-in or conveyance of the personal property
as part of the purchase price on the purchase of any similar new article,
provided however, that no property shall be used as a trade-in for any
purchase of an article over $25,000 in value except upon the receipt of a
competitive bid unless such competitive bidding is waived or not applicable,
as provided by ordinance.



         (d)   Donation of such personal property to another
governmental agency, not-for-profit or charitable organization or to
otherwise dispose of such property and determined by the Village Board to be
in the best interests of the village.



   (C)   Disposition of village property to Village of Carol Stream
employees. Disposition of village personal property to Village of Carol
Stream employees is prohibited.



(Ord. 2019-02-06, passed 2-19-2019)



§ 5-8-16  RECORDS.



   The Purchasing Agent shall keep a record of all bids submitted to the
village and such records shall be open to public inspection.



§ 5-8-17  EMERGENCY PURCHASES.



   Where, in the opinion of the Purchasing Agent, a serious emergency
exists within the village which will endanger the health or safety of its
citizens, the Purchasing Agent may make emergency purchases which exceed
$20,000. Prior to making such a purchase, the Purchasing Agent shall attempt
to notify the members of the Village Board regarding the pending purchase.
The Purchasing Agent may not undertake such a contract or purchase if a
majority of the members of the Village Board whom he or she is able to
contact indicate that they would not confirm and ratify the action of the
Purchasing Agent in making this purchase under emergency circumstances. The
Purchasing Agent shall report his or her actions in making such an emergency
purchase at the next regular scheduled Village Board meeting and provide full
details as to the purchase and the circumstances under which the purchase was
made.



(Ord. 2005-11-61, passed 11-21-2005)



§ 5-8-18  JOINT PURCHASE AGREEMENTS.



   The Purchasing Agent may enter into joint purchasing agreements for the
purchase of supplies, personal property and services with other governmental
units, as provided by statute, when authorized by the corporate authorities,
without individually undertaking the competitive bidding requirement set
forth within this article, provided that the mechanism for the
intergovernmental purchase provides for an equal or better opportunity for
providers of goods and services to competitively bid for the furnishing of
such goods or services to the governmental bodies.



ARTICLE 9:  HOTEL/MOTEL USE TAX



Section



   5-9-1   Definitions



   5-9-2   Tax; incidence; payment; collection



   5-9-3   Books and records; inspections; contents



   5-9-4   Reporting; transmittal; penalty



   5-9-5   Proceeds



   5-9-6   Exemption



   5-9-7   Penalties



   5-9-8   Severability



§ 5-9-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following words as used herein
shall be construed to have the meanings herein ascribed.



   HOTEL OR MOTEL. Any building or buildings in which the public may, for
rent, obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations.  The
term includes inns, motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging houses, rooming
houses and apartment houses.



   HOTEL OR MOTEL ROOM. A room within a structure offered for rental on a
daily basis and containing facilities for sleeping.



   OWNER. Any person having an ownership interest in or conducting the
operation of a hotel or motel or receiving the consideration for the rental
of such hotel or motel room.



   PERMANENT RESIDENT. Any person who occupies or has rented any hotel or
motel room for at least 30 consecutive days.



   RESIDENT EMPLOYEE. Any person who works and lives in the same hotel or
motel.



(Ord. 2008-08-37, passed 8-4-2008; Ord. 2018-06-22, passed 6-18-2018)



§ 5-9-2  TAX; INCIDENCE; PAYMENT; COLLECTION.



   (A)   Tax imposed. A tax is hereby levied and imposed upon the use
and privilege of renting, leasing, or letting a hotel or motel room within
the village at a rate of 5% of the room rental rate (not including taxes or
other non-room rental charges added to the hotel or motel bill), for each
such hotel or motel room rented for every 24-hour period or fraction thereof.



   (B)   Incidence of tax. The ultimate incidence of and liability for
payment of the tax is to be borne by the person who seeks the privilege of
occupying the hotel or motel room, such person hereinafter referred as to as
renter.



   (C)   Payment of tax. The tax herein levied shall be paid in
addition to any and all other taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of the
owner of every hotel or motel to secure the tax from the renter of the hotel
or motel room and to pay the tax over to the village under the procedures
prescribed in this article.



   (D)   Collection. Every person required to collect the tax levied by
this article shall secure the tax from the renter at the time he or she
collects the rental payment for the hotel or motel room. The amount due under
the tax provided in this article shall be stated separately upon the invoice,
receipt or other statement or memorandum given to the renter at the time of
payment.



(Ord. 2008-08-37, passed 8-4-2008; Ord. 2018-06-22, passed 6-18-2018)



§ 5-9-3  BOOKS AND RECORDS; INSPECTIONS; CONTENTS.



   (A)   The Village Finance Director, or any person certified by him
or her as his or her deputy or representative, may enter the premises of any
hotel or motel for inspection of books and records in order to effectuate the
proper administration of this article and to assure the enforcement of the
collection of the tax imposed.



   (B)   No person shall prevent, hinder or interfere with the Finance
Director or his or her duly authorized deputy or representative in the
discharge of his or her duties under this article.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of every owner to keep accurate and
complete books and records to which the Finance Director or his or her duly
authorized deputy or representative shall at all times have full access,
which records shall include a daily sheet showing:



      (1)   The number of hotel or motel rooms rented during the
24-hour period, including multiple rental of the same hotel or motel room
where such shall occur; and



      (2)   The actual hotel or motel receipts collected for the
date in question.



(Ord. 2018-06-22, passed 6-18-2018)



§ 5-9-4  REPORTING; TRANSMITTAL; PENALTY.



   (A)   Monthly reporting. The owner or owners of each hotel or motel
within the village shall file monthly tax returns, on a form approved by the
village, showing tax receipts received with respect to each hotel or motel
during each reporting period. The returns shall be due on or before the last
day of the calendar month next following the end of the monthly filing
period. All returns shall be for full calendar months as provided herein.



   (B)   Transmittal of tax. The tax shall be due on the day the
monthly return is due as provided herein.  At the time of filing such
returns, the owner shall pay to the Finance Director all taxes, interest and
penalties, if any, due for the period to which the return applies.



   (C)   Penalty. If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a
penalty at the rate of 1% of total taxes due per 30-day period, or any
portion thereof, shall be added and collected.



(Ord. 2018-06-22, passed 6-18-2018)



§ 5-9-5  PROCEEDS.



   All proceeds resulting from the collection of the tax under this
article, including interest and penalties, shall be paid into the Treasury of
the village and shall be credited to and deposited in the General Fund of the
village.



(Ord. 2008-08-37, passed 8-4-2008; Ord. 2018-06-22, passed 6-18-2018)



§ 5-9-6  EXEMPTION.



   The tax imposed by § 5-9-2 of this article shall not apply to
permanent residents or resident employees.



(Ord. 2018-06-22, passed 6-18-2018)



§ 5-9-7  PENALTIES.



   Any owner or person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this article
shall be punished, upon conviction thereof, by a fine of not less than $25
nor more than $500 for the first offense, and not less than $50 nor more than
$500 for the second and each subsequent offense in any 180-day period. A
separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day upon which
said violation shall continue.



(Ord. 2018-06-22, passed 6-18-2018)



§ 5-9-8  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any
person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this article and the
application thereof to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected
thereby.



(Ord. 2018-06-22, passed 6-18-2018)



ARTICLE 10:  REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX



Section



   5-10-1   Tax imposed



   5-10-2   Liability for tax



   5-10-3   Lien: enforcement



   5-10-4   Purchase of stamps



   5-10-5   Filing of declaration



   5-10-6   Exemptions



   5-10-7   Real estate transfer tax stamps



   5-10-8   Recordation of deeds



   5-10-9   Definitions



   5-10-10   Proceeds of tax



   5-10-11   Interest and penalties



   5-10-12   Civil liability for tax



   5-10-13   Fine for violation



   5-10-14   Other sum due the village



   5-10-15   Refund of tax



   5-10-16   Severability



   5-10-17   Lost or destroyed stamp



§ 5-10-1  TAX IMPOSED.



   A tax is imposed on the privilege of transferring title to real estate
within the corporate limits of the village, on the privilege of transferring
a beneficial interest in real property which is the subject of a trust, and
on the privilege of transferring a controlling interest in a real estate
entity owning property located in the village, at the rate of $3 for each
$1,000 of value or fraction thereof stated in the declaration provided for in
this article. REAL ESTATE shall mean both land and any structures permanently
affixed to the land. The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any and
all other taxes. The tax is due if the transfer is made by one or more
related transactions or involves one or more persons or entities and whether
or not a document is recorded. The fee to obtain an exempt stamp is $25.



(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2004-06-33, passed 6-7-2004; Ord.
2005-08-45, passed 8-15-2005; Ord. 2009-11-62, passed 11-16-2009)



§ 5-10-2  LIABILITY FOR TAX.



   The ultimate incidence, and liability for payment, of the tax imposed
by this article shall be borne by the grantor of any deed and the grantor,
assignor or transferor of any instrument conveying the beneficial interest in
real property which is the subject of a land trust, or the controlling
interest in a real estate entity subject to this article or, in the case of a
Sheriff’s sale, or a sale by tax deed the tax imposed by the article shall
be borne by the buyer. Where the buyer receives the property by Sheriff’s
sale or a tax deed, the village shall make a reasonable determination of the
liability for the tax based upon the rate of $3 for each $1,000 of value or
fraction thereof received by the buyer in the transaction. The value states
by the buyer shall be considered.



(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2004-06-33, passed 6-7-2004; Ord.
2005-08-45, passed 8-15-2005; Ord. 2009-11-62, passed 11-16-2009)



§ 5-10-3  LIEN: ENFORCEMENT.



   In the event a deed or trust document is filed for recordation without
the revenue stamps provided for by this article, a lien is declared against
the real property conveyed or transferred in the amount of the tax. The fact
that the deed or trust document does not contain a village revenue stamp in
an amount equal to the transfer tax imposed pursuant to this article shall
constitute constructive notice of the lien. The village may record a lien for
the non-payment of the tax. The lien may be enforced by proceedings to
foreclose pursuant to the Illinois Compiled Statutes. Nothing contained in
this article shall be interpreted as preventing the village from collecting
the tax imposed herein pursuant to a civil cause of action, including
interest and penalties as provided for in this article.



(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 5-10-4  PURCHASE OF STAMPS.



   The tax levied by this article shall be paid by the purchase of tax
stamps, or other designation determined by the village through the Director
of Finance or his or her agent. The payment of the tax shall be denoted by an
adhesive stamp or stamps affixed to the face of the deed or trust document,
or as otherwise determined and designated by the village.



(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 5-10-5  FILING OF DECLARATION.



   (A)   At such time as the tax levied by this article is paid, there
shall be filed with the Director of Finance a declaration, on a form
prescribed by the Director of Finance. The declaration shall be signed by at
least one of the sellers and also by at least one of the buyers in the
transaction or by the attorneys or agents for the sellers and buyers. The
declaration shall state information including, but not limited to:



      (1)   The value of the real property or beneficial interest in
real property located in the village so transferred;



      (2)   The parcel identifying number of the property;



      (3)   The legal description of the property;



      (4)   The date of the deed, the date the transfer was
effected, or the date of the trust document;



      (5)   The type of deed, transfer or trust document;



      (6)   The common address of the property;



      (7)   The type of improvement, if any, on the property;



      (8)   Information as to whether the transfer is between
related individuals or corporate affiliates or is a compulsory transaction;



      (9)   The lot size or acreage;



      (10)   The value of personal property sold with the real
estate;



      (11)   The year the contract was initiated if an installment
sale; and



      (12)   The name, address, telephone number of the person
preparing the declaration.



   (B)   A deed, a document transferring a controlling interest in real
property, or a trust document shall not be accepted for recordation unless it
is accompanied by a declaration containing all the information requested in
the declaration. A copy of the State of Illinois Real Estate Transfer Tax
Declaration form may be filed with the village in satisfaction of this
requirement.



(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 93-02-18, passed 2-23-1993; Ord.
2004-06-33, passed 6-7-2004)



§ 5-10-6  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   The following shall be exempt from the tax levied by this
article:



      (1)   Deed or trust documents involving the exchange of real
estate from one spouse to another as a result of a duly executed divorce;



      (2)   Deed or trust documents which secure debt or other
obligation and through which no transfer of possession or use occurs;



      (3)   Deeds or trust documents which, without additional
consideration, confirm, correct, modify or supplement, a deed or trustee
document previously recorded;



      (4)   Deed or trust documents where the actual consideration
is less than $100;



      (5)   Tax deeds;



      (6)   Deeds or trust documents of release of property, which
is security for a debt or other obligation and deeds in the case of a
foreclosure or in lieu of a foreclosure in which the buyer does not receive
actual consideration in addition to the release of the debt;



      (7)   Deeds of partition;



      (8)   Deeds or trust documents made pursuant to mergers,
consolidations or transfers or sales of substantially all of the assets of
corporations pursuant to plans of reorganization;



      (9)   Deed or trust documents made by a subsidiary corporation
to its parent corporation for no consideration other than the cancellation or
surrender of the subsidiary’s stock;



      (10)   Deeds wherein there is an actual trade or exchange or
real estate and trust documents wherein there is an actual trade or exchange
of beneficial interests; except that, the  money difference or money’s
worth paid from one to the other shall not be exempt from the tax;



      (11)   Deeds representing transfers subject to the imposition
of a documentary stamp tax imposed by the government of the United States;
except that, such deeds shall not be exempt from filing the declaration; and



      (12)   Deeds or trust documents involving real estate acquired
by or from any governmental body, but not including transfers made in
Sheriff’s sales or sales by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac. This exemption,
however, shall not be granted where the transfer is made to or from a
governmental body which leases or expresses an intent to lease to a majority
of the land, or in the case of a building, the structure, to a
non-governmental body.



   (B)   Every deed or trust document which is tax exempt pursuant to
this section shall be presented to the Director of Finance so as to be
appropriately marked by the Director to be eligible for recordation without
the payment of tax. At such time as a deed or trust document is presented to
the Director, pursuant to this section, there shall be filed with the
Director a certificate setting forth the facts which justify the exemption of
the deed or trust document presented. The certificate shall be executed on
behalf of either the grantor or grantee and shall be on a form provided by
the Director.



(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 93-02-18, passed 2-23-1993; Ord.
98-06-39, passed 6-1-1998; Ord. 2009-11-62, passed 11-16-2009)



§ 5-10-7  REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX STAMPS.



   (A)   The tax herein levied and imposed shall be collected by the
Director of Finance through the sale of real estate transfer tax stamps,
which shall be caused to be prepared by the Director in such quantities as
the Director may from time to time prescribe. Such stamps shall be available
for the sale at, and during the regular business hours of, the village
offices and the offices of such agents as the village may designate. For the
purpose of reviewing the request for the stamps, the village shall process a
request within two working days. Upon payment of the tax herein levied and
imposed, the stamps so purchased shall be affixed to the deed or trust
document or other instrument of conveyance as required by this article. Any
person so using and affixing a stamp shall cancel it and so deface it as to
render it unfit for re-use by marking it with his initials and the day, month
and year when the affixing occurs. Such markings shall be made by writing or
stamping in indelible ink or by perforating with a machine or punch; however,
the stamp(s) shall not be so defaced as to prevent ready determination of its
denomination and genuineness. The Carol Stream Real Estate Transfer Tax Stamp
shall be of a design determined by the Village Manager.



   (B)   The village hereby determines to establish an administrative
fee upon the issuance of exempt stamps under its real estate transfer tax
ordinance. The village has determined that there are substantial
administrative costs in determining whether an individual seeking an exempt
stamp under the village’s real estate transfer tax ordinance is entitled to
such a stamp. Because the amount of the tax due under the village’s real
estate transfer tax ordinance may be quite substantial, individuals
understandably may make an application for an exempt stamp when there is a
serious question as to whether the applicant is entitled to the tax
exemption. The village has not previously made a charge for evaluating and
processing such applications for tax exemptions, and the cost of such
services has been substantial, and no fee has been charged previously for
such service. The fee payable with an application for a real estate tax
exemption stamp shall be $25.



(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2009-04-14, passed 4-6-2009)



§ 5-10-8  RECORDATION OF DEEDS.



   After the effective date of this article, no deed conveying real
property, no document transferring a controlling interest in a real estate
entity, and no trust document transferring any beneficial interest in real
property which is the subject of a land trust within the corporate limits of
the village shall be entitled to recordation by the Recorder of Deeds, DuPage
County, Illinois, unless such deed shall bear either a village real estate
transfer tax stamp in the amount required by this article, or an exemption
mark from the Village Director of Finance.



(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2004-06-33, passed 6-7-2004)



§ 5-10-9  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BENEFICIAL INTEREST. Includes, but is not limited to:



      (1)   The beneficial interest in an Illinois land trust;



      (2)   The lessee interest in a ground lease (including any
interest of the lessee in the related improvements) that provides for a term
of 30 or more years when all options to renew or extend are included, whether
or not any portion of the term has expired; or



      (3)   The indirect interest in real property as reflected by a
controlling interest in a real estate entity.



   CONTROLLING INTEREST. More than 50% of the fair market value of all
ownership interests or beneficial interests in a real estate entity.



   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint
stock company, joint venture, public or private corporation, or a receiver,
executor, trustee, conservator, or other representative appointed by order of
any court.



   REAL ESTATE ENTITY. Any person, including, but not limited to, any
partnership, corporation, limited liability company, trust, other entity, or
multi-tiered entity, that exists or acts substantially for the purpose of
holding directly or indirectly title to or beneficial interest in real
property. There is a rebuttable presumption that an entity is a real estate
entity if it owns, directly or indirectly, real property having a fair market
value greater than 75% of the total fair market value of all of the
entity’s assets, determined without deduction for any mortgage, lien or
encumbrance.



   RECORDATION. The recording of deeds or trust documents by the Recorder
of Deeds, DuPage County, Illinois.



   TRUST DOCUMENT. A document required to be recorded pursuant to the
Illinois Land Trust Recordation Act.



   VALUE. The amount of the full actual consideration for the real
property, including the amount of any lien or liens on the real property
assumed by the grantee or purchaser. VALUE also includes the estimated
purchase price of any new construction and/or remodeling the effectuation of
which is a term or condition of the sale of the real estate, whether
expressed or implied, for which a real estate transfer declaration, as
defined in § 5-10-5, has been filed. The new construction and/or remodeling
will be performed by the seller or under the direction of the seller, or by
an entity under the control of the seller or the seller’s heirs, executors,
administrators, beneficiaries, representatives, successors and assigns and
will be paid for by the seller, or at the direction of the seller, or by an
entity under the control of the seller or the seller’s heirs, executors,
administrators, beneficiaries, successors and assigns and wherein said
residential new construction and/or residential remodeling does commence
within two years of the closing date of the transaction for which the
aforementioned real estate transfer declaration was filed. In the event that
the construction does not commence within this time period, a refund for the
tax paid for the contemplated construction or remodeling will, upon
application, be made.



(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2004-06-33, passed 6-7-2004; Ord.
2005-08-45, passed 8-15-2005)



§ 5-10-10  PROCEEDS OF TAX.



   All proceeds resulting from the collection of the tax imposed by this
article, including interest and penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of
the village and shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the
village.



(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2004-06-33, passed 6-7-2004)



§ 5-10-11  INTEREST AND PENALTIES.



   In the event that any person fails to pay the tax required by this
article or reports an amount of tax due, then in addition to the amount of
the tax, interest shall accumulate and be due and payable by that person upon
the tax at the rate of 1% per month commencing as of the first day following
the day when the deed or trust deed was recorded or the trust document was
accepted by the Trustee. In addition, a penalty of 25% of the tax and
interest due shall be assessed and collected against any person or entity who
fails to pay the tax imposed by this article or conspires to cause the
payment of less than the tax due.



(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2005-08-45, passed 8-15-2005)



§ 5-10-12  CIVIL LIABILITY FOR TAX.



   In the event that any person fails to pay to the Finance Director the
tax required hereunder when the tax shall be due, or reports an amount of tax
due which is less than the amount actually due, or conspires to or takes
action to cause or permit a false or incomplete payment to be made, said
person shall be liable to the village for such tax, together with interest
and penalties. The village may bring an action to collect such tax, interest,
and penalties in any court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2005-08-45, passed 8-15-2005)



§ 5-10-13  FINE FOR VIOLATION.



   In addition to the other provisions of this article, any person found
guilty in a court of competent jurisdiction of violating, disobeying,
providing false or incomplete information, omitting, neglecting or refusing
to pay the tax provided for in this article or any amendment to this article,
or conspiring to violate or evade this article or any amendment to this
article, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more
than $750 for each separate and distinct offense and may be required to pay
the amount of tax, interest, and penalty due.



(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2005-08-45, passed 8-15-2005)



§ 5-10-14  OTHER SUM DUE THE VILLAGE.



   The Director of Finance shall issue no real estate transfer tax stamps
to any person or entity unless the most current billing including the final
billing for water and sewer assessments for the real estate or beneficial
interest in real estate which is the subject of the proposed transfer is paid
in full. In addition, the Director of Finance shall issue no real estate
transfer tax stamps to any person or entity unless all outstanding amounts
due the village by the grantor or relating to the property to be transferred
and arising from any unpaid or due account, charge or liquidated claim of any
kind are paid in full. Payment for any outstanding balances due to the
village shall be in the form of cash, personal check, money orders or a
cashier’s check. The applicant shall also, if requested, certify that any
recycling or garbage collection container issued shall remain on the property.



(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 97-11-79, passed 11-3-1997)



§ 5-10-15  REFUND OF TAX.



   A grantor, seller, assignor or transferor who has paid the tax provided
for in this article shall be entitled to a refund of such tax in the event
such grantor, seller, assignor or transferor satisfies all of the following
requirements:



   (A)   He or she was the grantor or occupier of a property, including
residential, commercial or industrial property within the corporate limits of
the village as to which taxes were paid pursuant to this article;



   (B)   He or she did not rent or lease any portion of the previously
owned dwelling or real estate to another person or persons and must have
resided in the house being sold for a period of one year within the last
three years prior to sale;



   (C)   He or she has purchased and occupies at the date of the
application for refund another property within the village as a replacement
for the property sold; and



   (D)   He or she makes the application for refund not later than one
year after the tax payment has been made and provides adequate evidence of
the fulfillment of each requirement of a refund.



(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 93-02-18, passed 2-23-1993; Ord.
2005-08-45, passed 8-15-2005)



§ 5-10-16  SEVERABILITY.



   If any clause, sentence, section, provision or part of this article or
the application thereof to persons or circumstance shall be adjusted to be
unconstitutional, the remainder of this article or its application to person
or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid shall not be
affected thereby. The village specifically intends that if an exemption
contained in § 5-10-6 or the refund contained in § 5-10-15 is held to be
invalid that the tax should be collected from the exempt class or the refund
shall not apply and the article without the exemption shall remain in full
force and effect.



(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 5-10-17  LOST OR DESTROYED STAMP.



   In the event a real estate transfer stamp issued under this article is
lost or destroyed, a replacement stamp may be issued upon the payment of a
$25 administration fee and the filing of a statement upon oath or affirmation
stating that the stamp was lost or destroyed and an explanation of the
circumstances surrounding the loss or destruction. The affidavit shall be on
a form provided by the village.



(Ord. 93-02-18, passed 2-23-1993)



ARTICLE 11:  PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF CH. 5



Section



   5-11-1   Violations and penalties



§ 5-11-1  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.



   Any person who violates any provision of this Ch. 5, in addition to the
provisions of § 1-1-9 of this code, shall be subject to the following
penalties.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
fined not less than $10, nor more than $750.



   (B)   The village shall also seek as a cause of action for the
violation of any provision of this chapter the payment of all taxes owed and
not paid, plus interest at the maximum amount allowed by law, to be charged
for the failure to pay taxes in the correct amount when due.



   (C)   In addition to seeking the penalties set out above, the
village may also seek other appropriate judicial action, such as mandatory
injunction.



(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992)



ARTICLE 12:  MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX



Section



   5-12-1   Short title



   5-12-2   Definitions



   5-12-3   Tax imposed



   5-12-4   Collection of tax



   5-12-5   Books and records



Cross-reference:



   Municipal Utility Act, see Ch. 5, Art. 4



§ 5-12-1  SHORT TITLE.



   The tax imposed by this article shall be known as the “Municipal Gas
Use Tax” and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the
Village of Carol Stream, the State of Illinois, or any other municipal
corporation or political subdivision thereof.



(Ord. 2003-04-17, passed 4-21-2003)



§ 5-12-2  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the content clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company,
municipal corporation or political subdivision of the state, or a receiver,
trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.



   PUBLIC UTILITIES ACT. The Public Utilities Act, as amended (220 ILCS
5/1-101 et seq.).



   PUBLIC UTILITY. A public utility as defined in § 3-105 of the Public
Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/3-105).



   RETAIL PURCHASER. Any person who purchases gas in a sale at retail.



   SALE AT RETAIL. Any sale of gas by a retailer to a person for use or
consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose, the term RETAILER means
any person engaged in the business of distribution, supplying or furnishing
or selling gas.



(Ord. 2003-04-17, passed 4-21-2003)



§ 5-12-3  TAX IMPOSED.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, a tax is imposed
on the privilege of using or consuming gas in the village that is purchased
in a sale at retail at the rate of 2.5 cents ($0.025) per therm.



   (B)   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax
is on the retail purchaser, and nothing in this article shall be construed to
impose a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing,
selling or transporting gas.



   (C)   The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of
gas delivered to the retail purchaser’s premises:



      (1)   To the public utility designated to collect the tax
pursuant to § 5-12-2 of this article on or before the payment due date of
the public utility’s bill first reflecting the tax; or



      (2)   Directly to the village on or before the fifteenth day
of the second month following the month in which the gas is delivered to the
retail purchaser, if no public utility has been designated to collect the tax
pursuant to § 5-12-2, or if the gas is delivered by a person other than a
public utility so designated.



   (D)   A purchaser who purchases gas for resale and therefore does
not pay the tax imposed by this article with respect to the use or
consumption of the gas, but who later uses or consumes part or all of the
gas, shall pay the tax directly to the Village Treasurer on or before the
fifteenth day of the second month following the month in which the gas is
used or consumed.



   (E)   The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the
retail purchaser is billed by a public utility on or after 5-1-2003.



(Ord. 2003-04-17, passed 4-21-2003)



§ 5-12-4  COLLECTION OF TAX.



   (A)   The Finance Director is authorized to enter into a contract
for collection of the tax imposed by this article with any public utility
providing gas service in the village. The contract shall include and
subsequently conform with the following provisions:



      (1)   The public utility will collect the tax with respect to
gas delivered by it to its customers as an independent contractor;



      (2)   The public utility will remit collected taxes to the
Village Treasurer no more often than once each month;



      (3)   The public utility will be entitled to withhold from tax
collections a service fee equal to 3% of the amounts collected and timely
remitted to the Village Treasurer;



      (4)   The public utility shall not be liable to the village
for any tax not actually collected from a retail purchaser; and



      (5)   Such additional terms as the parties may agree upon.



   (B)   A public utility designated to collect the tax imposed by this
article from its customers shall bill each customer for the tax on all gas
delivered to the customer unless:



      (1)   The customer’s use or consumption is exempt from the
tax pursuant to a duly passed and authorized ordinance of the village; or



      (2)   The public utility has received written notification
from the village that the customer is exempt from the tax.



(Ord. 2003-04-17, passed 4-21-2003)



§ 5-12-5  BOOKS AND RECORDS.



   (A)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records,
including original source documents and books of entry, denoting the
activities or transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise to any tax
liability or exemption under this article.



   (B)   All such books and records shall, at all times during business
hours, be subject to and available for inspection by the village.



(Ord. 2003-04-17, passed 4-21-2003)



ARTICLE 13:  MUNICIPAL MOTOR FUEL TAX



Section



   5-13-1   Short title



   5-13-2   Definitions



   5-13-3   Tax imposed



   5-13-4   Collection of tax



   5-13-5   Registration and maintenance of records



   5-13-6   Late payment penalty



   5-13-7   Penalty



   5-13-8   Enforcement



§ 5-13-1   SHORT TITLE.



   The tax imposed by this article shall be known as the "Municipal Motor
Fuel Tax" and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the
Village of Carol Stream, the State of Illinois, or any other municipal
corporation or political subdivision thereof.



(Ord. 2018-04-12, passed 4-2-2018)



§ 5-13-2   DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MOTOR FUEL. Any volatile and inflammable liquid or gas produced,
blended or compounded for the purpose of or which is suitable for operating
motor vehicles, as defined herein.



   MOTOR FUEL RETAILER OR RETAIL DEALER.  Any person who is engaged in
the business of selling motor fuel in the Village of Carol Stream to a
purchaser for the purchaser's use or consumption, and not for resale in any
form.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
corporation, joint venture, joint stock company, limited liability company,
municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver,
trustee, conservator, legal representative, or other legally recognized
entity.



   SALE AT RETAIL. Any sale to a person for that person's use or
consumption and not for resale to another.



   SALE, RESALE OR PURCHASE. Any transfer of ownership or title or both,
any exchange or any barter, whether conditional or otherwise, in any manner
or by any means whatsoever for consideration.



   USE. The exercise of any right to, or power over, motor fuel incident
to the ownership thereof, including, but not limited to, the receipt of
vehicle fuel by any person into a fuel supply tank of a vehicle.



   VEHICLE. Any machine or device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a rail, street, road, highway
or otherwise upon land, in or upon water. VEHICLE shall include, but not be
limited to, automobiles, trucks, buses, trains, motorcycles, and boats. 



(Ord. 2018-04-12, passed 4-2-2018)



§ 5-13-3  TAX IMPOSED.



   Commencing on June 1, 2018, a tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege
of purchasing or using motor fuel at retail within the village. The tax shall
be at a rate of $0.04 per gallon of motor fuel. The ultimate incidence of and
liability for payment of the tax shall be upon the purchaser or user of the
vehicle fuel, and nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impose a tax
upon the occupation of selling or distributing motor fuel. It shall be a
violation of this chapter for any retail dealer to fail to add this tax to
the retail price of motor fuel or to absorb the tax. The tax shall be in
addition to any and all other taxes.



(Ord. 2018-04-12, passed 4-2-2018)



§ 5-13-4  COLLECTION OF TAX.



   The owner and operator of each motor fuel retailer within the village
shall jointly and severally have the duty to cause to be filed a sworn motor
fuel tax return with the Village of Carol Stream Director of Finance for each
such licensed premises located in the village. Said return shall be prepared
and submitted on forms prescribed by the village and shall be filed with the
village by the twentieth day of the month following the month in which such
motor fuel was sold. Said return shall also be accompanied by payment to the
village of all taxes imposed by this article which are due and owing for the
period covered by the return. The return shall also be accompanied with a
copy of the Illinois Department of Revenue Sales and Use Tax Return (ST-1)
for each motor fuel retailer.



(Ord. 2018-04-12, passed 4-2-2018)



§ 5-13-5  REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.



   Every motor fuel retailer shall register with the village within 30
days after the commencement of such business on forms provided by the Finance
Director.  Each motor fuel retailer shall have the duty to maintain complete
and accurate books, records and accounts showing the gross receipts for the
sale of motor fuel and the taxes collected from the purchaser thereof, which
shall be available in the Village of Carol Stream for examination and for
audit by the village upon reasonable notice during customary business hours.



(Ord. 2018-04-12, passed 4-2-2018)



§ 5-13-6  LATE PAYMENT PENALTY.



   If any tax imposed by this article is not paid over to the village when
due, a late payment penalty equal to 1% of the unpaid tax is added for each
month or any portion thereof, that such tax remains unpaid and the total of
such late payment penalty shall be paid along with the tax imposed hereby. 
The village may bring an action to collect any unpaid tax or penalty.



(Ord. 2018-04-12, passed 4-2-2018)



§ 5-13-7  PENALTY.



   In addition to any other penalty, any person or licensee violating any
provision of this article upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less
than $500 nor more than $1,000 for each such offense.  Each failure to
collect the tax imposed hereby or each failure to pay such tax over to the
Village of Carol Stream shall constitute a separate violation hereof.



(Ord. 2018-04-12, passed 4-2-2018)



§ 5-13-8  ENFORCEMENT.



   Payment and collection of the municipal motor fuel tax and any payment
penalty may be enforced by the village by action in any court of competent
jurisdiction.



(Ord. 2018-04-12, passed 4-2-2018)



ARTICLE 14:  MUNICIPAL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE TAX



Section



   5-14-1   Short title



   5-14-2   Definitions



   5-14-3   Tax imposed



   5-14-4   Liability for payment



   5-14-5   Collection of tax



   5-14-6   Rules and regulations



   5-14-7   Filing of return and payment of tax



   5-14-8   Failure to file return or pay tax when due



   5-14-9   Records



   5-14-10   Exemptions



   5-14-11   Suspension or revocation of licenses for failure to comply



   5-14-12   Disposition of proceeds of tax



   5-14-13   Penalty



§ 5-14-1  SHORT TITLE.



   The tax imposed by this article shall be known as the “Municipal
Alcoholic Beverage Tax” and is imposed in addition to all other taxes
imposed by the Village of Carol Stream, the State of Illinois, or any other
municipal corporation or political subdivision thereof.



(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)



§ 5-14-2  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this article, whenever any of the following words,
terms or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section.



   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Shall have the meaning ascribed to it as the term is
defined in § 11-2-1 of this code.



   CONSUMER. The person who seeks the privilege of purchasing alcoholic
liquor at retail at any liquor establishment.



   FINANCE DEPARTMENT.  The Finance Department of the Village of Carol
Stream.



   LIQUOR ESTABLISHMENT. Any premises required to obtain a retail liquor
license pursuant to Chapter 11, Article 2 of this code.



   OWNER. Any person or persons having a sufficient proprietary interest
in conducting the operation of a liquor establishment so as to entitle such a
person or persons to all or a portion of the net receipts thereof.



   PERSON. Any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor,
conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm,
co-partnership, joint venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or
foreign corporation, association, syndicate, society or any group of
individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal
nonprofit, or otherwise; whenever the term PERSON is used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to associations shall
mean that the owners or part owners thereof and, as applied to corporations,
the officers thereof.



   RETAIL SALE OR PURCHASE. Any transfer of the ownership, exchange or
barter or any transfer for a valuable consideration.



(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)



§ 5-14-3  TAX IMPOSED.



   (A)   Beginning on July 1, 2019, there is hereby levied and imposed
upon the privilege of purchasing alcoholic liquor at any liquor establishment
in the village a tax of 2% of the purchase price, exclusive of any other tax
charged for such alcoholic liquor.



(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)



§ 5-14-4  LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT.



   (A)   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax
imposed by this article shall be borne by the consumer.



   (B)   The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all
other taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of the owner, manager or
operator of every liquor establishment to collect said tax from the consumer
and remit to the village said tax under the rules and regulations prescribed
by the local Liquor Control Commissioner and as otherwise provided in this
article.



(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)



§ 5-14-5  COLLECTION OF TAX.



   Every person required to collect the tax levied by this article shall
collect said tax from the consumer at the time he or she collects payment for
the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail. The amount due under the tax provided
in this article shall be separately stated on the invoice receipt or other
statement or memorandum of the payment given to the consumer at the time of
payment, unless the person required to collect the tax does not have a cash
register that separately states such tax. In any event, the person required
to collect the tax shall keep records that clearly support total liquor sales
and liquor taxes due hereunder. It shall be unlawful for the owner, manager
or operator of a liquor establishment to fail to include the tax imposed
herein in the sale price of the alcoholic beverage or to otherwise absorb
such tax.



(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)



§ 5-14-6  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The local Liquor Control Commissioner may promulgate rules and
regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this article concerning
the enforcement and application of this article. The term "rules and
regulations" includes, but is not limited to, a case by case determination
whether or not the tax imposed by this article applies.



(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)



§ 5-14-7  FILING OF RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX.



   The owner(s) of each liquor establishment within the village shall file
with the Finance Department, sworn tax returns showing tax receipts received
during each calendar month reporting period on forms prescribed by the local
Liquor Control Commissioner.  The returns and related payment of taxes
collected shall be due on or before the last calendar day of the month
following the month for which the sales of alcoholic liquor occurred.At the
time of filing such returns, the owner shall pay to the village all taxes due
for the period to which the tax return applies, less a commission of 1 of the
amount of the tax, which is allowed to reimburse the owner for the expenses
incurred in keeping records, billing, preparing and filing returns, remitting
the tax and supplying data to the village upon request. No commission may be
claimed by an owner for taxes not timely remitted to the village. Payment of
the tax imposed shall be made to the Finance Department.



(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)



§ 5-14-8  FAILURE TO FILE RETURN OR PAY TAX WHEN DUE.



   (A)   If for any reason a tax imposed under this article is not paid
when due, a late fee shall be added and collected as follows. For the first
late payment, $50 or 2% of the amount of tax which remains unpaid, whichever
is greater; for the second late payment, $100 or 2% of the amount of tax
which remains unpaid, whichever is greater; and for the third and subsequent
late payments, $150 or 2% of the amount of tax which remains unpaid,
whichever is greater. In addition to the above late fee, beginning on the
first day of the month following the month in which a late fee is assessed,
interest will accrue on all unpaid taxes at the rate of 1% per month for any
portion of the month taxes remain due but unpaid.



   (B)   Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as provided in
this article, the village may bring or cause to be brought an action to
enforce the payment of the tax on behalf of the village and reasonable
attorney’s fees incurred in bringing such action in any court of competent
jurisdiction.



(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)



§ 5-14-9  RECORDS.



   (A)   Every owner, manager or operator of a liquor establishment in
the village shall keep books and records for a period of at least 48 months,
which, at a minimum should include a daily sheet showing:



      (1)   The amount of taxable receipts within the 24-hour
period; and



      (2)   The actual liquor establishment tax receipts collected
for the date in question.



   (B)   The local Liquor Control Commissioner or his or her designee
shall at all reasonable times have full access to said books and records.



   (C)   The financial records of any liquor establishment submitted
pursuant to this article or any rule and regulation promulgated thereunder
shall not be available for public inspection in order to protect the owner's
right to privacy, except when necessary in any action to enforce collection
of tax under this article or as otherwise provided by law.



(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)



§ 5-14-10  EXEMPTIONS.



   The tax imposed under this article shall not apply or be imposed upon a
person organized and operated exclusively for charitable, religious or
educational purposes to the extent alcoholic liquor is purchased by such
person and used solely for the charitable, religious or educational purposes
of such person and is not resold for profit.



(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)



§ 5-14-11  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES FOR FAILURE TO COMPLY.



   The Liquor Control Commissioner may, in accordance with law, revoke or
suspend any license issued by him or her if he or she determines that the
owner of a licensed establishment has violated any of the provisions of this
article. No suspension or revocation hereunder shall release or discharge
said person from his or her civil liability for the payment or collection and
remittance of the tax, nor from prosecution for such offense. Any suspension
or revocation of a liquor license shall follow the procedures set forth in,
and otherwise comply with, the provisions of Chapter 11, Article 1 of this
code.



(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)



§ 5-14-12  DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF TAX.



   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this
article, including penalties, shall be revenues of the general corporate fund
of the village and shall be paid into the treasury of the village and shall
be credited to and deposited in the general corporate fund of the village.



(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)



§ 5-14-13  PENALTY.



   In addition to the suspension or revocation of licenses as hereinabove
provided, any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting, or refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this article, except when otherwise
specifically provided, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine
of not less than $100 nor more than $1,500. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.



(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)



CHAPTER 6: BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE CODES



      Article



         1.   BASIC BUILDING CODE



         2.   ELECTRICAL CODE



         3.   PLUMBING CODE



         4.   MECHANICAL CODE



         5.   FIRE CODE



         6.   RESIDENTIAL CODE



         7.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



         8.   ANTI-MONOTONY CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS



         9.   FLOOD PRONE AREAS



         10.   SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE



         11.   SIGN CODE



         12.   FENCE CODE



         13.   FEES AND SECURITIES FOR CONSTRUCTION AND NEW
DEVELOPMENT



         14.   COUNTYWIDE STORM WATER AND FLOOD PLAIN CODE



         15.   CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL SYSTEM



         16.   FUEL GAS CODE



         17.   ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE



ARTICLE 1:  BASIC BUILDING CODE



Section



   6-1-1   Adoption of Basic Building Code



§ 6-1-1  ADOPTION OF BASIC BUILDING CODE.



   The ICC International Building Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the
International Code Council Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Building
Code of the village for the control of buildings and structures as therein
provided, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, terms
of offenses thereunder of the ICC International Building Code, 2012 Edition,
are hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set out in
this article, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in other village ordinances which contain local amendments to
national codes. Three document copies of said Code, in accordance with 50
ILCS 220/2 and 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, have been available for public use,
inspection and examination for 30 days and one copy for permanent public use
in the office of the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 2004-06-37, passed 6-21-2004; Ord. 2009-05-20, passed 5-4-2009; Ord.
2014-02-07, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 2014-06-21, passed 6-2-2014)



ARTICLE 2:  ELECTRICAL CODE



Section



   6-2-1   Adoption of Electrical Code



§ 6-2-1  ADOPTION OF ELECTRICAL CODE.



   The NFPA 70, National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition, as published by
the National Fire Protection Association, be and is hereby adopted as the
Electrical Code of the village for the control and regulation of the
installation of electrical equipment within the village; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, conditions, terms and offenses thereunder of
NFPA 70, National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition, are hereby referred to,
adopted and made part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in other
village ordinances which contain local amendments to national codes.  Three
document copies of said Code, in accordance with 50 ILCS 220/2 and 65 ILCS
5/1-3-2, have been available for public use, inspection and examination for
30 days and one copy for permanent public use in the office of the Village
Clerk.



(Ord. 2004-06-37, passed 6-21-2004; Ord. 2009-05-20, passed 5-4-2009; Ord.
2014-02-07, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 2014-06-21, passed 6-2-2014)



ARTICLE 3:  PLUMBING CODE



Section



   6-3-1   Adoption of Plumbing Code



§ 6-3-1  ADOPTION OF PLUMBING CODE.



   Three document copies, in accordance with 50 ILCS 220/2, and 65 ILCS
5/1-3-2, have been available for public use, inspection and examination for
30 days and one copy for permanent public use in the office of the Village
Clerk, being marked and designated as the Illinois Plumbing Code, Current
Edition, as published by the Illinois Department of Public Health, be and is
hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the village for the control of
buildings and structures as therein provided, and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, conditions, terms and offenses thereunder of the
Illinois Plumbing Code, Current Edition, are hereby referred to, adopted and
made part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in other village
ordinances which contain local amendments to national codes.



(Ord. 2004-06-37, passed 6-21-2004; Ord. 2009-05-20, passed 5-4-2009; Ord.
2014-02-07, passed 2-18-2014)



ARTICLE 4:  MECHANICAL CODE



Section



   6-4-1   Adoption of Mechanical Code



§ 6-4-1  ADOPTION OF MECHANICAL CODE.



   The ICC International Mechanical Code, 2012 Edition, as published by
the International Code Council Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the
Mechanical Code of the village; for the control of buildings and structures
as therein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
conditions, terms or offenses thereunder of the ICC International Mechanical
Code, 2012 Edition, are hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as
if fully set out in this article, with additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in other village ordinances which contain local
amendments to national codes.  Three document copies of said Code, in
accordance with 50 ILCS 220/2 and 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, have been available for
public use, inspection and examination for 30 days and one copy for permanent
public use in the office of the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 2004-06-37, passed 6-21-2004; Ord. 2009-05-20, passed 5-4-2009; Ord.
2014-02-07, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 2014-06-21, passed 6-2-2014)



ARTICLE 5:  FIRE CODE



Section



   6-5-1   Adoption of Fire Code



§ 6-5-1  ADOPTION OF FIRE CODE.



   The ICC International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the
International Code Council Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of
the village, for the control of buildings and structures as therein provided;
and each and all regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of offenses
thereunder of the ICC International Fire Code, 2012 Edition, are hereby
adopted and made part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in other
village ordinances which contain local amendments to national codes.  Three
document copies of said Code, in accordance with 50 ILCS 220/2 and 65 ILCS
5/1-3-2, have been available for public use, inspection and examination for
30 days and one copy for permanent public use in the office of the Village
Clerk.



(Ord. 2004-06-37, passed 6-21-2004; Ord. 2009-05-20, passed 5-4-2009; Ord.
2014-02-07, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 2014-06-21, passed 6-2-2014)



ARTICLE 6:  RESIDENTIAL CODE



Section



   6-6-1   Adoption of Residential Code



§ 6-6-1  ADOPTION OF RESIDENTIAL CODE.



   The ICC International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family
Dwellings, 2012 Edition, as published by the International Code Council Inc.,
be and is hereby adopted as the Residential Code of the village, for the
control of buildings and structures as therein provided; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, conditions, terms of offenses thereunder of the
ICC International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2012
Edition, are hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set
out in this article, with additions, insertions deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in other village ordinances which contain local amendments to
national codes.  Three document copies of said Code, in accordance with 50
ILCS 220/2 and 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, have been available for public use,
inspection and examination for 30 days and one copy for permanent public use
in the office of the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 2004-06-37, passed 6-21-2004; Ord. 2009-05-20, passed 5-4-2009; Ord.
2014-02-07, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 2014-06-21, passed 6-2-2014)



ARTICLE 7:  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



Section



   6-7-1   Adoption of Property Maintenance Code



§ 6-7-1  ADOPTION OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.



   The ICC International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, as
published by the International Code Council Inc., be and is hereby adopted as
the Property Maintenance Code of the village for the control of buildings and
structures as therein provided, and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions, terms and offenses thereunder of the ICC
International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, are hereby referred
to, adopted and made part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in other
village ordinances which contain local amendments to national codes.  Three
document copies of said Code, in accordance with 50 ILCS 220/2 and 65 ILCS
5/1-3-2, have been available for public use, inspection and examination for
30 days and one copy for permanent public use in the office of the Village
Clerk.



(Ord. 2004-06-37, passed 6-21-2004; Ord. 2009-05-20, passed 5-4-2009; Ord.
2014-02-07, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 2014-06-21, passed 6-2-2014)



ARTICLE 8:  ANTI-MONOTONY CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS



Section



   6-8-1   Definitions



   6-8-2   Anti-monotony construction standards for one-family dwelling
units



   6-8-3   Administration



   6-8-4   Variances and appeals



§ 6-8-1  DEFINITIONS.



   The words contained in this article shall have the common meaning
ascribed to them or such meanings as are contained within other sections of
the code of ordinances of the village; provided, however, that, the following
words shall be interpreted to mean as follows.



   ADJACENT LOTS. Lots which adjoin or share side property lines or lots
in which, although separated by a street, front property lines overlap
another by more than 30%.



   STREETSCAPE. The facades of single-family dwellings on both sides of a
street. The length of a STREETSCAPE shall be limited to no more than 20 lots
per side of street. When more than 20 lots per street side exist without an
intervening cross street, the village shall, through one of its officers or
employees, establish those lots which shall constitute a separate
STREETSCAPE. In making that determination, the official shall consider that
configuration of lots which shall be most influenced and affected by adjacent
lots. Where possible, physical demarcations such as topography, road
configuration or landscaping shall be utilized in establishing the
appropriate STREETSCAPES. In general, the front orientation of the residence
will determine the applicable STREETSCAPE.



§ 6-8-2  ANTI-MONOTONY CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS FOR ONE-FAMILY DWELLING UNITS.



   (A)   Generally. No two single-family dwellings of similar front
elevation or facade shall be constructed or located on adjacent lots; nor
shall there be constructed or located single-family dwellings of similar
front elevation or facade constituting more than 20% of the single-family
dwellings in any streetscape. Front elevations or facades shall be deemed to
be similar when there is no substantial difference in roof lines; and no
substantial change in windows of either size, location or type; and either no
change in the color of materials used (rather than a change in shade), or no
substantial change in the kind of materials.



   (B)   Roof lines.



      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following
differences in the roof lines of single-family dwellings as seen from the
front of the dwelling shall be deemed sufficient to render buildings
containing such changes and built on adjacent lots to be dissimilar:



         (a)   Changing gable roofs to hip roofs;



         (b)   Changing hip roofs to gable roofs;



         (c)   Providing an intersecting gable roof on the main
gable roof, provided that the height of the intersection roof is at least 50%
of the height of the main roof;



         (d)   Providing an intersecting hip roof on the main hip
roof; provided that, the height of the intersecting hip roof is at least 50%
of the height of the main roof;



         (e)   Subject to review by the Building Official, a shed
roof, when used as a front porch roof for a minimum of 50% of the entire
width of the house, excluding area of garage;



         (f)   Subject to review by the Building Official, a
substantial difference in roof line shall be deemed to exist if the front
soffit is increased significantly and is combined with columns at least six
inches in width or other architectural features of a similar magnitude which
reach the roof line of the highest story;



         (g)   Rotating gable roofs 90 degrees on the building;
and



         (h)   On a tri-level residence or other building type
which has three independent major roof areas, the changing of two out of
three roof lines shall be acceptable as a substantial change. Acknowledging
certain design elements may prevent the changing of all three roof lines, it
is desired that the roofs with the greatest impact on the streetscape be
changed.



      (2)   The following changes shall not be deemed sufficient to
make adjacent structures dissimilar:



         (a)   Gable roof atop hip roof;



         (b)   Hip roof atop gable roof;



         (c)   Small gable or hip projections above windows;



         (d)   Window dormers;



         (e)   Change in soffit overhang or minor variation in
eave height; and



         (f)   Skylight and cupola.



   (C)   Windows.



      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following
differences in the size, location or type of windows shall be deemed
sufficient to render buildings containing such changes and built on adjacent
lots to be dissimilar:



         (a)   Changing from single windows to a multiple window
arrangement (ganged units);



         (b)   Changing from multiple window arrangement to
single window;



         (c)   Changing the type of windows (e.g., casement to
double hung); and



         (d)   Providing a bay or bow window in the area of the
predominant window.



      (2)   The following change shall not be deemed sufficient to
constitute a substantial change in windows:  the addition or subtraction of
muntin bars (dividing lights).



      (3)   Where, because of its size, location or design, one
window is the predominant window on the front elevation or facade, if the
size, location or type of that window is changed to render the dwelling
dissimilar, then no other window need be changed.



   (D)   Construction material or color.



      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following
differences in construction material between adjacent single-family dwellings
as seen from the front of the dwellings shall be deemed sufficient to render
buildings containing such changes and built on adjacent lots to be dissimilar.



         (a)   Four-inch exposure horizontal siding;



         (b)   Eight-inch exposure horizontal siding;



         (c)   Brick facing;



         (d)   Vertical siding;



         (e)   Stone facing; and



         (f)   Stucco/staccato board and trim.



      (2)   When materials are changed, the change must occur
throughout the front facade or elevation for a minimum of one story in height.



      (3)   Color change shall be made by significant changes in
adjacent colors. The change must be one of color rather than merely of the
shade.



§ 6-8-3  ADMINISTRATION.



   The provisions of this article shall initially be administered by the
Building Official of the village. The Building Official shall find
single-family dwellings to be similar or dissimilar utilizing the general
standards established herein. The examples of similarity or dissimilarity set
forth in this article are not intended to categorize all dwelling designs
which may be presented to the Building Official. To aid the Building Official
and applicants in the interpretation of the provisions of this article, the
Building Official may prepare illustrative drawings and written descriptions
of the manner in which those provisions have or will be administered.



§ 6-8-4  VARIANCES AND APPEALS.



   (A)   In the event a building permit is denied to any applicant by
reason of this article, he or she shall have the right to appeal to the
President and Board of Trustees of the village seeking either to overrule the
decision of the official who denied the permit or to seek a variance to the
provisions of this article. Upon such appeal being made, and after reasonable
notice to the applicant, a public hearing shall be held by the President and
Board of Trustees where evidence shall be received from both the applicant
and any other interested parties. After receiving and carefully considering
such evidence, the President and Board of Trustees may:



      (1)   Order the permit to be issued;



      (2)   Order the permit to be issued if modifications are made
in the design of the building to bring it into conformity with the provisions
of this article;



      (3)   Order the permit to be issued after granting a variance
to the provisions of this article; provided that, such variance shall be
limited to those deviations from that section as shall not affect the general
intent of providing streetscapes without monotonous architectural design; or



      (4)   Deny the petition of the applicant.



   (B)   Along with other factors to be considered by the Village Board
shall be whether or not the applicant only desires a variance for a single
structure where the request for the variance is filed or concurred in by an
individual who will actually reside within the single-family home for which
the variance is sought.



ARTICLE 9:  FLOOD PRONE AREAS



Section



   6-9-1   Purpose



   6-9-2   Definitions



   6-9-3   Duties of the Village Engineer and Community Development
Director



   6-9-4   Building regulation permits



   6-9-5   Design criteria



   6-9-6   Administration; responsibility



   6-9-7   Appeals of administrative decisions



   6-9-8   Variances



   6-9-9   Interpretation



   6-9-10   Disclaimer of liability



   6-9-11   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance, see Ch.
6, Art. 14



   Land management regulations, see Ch. 7, Art. 5



   Storm water detention, see Ch. 7, Art. 9



   Subdivisions, see Ch. 7, Art. 7



§ 6-9-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish certain special building
regulations regarding the development of areas prone to flooding. The
regulations set forth hereafter are intended to protect new buildings and
major improvements to existing buildings from flood damage and to protect
human life and health from the hazards of flooding.



(Ord 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 6-9-2  DEFINITIONS.



   This article shall utilize words in the manner defined in Chapter 7 of
this code (Subdivision Code).



(Ord 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 6-9-3 DUTIES OF THE VILLAGE ENGINEER AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.



   (A)   Village Engineer. The Village Engineer shall be responsible
for the general administration and enforcement of this article, including,
but not limited to, the following duties:



      (1)   Ensure that all development activities within the
special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) of the jurisdiction of the village meet
the requirements of this article.



      (2)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon
request about permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques.



      (3)   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted
by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources
(IDNR-OWR), for all development projects subject to § 7-7-6 of this code and
maintain a record of such authorization.



      (4)   Obtain from the landowner a record of the “as-built”
elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all buildings subject
to § 6-9-5 of this article.



      (5)   Obtain from the landowner a record of the engineer's
certificate and the “as-built” floodproofed elevation of all buildings
subject to § 6-9-5 of this article.



      (6)   Maintain a record of the “as-built” elevation of the
lowest floor (including basement) of all non-residential buildings subject to
§ 6-9-5 of this article.



      (7)   Maintain a record of the engineer's certificate and the
“as-built” floodproofed elevation of all non-residential buildings
subject to § 6-9-5 of this article.



      (8)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request
“as-built” elevation and floodproofing data for all non-residential
buildings constructed subject to this article.



      (9)   Inspect all development projects to ensure they comply
with the provisions of this article.



      (10)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management
agencies to improve base flood and floodway data and to improve the
administration of this article. Submit reports as required for the National
Flood Insurance Program.



      (11)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request
base flood data, SFHA maps, copies of federal or state permit documents and
floodproofing data for all buildings and “as-built” elevation data of all
non-residential buildings constructed subject to this article.



   (B)   Community Development Director. The Community Development
Director shall be responsible for the following duties including, but not
limited to:



      (1)   Maintain a record of the “as-built” elevation of the
lowest floor (including basement) of all residential buildings subject to §
6-9-5 of this article.



      (2)   Maintain a record of the engineer's certificate and the
“as-built” floodproofed elevation of all residential buildings subject to
§ 6-9-5 of this article.



      (3)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request
“as-built” elevation and floodproofing data for all residential buildings
constructed subject to this article.



(Ord 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 6-9-4  BUILDING REGULATION PERMITS.



   (A)   Development permits. Development permits, including but not
limited to land movement, storage of materials, mining, drilling, stream
crossings, bridges, roads, sanitary sewers, water mains, storm sewers, street
lights, sidewalks, subdivisions, etc, and stormwater management
certifications.



      (1)   No person, firm or corporation shall commence any
development in the SFHA without first obtaining a development permit or
stormwater management certification from the Village Engineer. The Village
Engineer shall not issue a development permit or stormwater management
certification if the proposed development does not meet the requirements of
this article and of Ch. 6, Art. 14 of this code.



      (2)   Application for a development permit or stormwater
management certification shall be made on a form provided by the Village
Engineer.



      (3)   The Village Engineer shall inform the applicant of any
and all other local, county, state and federal permits or stormwater
management certifications that may be required for this type of development
activity. The Building Official shall not issue the development permit or
stormwater management certification unless all required federal, state and
county permits or stormwater management certifications have been obtained.



      (4)   No development in the SFHA shall include locating or
storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids,
pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection
elevation (FPE) unless such materials are stored in a storage tank or
floodproofed building constructed according to the requirements of this
article.



   (B)   Building permits. Building permits are required for all
proposed construction, substantial improvements, or other development within
floodplain areas having special flood hazards. Such permits shall ensure that
all other necessary permits or stormwater management certifications have been
received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by
federal, state or county law. The building permit applications will be
reviewed to ensure that any proposed construction is:



      (1)   Designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement of the structure.



      (2)   Constructed with materials and utility equipment
resistant to flood damage, and



      (3)   Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damage. At the time of issuing a building permit, the following information
will be noted and recorded by the village:



         (a)   Elevation of the lowest floor (including basement).



         (b)   Where the elevation of the lowest floor is below
grade on one or more sides, the elevation of the floor immediately above.



         (c)   Where a structure has been floodproofed, the
elevation to which the structure was floodproofed.



(Ord 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 6-9-5 DESIGN CRITERIA.



   The following general design criteria shall apply to all new
construction and substantial improvements which may be authorized in
floodplains:



   (A)   Building protection. All buildings to be located in the SFHA
shall be protected from flood damage below the FPE in accordance with the
damage prevention requirements of Ch. 6, Art. 14 of this code.



   (B)   Building protection methods. This building protection
requirement may be met by any of the methods stipulated in Ch. 6, Art. 14 of
this code.



   (C)   As built elevation record. The Building Official shall
maintain a record of the “as built” elevation in USGS datum of a FEMA
referenced bench mark of the lowest floor of residential buildings as
provided by the landowner and certified by a registered surveyor. The
Building Official shall maintain the engineer's certificate and a record of
the “as built” elevation in USGS datum of a FEMA referenced bench mark to
which a residential building was floodproofed as provided by the landowner
and certified by a registered surveyor. Likewise the Village Engineer shall
maintain these aforementioned records for all non-residential buildings.



(Ord 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 6-9-6 ADMINISTRATION; RESPONSIBILITY.



   The administration of this article shall be the responsibility of the
Village Engineer. Wherever specific provisions of this article fall within
the purview of any other commission or agency of this village, responsibility
is hereby transferred, provided that:



   (A)   Variances. No variance shall be issued without the prior
concurrence of the Village Board.



   (B)   Special Use Permit. No special use permit shall be issued
without meeting all the provisions in Ch. 6, Art. 14 of this code and without
prior concurrence of the Village Board.



   (C)   Official maps and profiles. Responsibility for all changes to
official maps and profiles remains with the Village Board.



(Ord 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 6-9-7 APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS.



   Appeals to the decisions of any administrative body or official of this
village in the interpretation of this article may be made in writing to the
Village Board by any aggrieved person or governmental unit within 30 days of
approval or rejection. The decision of the Village Board shall be final.



(Ord 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 6-9-8 VARIANCES.



   The Village Board may grant variances from the regulatory standards of
this article in accordance with the following requirements:



   (A)   All variance requests. No variance shall be granted unless the
applicant for the variance can demonstrate that:



      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the
SFHA;



      (2)   A substantial economic hardship would result if the
variance were not granted;



      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;



      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health or
safety or creation of a nuisance;



      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood
protection, rescue or relief operations, policing or repairs to roads,
utilities or other public facilities; and



      (6)   The variance shall not prevent the issuance of any
permits or stormwater management certifications required by another
governmental body.



      (7)   The variance shall be in conformance with all
requirements of Article XVI Variances of the DuPage County Countywide
Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance as adopted in Ch. 6, Art. 14 of this
code.



   (B)   Variances to lower protection levels. In addition to the
requirements of division (A) above, a variance from the requirements of this
article that would result in a structure not being protected to the elevation
of the base flood shall also meet the following requirements:



      (1)   The Village Board, by a notation on the application,
notifies the applicant in writing that such construction below the base flood
level will increase the risks to life and property and that the applicant
proceeds with full knowledge of these risks;



      (2)   The Village Board notifies the applicant that if the
variance is issued, it is contingent upon the applicant obtaining approval
from other agencies having jurisdiction, when the variance violates the
requirements of such agencies;



      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with full knowledge
of these risks and that he or she will acknowledge in writing that he or she
assumes all risks and complete liability.



   (C)   “Wet floodproofed” building.  A variance from the
requirements of this article may be granted to permit a “wet
floodproofed” building, that is, a building to be intentionally flooded
during a flood, provided:



      (1)   No part of such a building below the FPE may be subject
to flood damage;



      (2)   The variance shall be conditioned on the contents being:



         (a)   Of materials resistant to flood damage; or



         (b)   Items declared “property not covered” by a
standard flood insurance policy of the National Flood Insurance Program.



      (3)   Any future alteration of the area below the FPE that
violates the conditions of the variance shall be deemed a violation of this
article. The applicant shall be informed by a notation on the application or
otherwise that any such alteration is considered a willful act to increase
flood damages and therefore will cause coverage by a standard flood insurance
policy to be suspended.



   (D)   Historical structures. Variances requested in connection with
the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on
the National Register of Historical Places or documented as worthy of
preservation by the state Department of Conservation may be granted using
criteria more permissive than the requirements of division (A) above.



(Ord 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 6-9-9 INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this article, the provisions
expressed herein shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall be
liberally construed in favor of the village, and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other powers by state statutes.



(Ord 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 6-9-10 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may
occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This
article does not imply that development either inside or outside of the SFHA
will be free from flooding or damage. This article nor any other provisions
of this code relating to flood prone areas does not create liability on the
part of the village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage
that results from reliance on this code or any administrative decision made
lawfully thereunder.



(Ord 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 6-9-11 PENALTY.



   Failure to obtain a permit or certification for development in the SFHA
or failure to comply with the requirements of this article or conditions of a
variance granted under this article shall be deemed to be a violation of this
article. The Building Official or Village Engineer may determine upon due
investigation that a violation of the minimum standards of this article
exist, and after such owner fails, after ten days notice, to correct his or
her property, the village may make application to the circuit court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this article or make such other order
as the court sees necessary to secure compliance with the article. Any person
who violates this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less
than $75 nor more than $750. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. Failure to
comply with the requirements of a permit, certification or conditions of a
variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this article. The
Building Official or Village Engineer shall inform the owner that any such
violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and,
therefore, may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be
suspended. Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.



(Ord 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



ARTICLE 10:  SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE



Section



   6-10-1    Adoption of Swimming Pool and Spa Code



§ 6-10-1  ADOPTION OF SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE.



   The ICC International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2012 Edition, as
published by the International Code Council Inc., be and is hereby adopted as
the Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the village for the control of buildings
and structures as therein provided, and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions, terms and offenses thereunder of the ICC
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2012 Edition, are hereby referred
to, adopted and made part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in other
village ordinances which contain local amendments to national codes.  Three
document copies of said Code, in accordance with 50 ILCS 220/2 and 65 ILCS
5/1-3-2, have been available for public use, inspection and examination for
30 days and one copy for permanent public use in the office of the Village
Clerk.



(Ord. 2014-06-21, passed 6-2-2014)



ARTICLE 11:  SIGN CODE



Section



   6-11-1   Purpose and findings



   6-11-2   Scope



   6-11-3   Interpretation



   6-11-4   Rules



   6-11-5   Limit on sign area



   6-11-6   Calculation of sign area



   6-11-7   Calculation of sign height



   6-11-8   Application for sign permits



   6-11-9   Special event signs



   6-11-10   Prohibited signs



   6-11-11   Placement of signs on lots



   6-11-12   Illumination of signs, changeable copy and neon lighting



   6-11-13   Safety and maintenance



   6-11-14   Obscenity prohibited



   6-11-15   Signs permitted in all districts



   6-11-16   Signs in Residential Zones (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4)



   6-11-17   Signs in the Business Zones (B-1, B-2, B-3)



   6-11-18   Signs in the Office Zone (B-4)



   6-11-19   Signs in the Industrial Zone (I)



   6-11-20   Nonconforming signs



   6-11-21   Variations



   6-11-22   Appeal jurisdiction



   6-11-23   Appointment of enforcing officer



   6-11-24   Duties of enforcing officer



   6-11-25   Sign Code violations



   6-11-26   Definitions



§ 6-11-1  PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.



   (A)   Purpose. This code is adopted for the following purposes:



      (1)   To promote and protect the public health, safety,
comfort, morals, convenience and general welfare of the residents of the
village;



      (2)   To enhance the physical appearance of the village by
preserving the scenic and natural beauty of the area;



      (3)   To promote the safety and recreational value of public
travel;



      (4)   To protect the public investment in streets and highways
by reducing sign or advertising distractions that may increase traffic
accidents;



      (5)   To assure compatibility of signs with surrounding land
uses;



      (6)   To enhance the economy of the village by promoting the
reasonable, orderly and effective display of signs and outdoor advertising,
and by avoiding the “canceling out” effect of conflicting adjacent signs;
and



      (7)   To permit the full on-site and off-site expression of
non-commercial advertising and information spreading.



   (B)   Findings. In adopting this code, the corporate authorities
make the following findings.



      (1)   Many of the vacant areas contained within the village
are devoted to agricultural use or are held as open spaces which provide
scenic vistas.



      (2)   The village possesses a zoning ordinance which provides
ample areas for commercial and industrial development so that the general
location of businesses or industries in such areas is well known and
diminishes the need for off-site commercial advertising.



      (3)   There exists within the village a number of present or
imminent alternatives to off-site commercial advertising, including a number
of local newspapers and cable television. In the past, there have existed
within the boundaries of the village very few off-site commercial signs. In
addition to other aesthetically pleasing aspects of the development of the
village, this pleasant and uncluttered streetscape existing generally both in
commercial and non-commercial areas of the village has encouraged
residential, industrial and commercial development. The corporate
authorities, as an expression of the views of the citizens of the community,
desire that such a beneficial and aesthetically pleasing environment with
very few exceptions in the total prohibition of off-site commercial
advertising which has previously existed by custom and usage continue through
regulation.



      (4)   The regulations contained within this article are the
minimum exercise of the police power required in order to accomplish the
purposes of this article.



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992)



§ 6-11-2  SCOPE.



   From and after the effective date of this article, the use of all signs
and portions of signs erected, altered with respect to height and area or
sign face, added to, or relocated in the village shall be in conformity with
the provisions of this article. Any existing sign not in conformity with the
regulations herein prescribed shall be regarded as non-conforming.



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992)



§ 6-11-3  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   In interpretation and application, the provisions of this
article shall be held to be an expression of the maximum allowable number and
size of signs which bring about the least potential conflict with surrounding
uses and which promote and improve physical appearance within the village.



   (B)   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this article
upon the control of signs are either more restrictive or less restrictive
than comparable conditions imposed by any provisions of this article or of
any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the
regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards or
requirements shall govern.



   (C)   This article is not intended to abrogate any easement,
covenant or any other private agreement; provided, that where the regulations
are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirement than such
easements, covenants or other private agreements, the requirements of this
article shall govern.



   (D)   When a sign type is not specifically listed in the sections
devoted to permitted signs, it shall be assumed that such signs are hereby
expressly prohibited. If it is determined by the Community Development
Director that such sign is similar to and not more objectionable than signs
listed, such signs may then be permitted.



   (E)   Gary Avenue and North Avenue Corridors. Signs placed on
properties located within the Gary Avenue and North Avenue Corridors must
comply with the regulations contained in § 16-5-6.



      (1)   Signage for new development shall be included in the
Gary Avenue or North Avenue Corridor Development Plans, and shall be subject
to review and approval by the Plan Commission in accordance with the
procedures defined in § 16-5-6(N).



      (2)   New or replacement ground signs and pole signs placed on
existing, developed properties shall be subject to review and approval by the
Plan Commission in accordance with the procedures defined in § 16-5-6(N).



      (3)   New or replacement wall signs placed on existing,
developed properties must meet the purpose and intent of the corridor
regulations, as determined by the Community Development Director, and review
by the Plan Commission shall not be required; however, the applicant may
appeal the decision of the Community Development Director in accordance with
§ 6-11-22.



      (4)   The changing of the face of existing signage shall not
be subject to the corridor regulations.



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 2011-04-11, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 6-11-4  RULES.



   The language set forth in the text of this article shall be interpreted
in accordance with the following rules of construction.



   (A)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and
words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the
plural the singular.



   (B)   The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary.



   (C)   The word “may” is permissive.



   (D)   All measured distances or standards shall be to the nearest
integer; if a fraction is one-half or less, the integer next below shall be
taken.



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992)



§ 6-11-5  LIMIT ON SIGN AREA.



   (A)   Sign area limit. Each premises shall be allowed three square
feet of signage per foot of frontage for the first 67 linear feet of frontage
on a dedicated street. An additional one and one-half square feet of signage
will be allowed per foot of frontage on a dedicated street in excess of 67
linear feet.



   (B)   Premises having frontage on more than one dedicated street.
These premises will be allowed signage for frontage on each street in
accordance with the above formula; however, the frontage will be considered
continuous and the signs facing each street must be in proportion to the
frontage on that street.



   (C)   Maximum sign area allowed. Seven hundred fifty square feet of
sign area will be the maximum allowed on any premises in any case, with the
following exceptions:



      (1)   Shopping centers or shopping plazas. The maximum
allowable signage shall be 10% per front facade of each unit within such
center or plaza, and ground or pole signs shall not be included within this
restriction; and



      (2)   The area of temporary signs shall not be included in the
calculation of the maximum sign area allowed.



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 2010-03-10, passed 3-15-2010; Ord.
2011-04-11, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 6-11-6  CALCULATION OF SIGN AREA.



   (A)   Sign area shall be measured using the area of the smallest
triangle, rectangle or circle which can wholly enclose the surface area of
the sign. In the event that individual letters or insignia of a wall sign are
attached directly to the wall and vary significantly in size, sign area may
be computed using not more than two triangles, rectangles or circles per word
or insignia.



   (B)   Additional requirements are as follows.



      (1)   Ground mounted signs (including, but not limited to,
ground signs, real estate signs, construction signs, directory signs and the
like). On a double faced sign, only one side of the sign shall be included in
the area calculations. If one side of a ground sign is larger than the other,
the larger of the two sides shall be used.



      (2)   Wall signs. Wall signs are limited to an area equal to
the percentage allowed per facade in each zoning classification. If there are
multiple signs per facade, the area calculation shall include the total of
each separate sign area. The wall space between separate signs shall not be
included in the calculation of total wall sign area.



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 2011-04-11, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 6-11-7  CALCULATION OF SIGN HEIGHT.



   Height of signs shall be measured to the highest point thereon, from
the crown of the street directly opposite the sign, or from the natural grade
level directly below the sign, whichever is higher.



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992)



§ 6-11-8  APPLICATION FOR SIGN PERMITS.



   Permits for signs shall be required as follows.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided for in this article, no person shall
hereafter erect, alter, position or relocate any permanent sign or temporary
sign without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Community Development
Department. Such permit shall be issued only when the sign complies with all
of the applicable provisions of this article. The fee for granting such a
permit shall be in accordance with Ch. 6, Art. 13, of this code.



   (B)   Any person desiring such a permit shall file application
therefor upon a form provided by the Community Development Department which
shall contain or have attached thereto the following information:



      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant;



      (2)   A map drawn to scale showing the location of the
building, structure or lot to which the sign is to be attached or erected,
and showing the position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings and
thoroughfares;



      (3)   A plan drawn to scale showing the design of the sign,
materials used and method of construction, and means of attachment to the
building or the ground;



      (4)   The name of the person, firm, corporation or association
erecting, altering or relocating such sign;



      (5)   Written consent of the owner of the land on which the
sign is to be erected, altered or relocated; and



      (6)   Any other information as the Community Development
Director shall require in order to show full compliance with this and all
other applicable ordinances of the village.



   (C)   Temporary signs.  The duration of display of temporary signs
shall be as follows:



      (1)   Residential marketing signs, on-site and off-site. 
Twelve months, renewable on a 12-month basis;



      (2)   Real estate signs.  Twelve months, renewable on a
12-month basis;



      (3)   Banners.  No more than four events per calendar year
nor more than four weeks per event, with a maximum of no more than eight
weeks per calendar year;



      (4)   Construction signs.  Twelve months, renewable on a
12-month basis;



      (5)   Special event signs.  See § 6-11-9; and



      (6)   Removal.  Temporary signs shall be removed upon
expiration of the permit, or at such time as the event or purpose of the sign
has ended, whichever is sooner.



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 93-01-12, passed 1-26-1993; Ord.
2011-04-11, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 6-11-9  SPECIAL EVENT SIGNS.



   (A)   Certain temporary signs and attention-getting devices as
defined in this section, and which may otherwise be prohibited, may be
permitted for promoting special community activities, special business
events, grand openings for businesses, activities of non-profit organizations
or the sale or lease of real property, and are subject to the provisions of
this section.



   (B)   All special event signage shall comply with the following:



      (1)   Special event signage shall be considered temporary, and
shall be subject to the durations as specified in this section;



      (2)   All special event signage must be properly anchored or
secured, and maintained in good condition. Banners must be securely affixed
to a building or to posts; and



      (3)   A building permit is required in accordance with §
6-11-8.



   (C)   All temporary ground signs and banners affixed to posts shall
comply with the following.



      (1)   Prior to any digging or the installation of any posts,
the property owner shall contact J.U.L.I.E. (Joint Utility Locating
Information for Excavators) and have the location of buried utilities marked
on the property.



      (2)   Posts shall be installed to a depth at least 30 inches
into the ground and shall remain perpendicular to the ground for the duration
of the display event. Posts or above-ground supports shall be removed at the
time that the temporary sign is removed.



      (3)   Temporary ground signs and banners shall be maintained
in good condition and shall remain securely affixed to the posts or
above-ground supports for the duration of the display event.



      (4)   Banners affixed to posts shall not be permitted to hang
loosely and shall maintain 18 inches of clearance above the ground.



   (D)   Temporary signs advertising special events of governmental
agencies, not-for-profit organizations or other non-commercial signs.



      (1)   On premises.  A maximum of one temporary ground sign or
banner sign may be installed per street frontage, not larger than 32 square
feet in area, and not more than six feet in height if a ground-mounted
sign.  Pennants, streamers and balloons shall also be permitted.  Such
signs may remain for a maximum of 30 days and must be removed upon the close
of the event.  A governmental agency or not-for-profit organization may
install temporary signs for four such events per calendar year.  All
temporary signs shall comply with the sign placement requirements contained
in § 6-11-11.



      (2)   Off premises.  Only governmental agencies shall be
permitted to install temporary special event signs on properties other than
the property upon which the special event is to take place.  Off premises
special event signs shall only be permitted as an element of the overall
signage for a special event which includes on premises signage.  Off
premises special event signs shall comply with the following:



         (a)   A maximum of eight temporary off-site banner signs
may be installed, not larger than 32 square feet in area and not more than
six feet in height, if a ground-mounted sign.  Such signs may remain for a
maximum of 30 days and must be removed upon the close of the event.  The
signs shall only be located on properties owned by the government agency
hosting the event, or upon properties owned by other governmental agencies
with the written permission of those agencies.



         (b)   Temporary directional signs may be installed, not
larger than six square feet in area and not more than four feet in height.
The directional signs shall be displayed for no more than four days preceding
the event and must be removed immediately upon the close of the event. 
Directional signs may be located within the public right-of-way or on private
property with the written consent of the property owner, and the placement of
such signs shall comply with § 6-11-11 (C).  The location and number of
temporary directional signs shall be subject to approval by the Community
Development Director or his or her designee.



   (E)   Temporary on-site regional promotion signs for residential
subdivisions.  A maximum of two temporary ground signs shall be permitted
per event, not larger than 32 square feet in area and not more than ten feet
in height, and shall be located only at entrances to the subdivision and in
compliance with § 6-11-11. Pennants, streamers and balloons shall also be
permitted. Banners shall be permitted, but must be securely affixed to a
building. All other signs listed in § 6-11-10 shall not be permitted. A
maximum of two promotional events may be held during each calendar year for a
maximum of 15 days each.



   (F)   Grand opening signs.  Grand opening signs shall be permitted
in the Business Zones (B-l, B-2, B-3), Office Zone (B-4) and Industrial Zone
(I) for a one-time grand opening event for a new business or for a business
new to a particular site in the village. All such signs shall be considered
temporary, shall be permitted for a maximum of one one-week period and shall
not count toward the time conditions placed on other temporary signs.



      (1)   Permitted signs. Grand opening signs may include
temporary ground signs, banners, pennants, streamers, balloons, inflatable
shapes and vehicle signs, subject to the restrictions as contained in this
section. All other types of signs listed in § 6-11-10 shall not be permitted.



      (2)   Placement. Grand opening signs must be located in
accordance with the sign placement requirements contained in § 6-11-11.
Every grand opening sign must be securely attached to a building, posts or
other stable means of support.



      (3)   Temporary signs and banners. One temporary ground sign
or banner may be installed per street frontage, not to exceed 32 square feet
in area. In addition to the temporary banner permitted under this section, no
more than one other temporary banner per frontage may be displayed at any one
time as permitted by § 6-11-8(C). Banners must be securely affixed to a
building, posts or other stable means of support, shall be maintained in good
condition, and shall not be permitted to hang loosely.



      (4)   Pennants, streamers and balloons. Pennants and ballons
may contain a message if so desired. Pennants, streamers and balloons must be
made of durable material, and must be attached to a suitable cord or cable
and securely fastened to buildings, poles and/or other stable means of
support on private property.



      (5)   Inflatable shapes. One inflatable figure or large
balloon shall be permitted per event, shall not exceed 25 feet in height as
determined in accordance with § 6-11-7, and shall be securely anchored.
Inflatables may contain a message if so desired.



      (6)   Vehicle signs. Pennants, streamers and balloons may be
attached to vehicles during the grand opening event. Such signs must be
securely anchored to the vehicles. Vehicles bearing such signs, and vehicles
bearing permanently affixed signs, must be located in accordance with the
sign placement requirements contained in § 6-11-11.



      (7)   Additional grand opening signage. Signage that is not
otherwise permitted by this article, but determined to be similar to signage
otherwise permitted herein, may be approved by the Community Development
Director.



   (G)   Business event signs.  Business event signs shall be
permitted in the Business Zones (B-1, B-2, B-3), Office Zone (B-4) and
Industrial Zone (I). All such signs shall be considered temporary, shall be
permitted for a maximum of two 15-day periods per year and shall not count
toward the time conditions placed on other temporary signs.



      (1)   Permitted signs. Business event signs may include
temporary ground signs, banners, pennants, streamers, balloons and vehicle
signs, subject to the restrictions as contained in this section. All other
types of signs listed in § 6-11-10 shall not be permitted.



      (2)   Placement. Business event signs must be located in
accordance with the sign placement requirements contained in § 6-11-11.
Every business event sign must be securely attached to a building, posts or
other stable means of support.



      (3)   Temporary signs and banners. One temporary ground sign
or banner may be installed per street frontage, not to exceed 32 square feet
in area. In addition to the temporary banner permitted under this section, no
more than one other temporary banner per frontage may be displayed at any one
time as permitted by § 6-11-8(C). Banners must be securely affixed to either
a building, posts or other stable means of support, shall be maintained in
good condition, and shall not be permitted to hang loosely.



      (4)   Pennants, streamers and balloons. Such signage may
contain a message if so desired. Pennants, streamers and/or balloons must be
made of durable material, and must be attached to suitable cord or cable and
securely fastened to buildings and/or poles on private property.



      (5)   Vehicle signs. Pennants, streamers and balloons may be
attached to vehicles during the event. Such signs must be securely anchored
to the vehicles. Vehicles bearing such signs, and vehicles bearing
permanently affixed signs, must be located in accordance with the sign
placement requirements contained in § 6-11-11.



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 93-01-12, passed 1-26-1993; Ord.
2011-04-11, passed 4-18-2011; Ord. 2014-04-15, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 6-11-10  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided for in this article, the following
signs are expressly prohibited:



      (1)   Off-premises advertising signs or billboards; (Note:
this prohibition relates to commercial signs only.)



      (2)   Moving, rotating or animated signs except traditional
barber poles not exceeding two feet in height and projecting not more than 12
inches from the building, utilized only to identify a hair cutting
establishment. In authorizing the latter exemption, the corporate authorities
find it in the public interest to retain this historic symbol of American
commerce;



      (3)   Searchlights;



      (4)   Illumination that is not steady and constant;



      (5)   Trailer-type portable (temporary) signs;



      (6)   “A” frame-type portable (temporary) signs;



      (7)   Pennants, streamers, balloons, inflatable shapes;



      (8)   Free-standing panels used to advertise products, prices
and services;



      (9)   Triangular, cube or “V” shaped signs;



      (10)   Vehicle signs, temporary: no signs, banners, pennants,
streamers or other removable, attention attracting devices shall be mounted
on vehicles, except for vehicles utilized in parades for which village
permits have been issued or as provided in § 6-11-9;



      (11)   Vehicle signs, permanent: no vehicles bearing
permanently affixed signs shall be parked on public right-of-way, public
property or private property where the apparent purpose is to advertise a
product or service or to direct attention to a business or activity located
on the same or another property and not being used for the purposes of
transporting persons or materials. All vehicles displaying permanently
affixed signs shall be currently licensed, operable, parked on the property
of the business owning or leasing the vehicle, and in the parking area
furthest from any street right-of-way, so as to minimize the effects of
additional signage on the property, except for vehicles actively in
transport, or in the specific act of receiving or delivering merchandise or
rendering a service;



   (B)   Signs not listed in §§ 6-11-15 through 6-11-19 shall be
deemed to be prohibited, even though such signs are not specifically listed
in division (A) above.



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 95-01-01, passed 1-3-1995; Ord.
2010-03-10, passed 3-15-2010; Ord. 2011-04-11, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 6-11-11  PLACEMENT OF SIGNS ON LOTS.



   No sign shall be placed closer than five feet to any lot line, with the
following exceptions:



   (A)   Pole signs. Shall be set back a minimum of 40 feet from any
street right-of-way line;



   (B)   Gasoline price signs. May be placed on the lot line where it
does not obstruct the view of traffic;



   (C)   Sight obstruction. No sign of any type shall be located within
the 25-foot sight triangle of a corner lot, unless the height of the sign is
no more than 30 inches above the crown of the adjacent road. In addition, no
sign shall be placed at any location on any lot in such a manner as to
obstruct the view of traffic; and



   (D)   Political campaign signs. May be placed on private property or
within the public right-of-way, except must not be located within the 25-foot
sight triangle or in such a manner as to obstruct the view of traffic. See §
6-11-15(B)(8).



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 2010-09-46, passed 9-7-2010; Ord.
2011-04-11, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 6-11-12  ILLUMINATION OF SIGNS, CHANGEABLE COPY AND NEON LIGHTING.



   (A)   Illumination. Illumination of all signs shall be diffused or
indirect and shall be so arranged that there will be no direct rays
reflecting into the public way or any lot on the perimeter of the premises on
which the signs are located.



      (1)   Exposed light bulbs, flashing, blinking or traveling and
similar illumination is not permitted.



      (2)   Direct lighting shall be allowed only on permanent
residential development signs, office complex directory signs, industrial
park identification and entry features and so long as direct rays do not
reflect into the public right-of-way or onto residential lots.



      (3)   Backlighting of awning or canopy signs shall be allowed
so long as direct rays do not reflect into the public right-of-way or onto
residential lots and no part of the illumination device is visible from the
right-of-way. Backlighting of awnings or canopies without signs shall be
allowed under the same conditions.



   (B)   Changeable copy. Changeable copy is allowed on permanent signs
in accordance with the following.



      (1)   One-third of the sign area must be permanent copy,
containing only the name and/or logo of the occupant. The permanent portion
of a changeable copy sign shall be the upper portion of the sign, except that
the permanent portion of a ground sign must be the street side of the sign if
the sign is split vertically. If the changeable copy sign is a wall sign and
is one of multiple signs on the same facade, then a permanent portion shall
not be required if the name and/or logo of the occupant is provided on
another wall sign on the same facade.



      (2)   The changeable copy must be electronically controlled or
protected from unauthorized changes with a protective covering or other means
of securing the sign.



      (3)   Changeable copy is allowed on wall signs, provided that
the sign does not exceed the overall wall coverage requirements as set forth
in the regulations for the zone in which the sign is located.



      (4)   Changeable copy is allowed on window signs, provided
that the sign does not exceed the overall window coverage requirements as set
forth in the regulations for the zone in which the sign is located.



      (5)   Changeable copy signs shall not be programmed to flash,
blink or pulsate or to display messages that, in the judgment of the
Community Development Director, may be likely to distract motor vehicle
traffic. Electronic copy cannot be changed more than once every three seconds.



   (C)   Neon. Exposed neon tubing displayed in any manner shall be
prohibited unless it is strictly limited to the following:



      (1)   In business, office and industrial zones,
“open/closed” and “hours of business” on ground signs of a business;
provided that, portion is no larger than six square feet and in compliance
with requirements for signs regulating on-premise traffic and parking; and



      (2)   Window signs in business, office and industrial zones,
and in compliance with the overall window coverage requirements as set forth
in § 6-11-15.



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 93-04-42, passed 4-13-1993; Ord.
2005-08-44, passed 8-1-2005; Ord. 2011-04-11, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 6-11-13  SAFETY AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Every sign and all parts thereof, including framework,
supports, background, anchors and wiring systems shall be constructed and
maintained in compliance with the Building, Electrical and Fire Protection
Codes of the village. Signs may not be painted directly on any surface of a
building, except windows or doors and in compliance with the overall window
coverage requirements as set forth in the regulations for the zone in which
the property is located.



   (B)   All signs and all parts thereof shall be kept in a good state
of repair and maintenance.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or lessee of a sign or the
owner or lessee of the premises where a sign is displayed to fail or neglect
to maintain a sign as set forth in this section.



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 93-01-12, passed 1-26-1993)



§ 6-11-14  OBSCENITY PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to display upon any sign or other
advertising structure any matter in writing or in picture, which, considered
as a whole, predominantly appeals to prurient interest, that is, a shameful
or morbid interest in nudity, sex or excretion, and goes substantially beyond
customary limits of candor in description or representation of such matters.



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992)



§ 6-11-15  SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS.



   Signs listed in this section are permitted in all zones and shall
conform with the requirements as stated below. Such signs shall also conform
with the general regulations, for example height, area, setback, clearance
and the like, for signs enumerated in the remainder of the article.



   (A)   Signs requiring a permit. The following signs shall be
permitted in all zoning districts, and shall require a sign permit.



      (1)   Banners. One temporary banner per street frontage per
event, not to exceed 32 square feet in area and securely affixed to a
building. Such signs shall be considered temporary. See § 6-11-8(C).



      (2)   Residential marketing signs, off-site. Residential
marketing signs, off-site, shall be allowed at not more than four off-site
locations within the village to call attention and give directions to the
development. The corporate authorities find that temporary, residential
marketing signs are the sole type of commercial sign to be permitted to be
located off-site. In making this determination, the corporate authorities
have considered, among other factors, the following:



         (a)   Residential developments unlike other commercial
operations within the village are not clustered in specific and readily
ascertainable sections of the village;



         (b)   The residential developments advertised in such
signs are frequently located off main roads and along roads under
construction;



         (c)   Unlike other commercial operations, potential
purchasers of residences or suppliers to such residential developments are
frequently non-repetitive customers. The corporate authorities have
determined that the placement of this sole type of off-site commercial sign
would assist rather than impede the flow of traffic and improve public safety
within the village; and



         (d)   Each such sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in
area and shall not have a total height of more then ten feet. Such signs must
have at least one-quarter mile separation from each other, and no such sign
shall be closer to an existing residence than 100 feet. Location and
construction shall be approved by the Plan Commission. Such signs shall be
considered temporary. See § 6-11-8(C).



      (3)   Placement of signs during road repairs. Whenever the
repair of a road should make the location of ingress or egress to structures
confusing to vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and it would be desirable to
permit temporary signs to be placed to assist the public in gaining access to
public or private property, the Community Development Director may issue
permits for temporary signs which enhance the ability of the public to
utilize the roadway system within the village, enhance safety and diminish
the adverse economic impact of the necessary roadway work for adjacent
property owners. Temporary signs may be permitted with a maximum size of 32
square feet and a maximum height of eight feet. The application shall specify
the specific location at which the sign or signs will be placed, and the
number of signs desired. The Community Development Director, in determining
whether a permit shall be issued, shall consider, among other matters, the
level of confusion caused by the roadwork, the number of persons likely to
need information or direction at the location, the terrain and the aesthetic
effect of the type and number of signs requested. Applicants desiring
permission to install a larger sign shall use the variation provisions in §
6-11-21. The permit granting the sign shall contain a termination date and it
shall be a violation of this article for such signs to be retained beyond the
date of termination. Extensions in the termination date may be granted in the
same manner as the permits are issued. Signs shall be exempt from the
required schedule of fees.



      (4)   Scoreboards. Scoreboards associated with a public or
private recreation facility, provided the such a scoreboard:



         (a)   Shall not exceed 20 feet in height or 250 square
feet in total area.



         (b)   Shall not display commercial advertising that is
visible from a public street.



         (c)   Shall otherwise comply with § 6-11-11 of this
article.



   (B)   Signs not requiring a permit. The following signs shall be
permitted in all districts, and shall not require a sign permit.



      (1)   Name and address plates. Such signs shall give only the
name and/or address of the occupant of the building, and must be
wall-mounted. For one- and two-family residential dwellings, such signs shall
not be more than one and-one-half square feet in area. For residential
buildings containing more than two dwelling units, and non-residential
buildings, such signs shall not be more than three square feet in area.



      (2)   Memorial signs or tablets. Such signs shall only denote
the date of erection of buildings, and be no larger than five square feet.



      (3)   No trespassing or beware of dog signs. For these signs
or other such signs regulating the use of a property, the allowable sign area
shall be not more than six square feet in business, office or industrial
zones, and not more than two square feet in residential zones.



      (4)   Signs erected by a governmental body. Includes signs
erected under the direction of such a body, such as traffic signs, railroad
crossing signs, safety signs, signs identifying public schools and
playgrounds and banner signs promoting the village. If the banner signs are
sponsored by another agency or business, then such banner signs shall contain
at least three-quarter copy promoting the government-sponsored activity or
program and no more than one-quarter copy dedicated to the sponsoring agency
or business. Sponsoring agency or business copy may contain sponsor’s name,
logo, motto, date established or other similar information but shall contain
no address, telephone, email or other contact information including
information related to the sale of products or services.



      (5)   Flags, pennants, or insignias. Include signs of any
government, or of any religious, charitable or fraternal organization. Such
flag, pennant or insignia shall be no larger than four feet by six feet in
size. Limited to a maximum of four flags, pennants or insignias per lot. All
flags, pennants or insignias on a lot shall represent different entities. Any
flag pole shall be constructed in accordance with current Village Building
Code.



      (6)   Logo flag of a company located on the premises. A
maximum of one per lot; provided that, it is flown with the American flag and
shall not be larger than that flag and, in no event shall be larger than four
feet by six feet. Any flag pole shall be constructed in accordance with
current village building code.



      (7)   Political campaign signs. May be located on private
property or within the public right-of-way in accordance with § 6-11-11.



         (a)   On private property, not to exceed 32 square feet
in area or six feet in height. Such signs placed on private property shall be
placed with the consent of the owner of the property only.



         (b)   In the public right-of-way, political signs shall
be considered temporary, may remain for a maximum of 45 days and must be
removed upon the close of the event or election. Political signs placed
within the public right-of-way shall not be located within the 25-foot sight
triangle. Any party placing signs in front of a private residence is advised
to receive permission of adjacent property owner.



      (8)   Seasonal decorations. Decorations shall be displayed for
not more than 45 days.



      (9)   Signs regulating on-premises traffic and parking. Signs
regulating on-premise traffic and parking, and signs denoting sections of a
building such as lavatory facilities, drive-up windows, public telephone
areas, employee entrances and the like, with a maximum area of six square
feet, bearing no commercial advertising, with a maximum height of six feet if
a ground sign, and located in such a manner so as not to obstruct the view of
traffic. Located below the eave line if a wall sign. Such signage may be
placed on canopies or awnings to facilitate the movement of traffic and when
such signage includes no commercial advertising, and is limited to one, six
square foot sign per canopy or awning. Wall signs, canopy signs and awning
signs with an area in excess of six square feet shall require a permit, and
must comply with the wall coverage requirements as set forth in the
regulations for the zone in which the sign is located. Commercial advertising
shall be allowed on directional signs when limited to single use buildings
and such signs adjacent to a dedicated right-of-way.



      (10)   Window signs. Such signs shall not cover more than 50%
of the total window area as defined herein. In business, office and
industrial zones, neon tubing may be used as window signage provided such
signage shall not constitute more than one-half of the allowed window
coverage. A neon border of not more than one inch in width may be permitted
around the perimeter of each window and shall be included in the neon area
calculations. Neon signage area calculations shall be as follows.



         (a)   Words, pictures, logos and other shapes shall be
measured in the same manner as any other type of window signage.



         (b)   Neon borders shall be measured by multiplying the
linear length of the neon border by one inch.



      (11)   Door lettering. Such signs shall not cover more than
25% of the total door area. Limited to name of business, address, hours of
operation, and any directional information.



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 93-01-12, passed 1-26-1993; Ord.
93-04-42, passed 4-13-1993; Ord. 94-05-44, passed 5-24-1994; Ord. 2004-06-32,
passed 6-7-2004; Ord. 2010-03-10, passed 3-15-2010; Ord. 2010-09-46, passed
9-7-2010; Ord. 2011-04-11, passed 4-18-2011; Ord. 2012-10-34, passed
10-15-2012)



§ 6-11-16  SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4).



   The following signs shall be permitted in the general residence zones.
All other signs shall be prohibited.



   (A)   All signs enumerated in § 6-11-15.



   (B)   Permanent residential development identification and entry
features. Permitted in association with principal entrances to single-family
developments of 40 acres in size and multi-family developments of 30 acres in
size, provided:



      (1)   A maximum of two per development may be permitted;



      (2)   The land area dedicated for the identification and entry
feature shall contain a minimum of 1,000 square feet and shall be
appropriately landscaped;



      (3)   Covenants providing for private ownership and
maintenance of both the land area and signage shall be furnished and recorded;



      (4)   Signage constructed as part of identification and entry
features may contain the name of the development, the development logo and
the name of the village. Such signs shall be located a minimum of 150 feet
from any proposed or existing buildings. Signs shall not exceed 36 square
feet in area and six feet in height;



      (5)   A landscaping plan shall be provided;



      (6)   The sign shall be constructed of masonry or metal
materials only; and



      (7)   A variation from the stated standards shall be approved
by the Plan Commission.



   (C)   Temporary residential marketing signs at major entrances to
planned unit developments or residential subdivisions. Not to exceed 64
square feet in area or ten feet in height, containing the name of the overall
development and the names of builders or units therein. Such signs shall be
considered temporary.



   (D)   Awning or canopy signs. Shall be considered permanent, are
permitted only on multi-family or non-residential structures, and are
permitted only as follows:



      (1)   Awning signs. These signs shall not project above the
highest point of the building, and shall only be permitted as follows:



         (a)   Coloring or striping shall be allowed, but shall
not be included as area of the signage;



         (b)   Signs shall be limited to an area no larger than
50% of the face of the awning; and



         (c)   The area of awning signs shall be included in the
wall sign area calculation for the facade of the building upon which the
awning is mounted and the total wall signage area shall be limited to a
maximum of 8% of the facade area.



      (2)   Canopy signs. These signs shall not project above the
highest point of the building, and shall only be permitted as follows:



         (a)   Coloring or striping shall be allowed, but shall
not be included as area of the signage;



         (b)   Signage shall be limited to an area no larger than
50% of the canopy face upon which the sign is mounted; and



         (c)   The area of canopy signage shall be included in
the wall sign area calculation for the facade of the building upon which the
canopy is mounted, and the total wall signage area shall be limited to a
maximum of 8% of the facade area.



   (E)   Identification signs, bulletin boards and community message
boards. Shall be considered permanent, are permitted only for non-residential
uses, and are permitted only as follows:



      (1)   Identification signs and bulletin boards. Permitted for
non-residential uses, for example churches, cemeteries, golf courses and
private non-profit recreational areas. Wall signage shall only be located on
the principal building on the property, shall be located on facades which
face a public street, and shall comply with the requirements of §
6-11-18(C). Ground signage shall be limited to one ground sign per street
frontage, and each such sign shall be limited to 32 square feet in area and
six feet in height. Bulletin boards must be used exclusively for
non-commercial announcements; and



      (2)   Community message boards. Permitted for public
institutions, on public property of more than one acre of land, not exceeding
96 square feet in area or eight feet in height.



   (F)   Signs not requiring a permit. The following signs are
permitted in the Residential Zones, shall not require a sign permit, and
shall not be counted when calculating the number of signs or square footage
on a premise. However, such signs shall conform with the general regulations,
for example height, area, setback, clearance and the like, for signs
enumerated in the remainder of the article.



      (1)   Name and address plates. See § 6-11-15(B).



      (2)   Construction signs, residential. One per lot, not
exceeding six feet in height and 16 square feet in area. Such signs shall be
removed upon completion of the project.



      (3)   Real estate signs, residential. One per street frontage,
not exceeding six square feet per side in sign area. Such signs shall be
removed within ten days after the premises or lot advertised has been sold,
rented or leased.



      (4)   Open house signs, residential. Professionally designed
and lettered open house directional signs not exceeding six square feet in
surface area per face and not exceeding four feet in overall height may be
placed within the public right-of-way under the following conditions.



         (a)   Signs may be in place on Saturdays and Sundays
only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.



         (b)   Signs must be free-standing, not attached to any
utility pole or structure nor any traffic control sign.



         (c)   No attention attracting devices such as pennants,
streamers, balloons, inflatable shapes, banners, flashing lights or other
illumination shall be attached to an open house sign or placed in the public
right-of-way.



         (d)   Each sign must have attached an adhesive label or
other means to identify the name, business address and business telephone
number of the person responsible for the placement and removal of each sign.



         (e)   A maximum of four signs for each house may be
placed in the public right-of-way.



         (f)   No sign greater than 30 inches in height shall be
placed within any portion of the 25 foot sight triangle as extended to the
street pavement on the triangles third (non-right-of-way) side. The triangle
is made up of the area of 25 feet from the point of intersection of two
street right-of-way lines forming a corner.



         (g)   No more than one sign directing the public in any
one direction shall be placed by the same company at a single corner of an
intersection.



      (5)   Garage sale signs. Garage sale direction signs not
exceeding six square feet in surface area per face and not exceeding four
feet in overall height may be placed within the public right-of-way under the
following conditions.



         (a)   Signs may be in place on Thursdays, Fridays,
Saturdays and Sundays only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.



         (b)   Signs must be free-standing, not attached to any
utility pole or structure nor any traffic control sign.



         (c)   No attention attracting devices such as pennants,
streamers, balloons, inflatable shapes, banners, flashing lights or other
illumination shall be attached to a garage sale sign or placed in the public
right-of-way.



         (d)   Each sign must have attached an adhesive label or
other means to identify the name and daytime telephone number of the person
responsible for the placement and removal of each sign.



         (e)   A maximum of four signs for each garage sale may
be placed in the public right-of-way.



         (f)   No sign greater than 30 inches in height shall be
placed within any portion of the 25 foot sight triangle as extended to the
street pavement on the triangles third (non-right-of-way) side. The triangle
is made up of the area 25 feet from the point of intersection of two street
right-of-way lines forming a corner.



         (g)   No more than one sign directing the public in any
one direction shall be placed at any intersection.



         (h)   No garage sale signs my be posted at the corners
of the intersection of Lies Road and Gary Avenue.



      (6)   Temporary residential model signs. One per model,
located adjacent to such model. These signs shall be considered temporary and
contain the name of the model and hours of operation. Each sign shall not
exceed six square feet in area and shall not exceed four feet in height.



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 93-01-15, passed 1-26-1993; Ord.
93-04-42, passed 4-13-1993; Ord. 2002-06-32, passed 6-17-2002; Ord.
2010-03-10, passed 3-15-2010; Ord. 2011-04-11, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 6-11-17  SIGNS IN THE BUSINESS ZONES (B-1, B-2, B-3).



   All signs are prohibited in the business zones, except for:



   (A)   All signs enumerated in § 6-11-15;



   (B)   Ground signs. All shall be considered permanent and are
permitted as follows: single use building and lot. One per street frontage,
not to exceed 72 square feet in area and six feet in height, except when a
sign is installed  directly adjacent to a property line along a road
right-of-way that equals or exceeds 200 feet in width, in which case the sign
is not to exceed ten feet in height.



   (C)   Pole or commercial identification signs. All shall be
considered permanent, shall be set back a minimum of 40 feet from any
property line, and are permitted as follows:



      (1)   Single use building and lot containing a minimum of
100,000 square feet, located on a ten acre or larger lot and in lieu of a
ground sign. One pole or commercial identification sign per street frontage,
not exceeding 160 square feet in area or 25 feet in height.



      (2)   Shopping center. One pole or commercial identification
sign per street frontage, not to exceed 160 square feet in area, or 25 feet
in height, provided that advertising displayed thereon shall be limited to
business, merchandise and services found within the shopping center, and/or
shall include the overall name of the shopping center. No individual business
or use within a shopping center may erect or maintain a pole or commercial
identification sign.



   (D)   Directory signs. No single business or use shall erect or
maintain a directory sign. All shall be considered permanent and are
permitted as follows.



      (1)   Combined use building and lot. One ground directory sign
per street frontage, not to exceed 72 square feet in area or six feet in
height, except when a sign is installed directly adjacent to a property line
along a road right-of-way that equals or exceeds 200 feet in width, in which
case the sign is not to exceed ten feet in height.



      (2)   Shopping plaza. One ground directory sign per street
frontage, not to exceed 96 square feet in area or six feet in height, except
when a sign is installed directly adjacent to a property line along a road
right-of-way that equals or exceeds 200 feet in width, in which case the sign
is not to exceed ten feet in height.



      (3)   Shopping center. One ground directory sign per street
frontage, not to exceed 120 square feet  in area or six feet in height,
except when a sign is installed directly adjacent to a property line along a
road right-of-way that equals or exceeds 200 feet in width, in which case the
sign is not to exceed ten feet in height.



   (E)   Wall signs. All shall be considered permanent and are
permitted as follows.



      (1)   All wall signs must not extend more than 12 inches from
the building wall, nor extend above the facade of a flat roof, nor extend
more than 20 feet above grade on a hip, gable, gambrel or any undefined roof,
provided the sign is below the uppermost portion of the roof top, and below
the uppermost portion of a mansard roof, but may be above the deck line.



      (2)   Such signs shall not be painted directly on the surface
of the walls or roof of a building.



      (3)   The total area of wall signage shall not exceed 10% of
the facade upon which the sign or signs are to be mounted.



      (4)   Shopping centers or shopping plazas. The maximum
allowable area of wall signage shall be 10% per front facade of each unit
within such center or plaza.



   (F)   Awning or canopy signs. Shall be considered permanent and are
permitted only as follows.



      (1)   Awning signs. These signs shall not project above the
highest point of the building, and shall only be permitted as follows.



         (a)   Coloring or striping shall be allowed, but shall
not be included as area of the signage.



         (b)   Signs shall be limited to an area no larger than
50% of the face of the awning.



         (c)   The area of awning signs shall be included in the
wall sign area calculation for the facade of the building upon which the
awning is mounted, and the total wall signage area shall be limited to a
maximum of 10% of the facade area.



      (2)   Canopy signs. These signs shall not project above the
highest point of the building, and shall only be permitted as follows.



         (a)   Coloring or striping shall be allowed, but shall
not be included as area of the signage.



         (b)   Signage shall be limited to an area no larger than
50% of the canopy face upon which the sign is mounted.



         (c)   The area of canopy signage shall be included in
the wall sign area calculation for the facade of the building upon which the
canopy is mounted, and the total wall signage area shall be limited to a
maximum of 10% of the facade area.



   (G)   Gasoline price signs. No more than one per street frontage,
with a maximum sign area of 24 square feet and a maximum height of six feet
if a ground-mounted sign, 15 feet if attached to light poles. May be placed
on the lot line where it does not obstruct the view of traffic.



   (H)   Menu boards. Limited to only those businesses classified as
restaurants having a drive-through window. Up to two such signs shall be
permitted per drive-through lane, with a maximum height of ten feet, a
maximum combined sign area of 80 square feet per lane, and a maximum
individual sign area of 60 square feet. Wall-mounted menu boards shall not be
included in the calculation of wall sign area.



   (I)   Temporary real estate signs. One ground sign per street
frontage, each sign not exceeding ten feet in height. The maximum area of
each sign shall be 20 square feet, except that the area of all such signs on
a lot shall be permitted to increase to a maximum of ten square feet of sign
area for each one acre of land area up to a maximum of 200 square feet of
sign area for each sign. Such signs shall be considered temporary.



   (J)   Temporary construction sign. One per street frontage, each
sign not exceeding eight feet in height and 32 square feet in area. Such
signs shall be considered temporary.



   (K)   Now hiring or help wanted temporary banners. One temporary
banner per street frontage, not to exceed 32 square feet in area and securely
affixed to a building. Such signs shall be considered temporary and shall be
permitted for the same duration and frequency as other temporary banners as
outlined in § 6-11-8(C). These banners shall not count toward time
conditions placed on other temporary banners. In addition to the temporary
banner permitted under this section, no more than one other permitted
temporary banner per street frontage may be displayed at any one time.



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 93-04-42, passed 4-13-1993; Ord.
95-01-01, passed 1-3-1995; Ord. 2010-03-10, passed 3-15-2010; Ord.
2011-04-11, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 6-11-18  SIGNS IN THE OFFICE ZONE (B-4).



   All signs are prohibited in the office zone, except for the following.



   (A)   All signs enumerated in § 6-11-15;



   (B)   Ground signs. All require a sign permit and are permitted as
follows: single use building and lot. One per street frontage, not to exceed
72 square feet in area or six feet in height, except when a sign is installed
directly adjacent to a property line along a road right-of-way that equals or
exceeds 200 feet in width, in which case the sign is not to exceed ten feet
in height.



   (C)   Wall signs. All shall be considered permanent and are
permitted as follows:



      (1)   All wall signs must not extend more than 12 inches from
the building wall, nor extend above the facade of a flat roof, nor extend
more than 20 feet above grade on a hip, gable, gambrel or any undefined roof,
provided the sign is below the uppermost portion of the roof top, and below
the uppermost portion of a mansard roof, but may be above the deck line.



      (2)   Such signs shall not be painted directly on the surface
of the walls or roof of a building.



      (3)   The total area of wall signage shall not exceed 8% of
the facade upon which the sign or signs are to be mounted.



   (D)   Directory signs. Wall directory signs shall be located below
the eave line of the building, and shall not be included in the 8% maximum
wall coverage requirement for wall signs in the office zone. All shall be
considered permanent and are permitted as follows:



      (1)   Single use building and lot. One wall directory sign,
not to exceed 30 square feet in area;



      (2)   Multi-tenant building on a single lot. One ground
directory sign per street frontage, not to exceed 72 square feet in area and
six feet in height, except when a sign is installed directly adjacent to a
property line along a road right-of-way that equals or exceeds 200 feet in
width, in which case the sign is not to exceed ten feet in height, and one
wall directory sign, not to exceed 30 square feet in area; and



      (3)   Office complex. One ground directory sign per street
frontage, with a maximum of 96 square feet in area and six feet in height.
Also, one ground directory sign per building, not to exceed 30 square feet in
area, and six feet in height, or one wall directory sign per building, not to
exceed 30 square feet in area.



   (E)   Awning or canopy signs. Shall be considered permanent and are
permitted only as follows.



      (1)   Awning signs. These signs shall not project above the
highest point of the building, and shall only be permitted as follows.



         (a)   Coloring or striping shall be allowed, but shall
not be included as area of the signage.



         (b)   Signs shall be limited to an area no larger than
50% of the face of the awning.



         (c)   The area of awning signs shall be included in the
wall sign area calculation for the facade of the building upon which the
awning is mounted and the total wall signage area shall be limited to a
maximum of 8% of the facade area.



      (2)   Canopy signs. These signs shall not project above the
highest point of the building, and shall only be permitted as follows.



         (a)   Coloring or striping shall be allowed, but shall
not be included as area of the signage.



         (b)   Signage shall be limited to an area no larger than
50% of the canopy face upon which the sign is mounted.



         (c)   The area of canopy signage shall be included in
the wall sign area calculation for the facade of the building upon which the
canopy is mounted, and the total wall signage area shall be limited to a
maximum of 8% of the facade area.



   (F)   Temporary real estate signs. One ground sign per street
frontage, each sign not exceeding ten feet in height. The maximum area of
each sign shall be 20 square feet, except that the area of all such signs on
a lot shall be permitted to increase to a maximum of ten square feet of sign
area per face for each one acre of land area up to a maximum of 200 square
feet of sign area for each sign. Such signs shall be considered temporary.



   (G)   Temporary construction sign. One per street frontage, each
sign not exceeding eight feet in height and 32 square feet in area. Such
signs shall be considered temporary.



   (H)   Now hiring or help wanted signs. One temporary ground or wall
sign per street frontage, not to exceed 12 square feet in area and six feet
in height when a ground sign. Such signs shall be considered temporary and
shall be permitted for the same duration and frequency as temporary banners
as outlined in § 6-11-8(C).



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 93-04-42, passed 4-13-1993; Ord.
95-01-01, passed 1-3-1995; Ord. 2006-11-67, passed 11-20-2006; Ord.
2011-04-11, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 6-11-19  SIGNS IN THE INDUSTRIAL ZONE (I).



   All signs are prohibited in the industrial zones, except for the
following:



   (A)   All signs enumerated in § 6-11-15;



   (B)   Ground signs. All shall be considered permanent and are
permitted as follows:



      (1)   Single use building on a lot less than ten acres in
area. One per street frontage, not to exceed 96 square feet in area, or ten
feet in height; and



      (2)   Single use building on a lot of ten acres or more in
area. One per street frontage, not to exceed 160 square feet in area, or ten
feet in height.



   (C)   Wall signs. All shall be considered permanent and are
permitted as follows.



      (1)   All wall signs must not extend more than 12 inches from
the building wall, nor extend above the facade of a flat roof, nor extend
more than 20 feet above grade on a hip, gable, gambrel or any undefined roof,
provided the sign is below the uppermost portion of the roof top, and below
the uppermost portion of a mansard roof, but may be above the deck line.



      (2)   Such signs shall not be painted directly on the surface
of the walls or roof of a building.



      (3)   The total area of wall signage shall not exceed 12% of
the facade upon which the sign or signs are to be mounted.



   (D)   Directory sign. Wall directory signs shall be located below
the eave line of the building and shall not be included in the 12% maximum
wall coverage requirement for wall signs in the industrial zone. All shall be
considered permanent and are permitted as follows:



      (1)   Single use building and lot. One wall directory sign,
not to exceed 30 square feet in area; and



      (2)   Multi-tenant building on a single lot. One ground
directory sign per street frontage, not to exceed 96 square feet in area, or
ten feet in height, and one wall directory sign, not to exceed 30 square feet
in area.



   (E)   Awning or canopy signs. Shall be considered permanent and are
permitted only as follows.



      (1)   Awning signs. These signs shall not project above the
highest point of the building, and shall only be permitted only as follows.



         (a)   Coloring or striping shall be allowed, but shall
not be included as area of the signage.



         (b)   Signs shall be limited to an area no larger than
50% of the face of the awning.



         (c)   The area of awning signs shall be included in the
wall sign area calculation for the facade of the building upon which the
awning is mounted, and the total wall signage area shall be limited to a
maximum of 12% of the facade area.



      (2)   Canopy signs. These signs shall not project above the
highest point of the building, and shall only be permitted as follows.



         (a)   Coloring or striping shall be allowed, but shall
not be included as area of the signage.



         (b)   Signage shall be limited to an area no larger than
50% of the canopy face upon which the sign is mounted.



         (c)   The area of canopy signage shall be included in
the wall sign area calculation for the facade of the building upon which the
canopy is mounted, and the total wall signage area shall be limited to a
maximum of 12% of the facade area.



   (F)   Industrial park identification and entry features. For
industrial park development of 40 acres or more in size, with a minimum of
five building sites, and which are subdivided into individual parcels with
separate uses. Such signs  shall be permitted with the following conditions:



      (1)   A maximum of two per development with no more than one
per principal entrance;



      (2)   The land area dedicated for the identification and entry
feature shall contain a minimum of 1,500 square feet and shall be
appropriately landscaped;



      (3)   Covenants providing for private ownership and
maintenance of both the land area and signage shall be furnished and recorded;



      (4)   Signage constructed as part of identification and entry
features shall contain the name of the development, and may contain the
developer’s name and/or logo. Such signs shall be allowed 16 square feet of
signage for the development’s first four acres. For developments larger
than four acres, an additional two square feet of signage will be allowed for
each acre in excess of four acres. Such signs shall not exceed a maximum of
96 square feet in area, eight feet in height, and shall be located a minimum
of 100 feet from any proposed or existing buildings;



      (5)   A landscaping plan shall be provided;



      (6)   The sign shall be constructed of masonry or metal
materials only, but may include illuminated lettering and symbols of other
materials; and



      (7)   A variation from the stated standards shall require
approval by the Plan Commission.



   (G)   Temporary real estate signs. One ground sign per street
frontage, each sign not exceeding ten feet in height. The maximum area of
each sign shall be 20 square feet, except that the area of all such signs on
a lot shall be permitted to increase to a maximum of ten square feet of
signage for each one acre of land area up to a maximum of 200 square feet of
sign area for each sign. Such signs shall be considered temporary.



   (H)   Temporary construction sign. One per street frontage, each
sign not exceeding eight feet in height and 32 square feet in area. Such
signs shall be considered temporary.



   (I)   Now hiring or help wanted signs. One temporary ground or wall
sign per street frontage, not to exceed 12 square feet in area and six feet
in height when a ground sign. Such signs shall be considered temporary and
shall be permitted for the same duration and frequency as temporary banners
as outlined in § 6-11-8(C).



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 93-04-42, passed 4-13-1993; Ord.
95-01-01, passed 1-3-1995; Ord. 2011-04-11, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 6-11-20  NONCONFORMING SIGNS.



   (A)   All permanent signs which are in existence at the time of
passage of this article, but which do not conform to one or more provision of
this code, shall be deemed to be a legal nonconforming use and may be
continued only as provided in this code.



   (B)   Any nonconforming sign rendered nonconforming by the
provisions of this code or any subsequent amendment to the sign code may be
continued in use for a period of six months after the effective date of that
amendment, provided there is no physical change other then necessary
maintenance and repair, except as otherwise permitted herein. Any
nonconforming sign which has not been removed or rendered conforming on or
before the date of its required abatement shall be deemed a nuisance and may
be abated as provided by law or ordinance. Provided, however, that any such
nonconforming sign, the value of which is less than $500, may be continued in
use for a period of only six months after the effective date of this
amendment. Provided further, that any owner of property containing a sign
which was granted a variation under prior versions of the sign regulations of
the village may only display signs upon their premises as shall be in
accordance with the terms of the variation granted. In the event that the
terms of the variation previously granted are not complied with, such signs
which were nonconforming uses pursuant to this comprehensive amendment shall
be discontinued immediately; the corporate authorities have found that the
expiration of the previously granted abatement period has expired.



   (C)   Any sign for which a permit has been lawfully granted prior to
the effective date of this or any subsequent amendment of the sign code and
which does not comply with the provisions of such amendment may nonetheless
be completed in accordance with the approved plans, provided construction of
the sign is started within 90 days after the passage of the ordinance
amendment, and is diligently prosecuted to completion.



   (D)   Whenever a nonconforming sign has been discontinued for a
period of six consecutive months, or whenever there is evident a clear intent
on the part of the owner to abandon a nonconforming sign, such sign shall
not, after being discontinued or abandoned, be re-established, and the sign
thereafter shall be in conformity with the regulations of this code.



   (E)   Normal maintenance of a nonconforming sign is permitted,
including necessary nonstructural repairs and incidental alterations which do
not extend or intensify the nonconforming features of the sign.



   (F)   No structural alteration, enlargement or extension shall be
made in a nonconforming sign, except in the following situations:



      (1)   When the alteration is required by law; and/or



      (2)   When the alteration will actually result in eliminating
the nonconforming use.



   (G)   If a nonconforming sign is damaged or destroyed by any means
to the extent of 50% or more of its replacement value at that time, the sign
can be rebuilt or used thereafter only for a conforming use and in compliance
with the provisions of the code. In the event the damage or destruction is
less than 50% of its replacement value, based upon prevailing costs, the sign
may then be restored to its original condition and the use may be continued
which existed at the time of such partial destruction until the nonconforming
sign is otherwise abated by the provisions of this code. In either event,
restoration or repair must be started within a period of six months from the
date of damage or destruction, and diligently prosecuted to completion.



   (H)   Existing temporary signs shall expire at the termination date
specified on the permit, but in no case later than six months from the date
of passage of this amendment. New temporary signs shall be allowed only in
conformance with the provisions contained in this amendment.



   (I)   The Community Development Director shall, after the passage of
this sign code, notify each owner of a nonconforming sign of the manner in
which such sign is not in compliance with this code. He or she shall further
notify each owner of a nonconforming sign that such sign must either be
brought into compliance with this code or removed prior to its required
abatement date.



   (J)   Conformity of sign setbacks reduced by the exercise of eminent
domain. Legal, permitted signs which do not meet the requirements of the
minimum setback which conformed to the provisions of this article but were
reduced in setback as a result of the exercise of eminent domain or the
threat of the exercise of eminent domain by a governmental body and which are
still located entirely upon private property and not in the 25-foot sight
triangle shall not be found to be nonconforming with the provisions of this
article as a result of the loss of such territory.



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 95-06-31, passed 6-19-1995; Ord.
2011-04-11, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 6-11-21  VARIATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Variations to this sign code may be granted by the
Zoning Board of Appeals after a public hearing and subject to the right of
the Village Board to reverse such a decision as hereinafter provided. The
Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider a request for a variation at a regular
or special meeting of the Board, but no published public notice of the
consideration of the request for a variation need be made. The Zoning Board
of Appeals shall report its decision regarding the granting or refusing of
the variation, in writing, to the Village Board.



      (2)   If the Village Board takes no action regarding the
decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals within 21 days after the receipt of
the written decision of the Board or the date of the first Village Board
meeting which occurs after receipt of the decision of the Zoning Board,
whichever event should occur later, the decision of the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall become final. The Village Board may, however, approve or
reverse the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals at any time within 21
days after the receipt of the decision of the Zoning Board. In the instances
in which the Village Board acts on the matter of variations of the Sign Code,
its decision shall be final.



   (B)   The Zoning Board of Appeals or the Village Board may require
from the applicants such sketches, drawings or photographs as shall be
necessary to indicate the present condition of the property or sign and the
condition of the property or sign after the variation is granted. The Zoning
Board of Appeals or the Village Board may impose reasonable restrictions or
conditions which the applicant shall be required to observe if the variation
is granted. In considering the application for variation, the Zoning Board of
Appeals and the Village Board shall consider any unique physical property of
the land involved, the available locations for adequate signing on the
property, the effect of the proposed sign on pedestrian and motor traffic,
the cost to the applicant of complying with the sign code as opposed to the
detriment, if any, to the public from the granting of the variation and the
general intent of the Sign Code.



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 2011-04-11, passed 4-18-2011)



§ 6-11-22  APPEAL JURISDICTION.



   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power to hear and rule on
appeals from any decision of the Community Development Director in enforcing
this article. Such appeals shall be filed in accordance with the appeal
provisions of the village’s Zoning Code.



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992)



§ 6-11-23  APPOINTMENT OF ENFORCING OFFICER.



   The Community Development Director shall enforce the provisions of this
article.



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992)



§ 6-11-24  DUTIES OF ENFORCING OFFICER.



   The Community Development Director shall examine all applications for
permits for erection of new signs which conform with the requirements of this
article, record and file all applications for permits with any accompanying
plans and documents, make a periodic inspection of all signs in the village,
and submit reports as directed by the Village Manager.



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992)



§ 6-11-25  SIGN CODE VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful to erect or display any sign prohibited by this
article. Any person violating any provision of this article, and any person
who knowingly permits or allows a violation of this article to occur on
property owned by or under the control of that person shall be fined not less
than $50, nor more than $750.



(Ord. 93-01-12, passed 1-26-1993)



§ 6-11-26  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   (A)   General definitions.



      AWNING. A roof-like framework supported entirely from the
exterior wall of a building, projecting more than 12 inches from the wall,
and covered with a protective material.



      CANOPY. A roof-like structure that either projects from the
exterior wall of a building and is affixed on one end to a support that is
attached to the ground, or that is detached from a building and is affixed
only to free-standing supports that are attached to the ground.



      CORNER LOT. A lot with property lines of two streets intersecting
on an angle.



      END UNITS. Those units within a shopping plaza/center which are
located on the end of a shopping strip, and the side of the building is
directly adjacent and parallel to a dedicated right-of-way.



      FACADE. The face or wall of a building as it is presented to
view; the apparent width and/or height of a building as viewed from streets,
driveways and parking lots. Minor changes in wall elevations do not
constitute the creation of additional FACADES.



      OFFICE COMPLEX. A business, service or medical development in
excess of one acre of land, improved with two or more buildings, also sharing
common parking areas and access drives.



      SHOPPING CENTER. A commercial development in excess of ten acres
of land improved with a structure of at least 50,000 square feet and
containing five or more distinct and separate retail businesses.



      SHOPPING PLAZA. A commercial development in excess of one acre of
land, improved with a structure containing three or more distinct and
separate retail businesses, also sharing common parking areas and access
drives.



      SIGHT TRIANGLE. A triangular area located at the point of
intersection of the two street rights-of-way lines along those rights-of-way
forming a corner lot. The length of each side of the sight triangle along the
rights-of-way lines is 25 feet.



      SIGN. Any structure, vehicle, device, or any part thereof, which
shall be used to identify, advertise or attract attention to any object,
product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, firm, group,
commodity, profession, enterprise, industry or business, and which shall
display or include any letter, word, model, number, banner, flag, pennant,
insignia, device or representation used as an announcement, direction or
advertisement, or which is intended to be seen by persons in the public
right-of-way. The definition of SIGN shall not, however, be interpreted as
prohibiting any structure, vehicle, device or any part thereof used for the
purpose of disseminating political, economic, social or philosophical ideas
entitled to constitutional protections as non-commercial speech. In any
instance where this code would purport to prohibit any such activity, the
conditions of this code shall be interpreted as permitting the utilization of
a sign to express such non-commercial speech subject to such other
limitations as are included in this code.



      SIGN AREA. Unless otherwise specified, the area of the smallest
triangle, rectangle or circle which can wholly enclose the surface area of
the sign. In the event that individual letters or insignia of a wall sign are
attached directly to the wall and vary significantly in size, SIGN AREA may
be computed using not more than two triangles, rectangles or circles per word
or insignia.



      SIGN FACE. The surface of a sign or sign board upon, against or
through which a message is displayed.



      WINDOW AREA. The glass area contiguous within any wall edge. For
purposes of measuring the area of window signage, any window located within a
door shall not be considered WINDOW AREA.



   (B)   Types of signs defined.



      ADVERTISING SIGN or BILLBOARD. A commercial ground, wall or
window sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service,
activity, idea, slogan or entertainment each of a commercial nature
conducted, sold, offered or available elsewhere than upon the property where
such sign is located or to which it is affixed.



      AWNING SIGN. A business or identification sign attached directly
to an awning, or weather resistant paint directly affixed to the awning
material.



      BANNER. A temporary sign made of cloth or similar material used
for a specific time period to advertise a short-term special or sale.



      BULLETIN BOARD. A sign upon which messages or notices may be
posted.



      BUSINESS SIGN. A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, activity, idea, slogan or entertainment conducted, sold,
offered or available upon the premises where such sign is located or to which
it is affixed.



      CANOPY SIGN. A business or identification sign attached directly
to a canopy, or weather resistant paint directly affixed to the canopy
material.



      COMMERCIAL SIGN or SIGN OF A COMMERCIAL NATURE. Any sign, the
content of which advertises or publicizes any business, commodity, service,
activity, idea, slogan or entertainment, conducted, sold, offered or
available by a person, corporation or entity which has as its goal or effect
the distribution of profits to the owners of the advertising enterprise. In
determining whether the form of advertising is commercial or non-commercial,
the officials of the village shall determine whether the text of such
advertising would be entitled to the protections accorded by the First
Amendment of the United States Constitution.



      COMMERCIAL IDENTIFICATION SIGN. Any business sign designed as a
monument sign for a commercial development and constructed of a similar
material and having a similar appearance as the commercial building on the
site that the sign is representing. The sign shall also have a height that is
at least two times the width.



      COMMUNITY MESSAGE BOARD. A sign upon which messages or notices of
interest to the community may be posted.



      CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A temporary sign used to advertise the company
building a structure or announcing a future occupant at a particular location.



      DIRECTORY SIGN. A permanent sign which contains only the overall
name of the building or development and lists those businesses or services
available within the building or development.



      GARAGE SALE SIGN. A temporary sign used to advertise the sale of
secondhand merchandise from the garage or driveway of a residence.



      GASOLINE PRICE SIGN. A sign advertising the price of gasoline for
sale on the same lot where the sign is located.



      GROUND SIGN. A permanent sign which is supported by a structure
securely anchored in the ground.



      IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign used to display and identify the name
of the individual, business, profession, organization or institution
occupying the premise upon which such sign is located.



      INDUSTRIAL PARK IDENTIFICATION AND ENTRY FEATURES. Those items
used to improve, identify, designate, label or demarcate the entrance(s) to
or exit(s) from an industrial park development.



      MENU BOARD. Any permanent sign used to display and identify those
products sold within that business.



      NON-COMMERCIAL SIGN or SIGN OF A NON-COMMERCIAL NATURE. Any sign,
the content of which relates to a social, philosophical or similar idea which
would be entitled to the protection of the First Amendment of the United
States Constitution.



      OPEN HOUSE SIGN, RESIDENTIAL. A temporary business sign placed
upon a property advertising that particular property is open for visual
inspection.



      PERMANENT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT IDENTIFICATION AND ENTRY
FEATURES. Those items used to improve, identify, designate, label or
demarcate the entrance(s) to or exit(s) from a residential development.



      PERMANENT SIGN. Any sign which is not a temporary sign.



      POLE SIGN. Any business sign having a supporting structure with a
size less than 25% of the total width of the sign with more than two feet of
clear space between the bottom of the face of the sign and the grade beneath
the sign face.



      POLITICAL CAMPAIGN SIGNS. Signs announcing candidates seeking
public office or expressing political issues for which an election will be
held.



      REAL ESTATE SIGN. A business sign placed upon a property
advertising that particular property for sale or for rent or for lease.



      SEASONAL DECORATIONS. Decorations customarily displayed on a
national, state, local or religious holiday. This shall not include any type
of signage either prohibited by this article or requiring a permit under this
article.



      TEMPORARY ON-SITE REGIONAL PROMOTION SIGNS FOR RESIDENTIAL
SUBDIVISIONS. A temporary ground sign used to identify participation in a
regional sale event for new residential construction and involving a
coalition of different subdivisions and builders.



      TEMPORARY RESIDENTIAL MODEL SIGN. A temporary ground sign placed
in front or adjacent to a model home for sale.



      TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign intended to be displayed for a limited
length of time.



      WALL SIGN. A business or identification sign attached directly to
a building wall.



      WINDOW SIGN. A temporary or permanent wall sign which is visible
to persons in the public right-of-way and which is placed within or on the
inside of a building and within one foot of a window.



(Ord. 92-06-75, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 93-01-12, passed 1-26-1993; Ord.
93-04-42, passed 4-13-1993; Ord. 2011-04-11, passed 4-18-2011)



ARTICLE 12:  FENCE CODE



Section



   6-12-1   Purposes of fencing



   6-12-2   Interpretation



   6-12-3   Rules of construction



   6-12-4   Definitions



   6-12-5   Permit required to erect or alter fence



   6-12-6   Permit fees



   6-12-7   Plans, survey and specifications



   6-12-8   General provisions



   6-12-9   Height of structural fences in Residential Zones



   6-12-10   Height of structural fences in Business Zones



   6-12-11   Height of structural fences in Industrial Zones



   6-12-12   Dog runs



   6-12-13   Non-conforming fences



   6-12-14   Variations



   6-12-15   General duties of Community Development Director



§ 6-12-1  PURPOSES OF FENCING.



   The purpose of a fence is to provide privacy, security, weather
control, aesthetic appearance, boundary definitions, utility (snow fences)
and the like for residential, commercial, industrial, public and quasi-public
land uses within the corporate area of the village.



§ 6-12-2  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   In the interpretation of this article, the rules and
definitions contained in this article shall be observed and applied, except
when the context clearly indicates otherwise.



   (B)   All provisions contained herein shall relate only to those
areas within the applicant’s property lines.



§ 6-12-3  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   The language set forth in the text of this article shall be interpreted
in accordance with the following rules of construction.



   (A)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future.



   (B)   Words in the singular number include the plural number, and
words in the plural number include the singular number.



   (C)   The phrase “used for” shall include the phrases
“arranged for”, “designed for”, “intended for”, “maintained
for” and “occupied for”.



   (D)   The word “shall” is mandatory.



   (E)   The word “may” is permissive.



   (F)   The words “yard” or “yards” when used in this article
shall refer to those yard requirements as are set forth in the village’s
Zoning Code.



§ 6-12-4  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FENCE, DECORATIVE. That type of fence which is essentially for
decorative purposes only, intended to contribute to the attractiveness of the
property, and not to act as a means of protection or confinement, or to
satisfy any other provision of this article.



   FENCE, DOG RUN. An area enclosed on all sides made of wood or metal for
the exclusive use of a dog.



   FENCE, MODEL HOME. A fence used by a residential home builder to help
control the circulation patterns of prospective home purchasers throughout
the model home area.



   FENCE, NATURAL. That type of fence which consists of natural growth,
such as shrubs, hedges, evergreens and the like, which are 30 inches or more
in height and are spaced less than ten feet apart.



   FENCE, PRIVACY. A structural fence constructed to screen a patio or
deck which does not extend more than five feet beyond the perimeter of the
patio or deck. The area enclosed by the PRIVACY FENCE shall be included in
the maximum lot coverage as regulated in the Zoning Code. An enclosure that
permits light and air to pass through more than 50% of its surface such as
lattice or railings shall not be considered a PRIVACY FENCE.



   FENCE, SPLIT RAIL. An undressed fence rail split lengthwise from a log
and set at either end into an upright post. A split rail fence may be either
decorative, in conformance with the requirements of § 6-12-8(D), or
structural, in conformance with the requirements of § 6-12-9.



   FENCE, STRUCTURAL. A structure which is a barrier and is used as a
means of protection or confinement, and which is made of manufactured
material, such as, but not limited to, wire mesh, chain link, wood or stone
material. This definition shall not include dog runs, natural fence or
decorative fence. All types of fences, except dog runs, natural fences and
decorative fences, shall be considered as a STRUCTURAL FENCE.



   FIRST FLOOR DECK. A deck or platform that is no higher than six feet
above the top of foundation of that section of the wall to which the deck is
being attached.



   SIGHT TRIANGLE. The portion of a lot within the triangular area formed
by two measurements 25 feet in length from the point of intersection of two
street right-of-way lines forming a corner lot, or 25 feet in length from the
point of intersection of a street right-of-way line and the edge of an
intersecting driveway.



(Ord. 2007-06-25, passed 6-18-2007)



§ 6-12-5  PERMIT REQUIRED TO ERECT OR ALTER FENCE.



   Unless otherwise provided, no structural fence or dog run shall be
erected or altered until a permit has been secured from the village by the
person desiring to erect or alter the structural fence or dog run. No permit
shall be required for the erection or alteration of a decorative fence, a
natural fence or a model home fence.



(Ord. 2007-06-25, passed 6-18-2007)



§ 6-12-6  PERMIT FEES.



   The fee for permits issued for the erection or alteration of structural
fences and dog runs shall be as are required in § 6-13-10 of this code.



(Ord. 2007-06-25, passed 6-18-2007)



§ 6-12-7  PLANS, SURVEY AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   A copy of the plat of survey for the property, the specifications
showing work to be done, and the location of proposed fence on the property
must be submitted with each application for a building permit.



(Ord. 2007-06-25, passed 6-18-2007)



§ 6-12-8  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   No structural fence shall be allowed on any part of a required
or actual front yard or side yard adjoining a street, except as provided in
this article.



   (B)   All structural, decorative and natural fence, including all
posts, bases and other structural parts, shall be located completely within
the boundaries of the lot on which the fence is located. No fence shall be
located closer than 12 inches to a public sidewalk.



   (C)   Model home fences may be located in required front yard or
side yards adjoining a street, shall be no more than 36 inches in height, and
shall not be located within a sight triangle or in any street rights-of-way.
Model home fences shall only be used to help control the circulation patterns
of prospective home purchasers throughout the model home area. Conversion of
a model home to a residence shall require any existing fences on the property
which do not comply with the applicable regulations of this article to be
removed prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued for the residence.



   (D)   Natural and/or decorative fences may be allowed anywhere in
the required front yard and/or side yard adjoining the street, subject to the
following provisions.



      (1)   No natural fence or decorative fence located in a front
yard shall be oriented parallel to the street if designed in any manner which
causes the fence to extend across more than one-third of any street frontage,
unless specifically permitted in this article.



      (2)   All natural fences must be wholly within the property
lines.



      (3)   No natural fence located in a front yard or side yard
adjoining a street may be located closer than ten feet from the curb or
within a sight triangle.



      (4)   Decorative fence located in a front yard shall be no
more than 36 inches in height, shall be at least 50% open space, and shall in
no way interfere with vision.



      (5)   Decorative fence located in a side yard adjoining a
street shall be no more than 48 inches in height, shall be at least 50% open
space, and shall in no way interfere with vision.



   (E)   Structural fence material shall consist of one of the
following:



      (1)   Wood, chemically treated or naturally resistant to decay;



      (2)   Metal, not less than 11 gauge;



      (3)   Concrete;



      (4)   Masonry;



      (5)   Plastic;



      (6)   Wood composites; and



      (7)   Use of any other materials must be as approved by the
Community Development Director.



   (F)   Structural fences shall be designed and constructed to resist
a horizontal wind pressure of not less than 35 pounds per square foot, in
addition to all other forces to which they may be subjected. Fences that are
leaning at an angle of 15 degrees or greater when measured from vertical are
considered dangerous and shall be unlawful.



   (G)   Structural fences shall be erected so that the posts and all
other supporting members face to the owner’s property. The rough part of a
fence shall face the owner’s property. This restriction shall not apply in
the case of a fence erected on a residential property which abuts a
commercial or industrial lot. Chain link fabric shall be installed with the
barbed end facing down.



   (H)   Fire hydrants shall not be blocked by any fence or bushes.



   (I)   Fences shall not be placed closer than 18 inches from an
underground utility access structure or drainage structure, or 18 inches from
a telephone, electric, cable television or gas pedestal, or in any manner
that would interfere with the maintenance for these utilities. Fences shall
not be placed in such a way as to block access to underground utility access
structures, or to inhibit the function of storm drainage structures.



   (J)   The bottom of fences located in a drainage swale or a drainage
easement shall be no less than two inches above finished grade.



   (K)   The use of barbed wire is prohibited except under the
following conditions.



      (1)   Barbed wire shall be permitted in the I Industrial
Zoning District only.



      (2)   Barbed wire shall be limited to a maximum height of one
foot, and a maximum of three strands of wire. The total height of the fence
shall be as specified in § 6-12-11, and the barbed wire shall not be
included in the determination of fence height.



      (3)   Barbed wire may be permitted in other districts by
variation from the Zoning Board of Appeals as provided in the village’s
Zoning Code after a public hearing, if the Board finds that such type of
protective barrier is required for the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the village.



   (L)   The use of electrically-charged fences is prohibited, except
for underground “invisible” fences for dogs.



   (M)   No structural or natural fence located in a front yard or side
yard adjoining a street shall be allowed within a sight triangle.



   (N)   Height tolerance: the fence heights as specified in this
article shall be the minimum or maximum dimension plus or minus three inches.
Fence posts and decorative post caps shall not be included in the
determination of fence height.



(Ord. 98-07-50, passed 7-6-1998; Ord. 2007-06-25, passed 6-18-2007; Ord.
2009-08-38, passed 8-3-2009)



§ 6-12-9  HEIGHT OF STRUCTURAL FENCES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES.



   (A)   The height of a structural fence shall be measured from the
average ground level of both sides of the fence.



   (B)   The height of a structural fence shall not exceed five feet
except as permitted under divisions (D) and (E) herein.



   (C)   Fences adjacent to streets: a structural fence may be erected
within a rear yard and/or a side yard adjoining a street under the following
conditions.



      (1)   A structural fence erected adjacent and parallel to any
street, other than an arterial street as designated in the ordinances of the
village, shall have a height not to exceed five feet. The fence shall be
located adjacent and parallel to the rear yard lot line, and shall not extend
into a side yard adjoining a street except as allowed in division (D)(3)
through (D)(6) herein.



      (2)   A structural fence erected adjacent and parallel to an
arterial street, as designated in the ordinances of the village, shall have a
height not to exceed six feet. The fence shall be located adjacent and
parallel to the rear or side yard lot line adjoining the arterial street.



      (3)   In the case of a corner lot in which the rear lot line
of the rear yard abuts the side lot line of the rear yard of an adjacent
interior through lot (Figure 1), a structural fence may be erected in the
side yard adjoining a street within the area between the rear lot line and
the rear of the dwelling unit. If the only rear access door to the house is
located facing the side yard adjoining a street, the fence may extend along
the side of the house to a point not more than three feet past the access
door.







 



   Figure 1



      (4)   In the case of a corner lot in which the rear lot line
of the rear yard abuts the rear lot line of the rear yard of an adjacent
corner lot (Figure 2), a structural fence may be erected in the side yard
adjoining a street within the area between the rear lot line and the rear of
the dwelling unit. If the only rear access door to the house is located
facing the side yard adjoining a street, the fence may extend along the side
of the house to a point not more than three feet past the access door.







   Figure 2



      (5)   In the case of a corner lot in which the rear lot line
of the rear yard abuts a public right-of-way, or a lot line of any lot,
public or private, other than a single-family residential lot (Figure 3), a
structural fence may be erected in the side yard adjoining a street within
the area between the rear property line and the rear of the dwelling unit. If
the only rear access door to the house is located facing the side yard
adjoining a street, the fence may extend along the side of the house to a
point not more than three feet past the access door.







   Figure 3



      (6)   In the case of a corner lot in which the rear lot line
of the rear yard abuts the side lot line of the front yard of an adjacent
residential interior lot (Figure 4), a structural fence may be erected in the
side yard adjoining a street within the area between the rear lot line and
the rear of the dwelling unit, provided the fence is placed no nearer to the
right-of-way/property line than the required setback for a side yard
adjoining a street for the zoning district or planned unit development, as
applicable, in which the lot is located. If the only rear access door to the
house is located facing the side yard adjoining a street, the fence may
extend along the side of the house to a point not more than three feet past
the access door and may encroach no more than five feet into this required
setback. The fence setback shall increase back to the required setback at a
point no greater than five feet past the rear of the dwelling unit into the
rear yard.







   Figure 4



   (D)   Structural fences higher than five feet in residential
districts.



      (1)   A structural fence may be erected to a height of six
feet along a rear or side yard lot line of a single family residential
district which abuts a multi-family district property line. Attached single
family units are not multi-family.



      (2)   Residential use adjacent to a business or industrial
use. A structural fence may be erected at a height not to exceed seven feet
adjacent and parallel to a rear or side yard lot line of a property in a
residential zoning district which separates such property from a property in
a business or industrial zoning district, or from a property being used for a
non-conforming use which is permitted in only a business or industrial
district.



      (3)   Residential use adjacent to railroad right-of-way. A
structural fence may be erected at a height not to exceed seven feet adjacent
and parallel to a rear or side yard lot line of a property in a residential
zoning district along a railroad right-of-way.



      (4)   Adjacent to an arterial street. A structural fence may
be erected at a height not to exceed six feet adjacent and parallel to a rear
or side yard lot line of a property in a residential zoning district along a
street which has been designated as an arterial street in the ordinances of
the village.



      (5)   Single-family use adjacent to multiple-family use. A
structural fence may be erected at a height not to exceed six feet along a
rear or side yard lot line of a property in a single-family residential
district which abuts a multiple-family district property line. Attached
single-family units do not constitute a multiple-family use.



      (6)   Single-family use adjacent to a utility use. A
structural fence may be erected at a height equal to six feet along a rear or
side yard lot line of a property in a single-family residential district
which abuts a lot line of a parcel of property improved with a major utility
structure and is not used for dwelling purposes.



      (7)   Single-family use adjacent to a non-residential use. A
structural fence may be erected at a height not to exceed six feet along a
rear or side yard lot line of a property in a single-family residential
district which abuts a lot line of a property improved with a habitable
building or structure that is not used for dwelling purposes (such as
schools, churches, community centers, public buildings, etc.).



      (8)   Single-family use adjacent to a public recreational use.
A structural fence may be erected at a height not to exceed six feet along a
rear or side yard line of a property in a single-family residential district
which abuts a lot line of a property that is not used for dwelling purposes
and is improved with, and has a principal use of, a public recreational use
such as, but not limited to, a swimming pool, tennis courts, basketball
courts, golf course, driving range or mini-golf facility.



      (9)   Single-family use adjacent to public park and/or storm
water management facilities. A structural fence may be erected at a height
not to exceed six feet along a rear or side yard lot line of a property in a
single-family residential district which abuts a lot line of a property that
is not used for dwelling purposes and is specifically dedicated for park uses
or storm water detention/retention use, or a combination thereof. This shall
not include land used solely for pathways, sidewalks or other pedestrian or
bicycle paths.



      (10)   Garbage container enclosures. A structural fence may be
erected at a height not to exceed six feet to enclose a garbage container
area in a multiple-family residential property.



   (E)   Enclosures for athletic facilities, public and private.



      (1)   Swimming pools. All swimming pools, hydromassage, spa
and hot tubs shall be completely enclosed by a fence surrounding either the
rear yard or the immediate pool area, sufficient to make such body of water
inaccessible to small children. Such enclosure, including gates therein, must
be not less than four feet above the underlying ground or surface surrounding
the pool, hydromassage, spa or hot tub. All gates must be self-closing and
self-latching with latches placed four feet above the underlying ground or
otherwise made inaccessible from the outside to small children. A pool cover
or other protective device approved by the Community Development Director, or
his or her designee, may be used so long as the degree of protection afforded
by the substituted devices or structures is not less than the protection
afforded by the enclosure, gate and latch described herein. Where an
aboveground pool is equipped with a self-contained fence around the entire
top of the pool area and the top of this fence is four feet or more in height
above grade, the intent of this section shall be met. Access to such pool
shall be made by a removable, raisable or retractable ladder.



      (2)   Tennis courts. Tennis courts may be totally enclosed
with an open-type fence. The height of the fence shall not exceed 12 feet or
conform to the requirements of the United States Lawn Tennis Association,
whichever is lower.



      (3)   Other facilities. All other fence-type enclosures for
athletic facilities shall be approved by the Plan Commission, after a review
of a site plan of the proposed improvement and the surrounding area.



(Ord. 94-10-87, passed 10-17-1994; Ord. 96-09-62, passed 9-3-1996; Ord.
2007-06-25, passed 6-18-2007)



§ 6-12-10  HEIGHT OF STRUCTURAL FENCES IN BUSINESS ZONES.



   (A)   The height of a structural fence shall be measured from the
average ground level of both sides of the fence.



   (B)   The height of a structural fence shall not exceed seven feet.



§ 6-12-11  HEIGHT OF STRUCTURAL FENCES IN INDUSTRIAL ZONES.



   (A)   The height of a structural fence shall be measured from the
average ground level of both sides of the fence.



   (B)   The height of a structural fence shall not exceed seven feet.



   (C)   If barbed wire is added to a structural fence, it shall comply
with the requirements of § 6-12-8(K), and shall not be included in the
determination of fence height.



(Ord. 2007-06-25, passed 6-18-2007)



§ 6-12-12  DOG RUNS.



   (A)   Maximum area: there shall be no maximum area for a dog run,
except under the following circumstances.



      (1)   Any dog run with any type of a cover over the top shall
be limited to a maximum area of 100 square feet.



      (2)   A dog run constructed to a height greater than five feet
in accordance with division (D) herein shall be limited to a maximum area of
100 square feet.



   (B)   Dog runs shall be permitted in a required rear yard only with
the approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals through a public hearing. The
Zoning Board of Appeals shall review the location with respect to its effect
on surrounding residences.



   (C)   Dog runs shall not be permitted in any side yard or front yard.



   (D)   The height of a dog run shall be as permitted within the
zoning district for structural fence unless it is constructed entirely of
chain link, in which case the height of the dog run may be up to eight feet.



   (E)   Dog runs shall follow the other applicable regulations for
fences within the zoning district.



   (F)   The area within a dog run enclosure may be paved.



   (G)   A dog run constructed for the purpose of providing a secure
enclosure for a dangerous, vicious or ferocious dog shall conform with the
requirements of § 9-3-11 of the village code.



(Ord. 94-10-87, passed 10-17-1994; Ord. 2007-06-25, passed 6-18-2007)



§ 6-12-13  NON-CONFORMING FENCES.



   All permanent fences which are in existence at the time of passage of
this article or revisions thereto, but which do not conform to one or more
applicable provisions of this article at the time of passage, shall be
allowed to remain until such time as said fences are damaged or removed. If
repaired or replaced, that portion or portions of the fence shall be made to
comply with the requirements of this article.



(Ord. 2007-06-25, passed 6-18-2007)



§ 6-12-14  VARIATIONS.



   (A)   The Zoning Board of Appeals may, after a public hearing and
with the limitation hereinafter set forth, vary the provisions of this
article in cases in which there are, by reason of an exceptional situation,
topography, surroundings or conditions of a specific piece of property, or by
reason of exceptional narrowness or shallowness, difficulties or particular
hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter thereof; provided that,
such variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to
adjacent property or endanger the public safety, or unreasonably diminish or
impair established property values within the surrounding area, or in any
other aspect impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals or welfare of
the inhabitants of the village.



   (B)   A written petition for a variation under this article shall be
filed in the Community Development Department upon such forms as may be
prescribed by the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Community Development Director
shall give written notice of the filing of such petition to the owners of all
contiguous property and also to the owners of all properties across a street,
alley, easement (public or private), of any type, immediately opposite the
subject property. Such notice shall show the date of the filing of the
petition, a description of the type of fence and the nature of the variation
requested. The public hearing may not be held sooner than 15 days from the
date of mailing or other delivery of such notice.



(Ord. 2007-06-25, passed 6-18-2007)



§ 6-12-15  GENERAL DUTIES OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.



   (A)   It is made the duty of the Community Development Director to
exercise supervision over all fences erected, altered, constructed or
maintained, and to cause inspection by inspectors in his or her department of
all fences to be made. Whenever it shall appear to the inspector that any
such fence or any part thereof has been erected in violation of this article
or of any other ordinance of the village, or is in an unsafe condition, or
has become unstable or insecure, or is in such a condition as to be a menace
to the safety or health of the public, he or she shall thereupon issue or
cause to be issued a notice in writing to the owner of such fence, or to the
person maintaining the same, or to the owner of the property upon which the
fence is placed, informing such person, firm or corporation of the violation
of this article and the dangerous condition of such fence, and directing him
or her to make such alterations or repairs thereto and to do such acts or
things as are necessary or advisable to cause such fence to be brought into a
safe, substantial and secure condition, and to make the same comply with the
requirements of this article, within such reasonable time as may be stated in
such notice. Any and all fences installed or maintained in violation of this
article, or any of the clauses or provisions of the same, or in violation of
any of the laws of the village or the state are declared to be public
nuisance and subject to treatment and abatement as such. Any such fence so
erected or maintained contrary to law shall be abated as a common nuisance.



   (B)   In addition to the declaration that a fence has become a
nuisance under the provisions of this article, any person, firm or
corporation who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined in accordance with the general provisions of the code of
ordinances relating to fines for violations of the provisions herein.



(Ord. 2007-06-25, passed 6-18-2007)



ARTICLE 13:  FEES AND SECURITIES FOR CONSTRUCTION AND NEW DEVELOPMENT



Section



   6-13-1   Precedence of fees



   6-13-2   Payment of fees



   6-13-3   Building permit and inspection fees for one- and two-family
residential construction



   6-13-4   Building permit and inspection fees for commercial,
industrial, institutional and multiple-family residential construction



   6-13-5   Development services fee



   6-13-6   Consultant and agency fees



   6-13-7   Fire prevention fees



   6-13-8   Water and sewer fees



   6-13-9   Engineering fees and deposits



   6-13-10   Occupancy variance and performance guarantee deposits



   6-13-11   Elevator inspection fees



   6-13-12   Zoning and plat approval fees



   6-13-13   Annexation fees



   6-13-14   Land and cash donations



   6-13-15   Code appeal fees



   6-13-16   Document sales and reproduction costs



   6-13-17   Penalty



   6-13-18   Waiver of permit fees for governmental agencies



   6-13-19   Property maintenance code fees



§ 6-13-1  PRECEDENCE OF FEES.



   The fees set forth in this article shall supersede and take precedence
over fees contained within other articles of this chapter or other chapters
of the code which are of a different amount than set forth herein.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)



§ 6-13-2  PAYMENT OF FEES.



   A permit application for new construction, alteration, demolition or
other building operation shall not be accepted until the fees prescribed in
this section shall have been paid to the village, nor shall an application
for an amendment to a permit necessitating an additional fee be accepted
until the additional fee shall have been paid.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)



§ 6-13-3  BUILDING PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES FOR ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Type A - new construction.  All plan review and clerical fees
shall be due and payable at the time an application for permit is submitted.
The development services fee and inspection fees shall be due and payable at
the time of issuance of a permit.



      (1)   Clerical fee.  $160.00;



      (2)   Plan review fees.  Plan review fees for new one- and
two-family residential construction shall be in accordance with Table
6-13-3(A)(1), based on the types of reviews required.



 

Building Size, incl. basement and garage (sq. ft.)
 
Table 6-13-3(A)(1)
1&2-Family Residential Plan Review Fees
Type A - New Construction
(cost per square foot or minimum fee)


Building, Plumbing, Mechanical and Electrical
 
Zoning
 
Fire Sprinkler
 
Energy


Up to 3,000
 
$480
 
$75
 
$210
 
$240


Over 3,000
 
$0.16/s.f.
 
$0.025/s.f.
 
$0.07/s.f.
 
$0.08/s.f.



 



      (3)   Fees for additional reviews. Review fees are based on up
to two review cycles. If additional review is required, and if it is
determined by the building official that the need for additional review is
owing to nonresponsiveness to review comments on the part of the permit
applicant, then an additional plan review fee in the amount of 25% of the
total initial plan review fees shall be charged for each additional review
cycle, and payment shall be required at time of resubmittal for review.



      (4)   Development services fee.  The development services fee
for new one- and two-family residential construction shall be based on the
estimated valuation of the cost of construction provided by the permit
applicant.  The fee shall be $6.70 per $1,000 of valuation, with a minimum
fee of $50. See § 6-13-5.



      (5)   Inspection fees.  Inspection fees for new one- and
two-family residential construction shall be in accordance with Table
6-13-3(A)(2), based on the types of inspections required.



 

Building Size, incl. basement and garage
(sq. ft.)
 
Table 6-13-3(A)(2)
1&2-Family Residential Inspection Fees
Type A - New Construction
(cost per square foot or minimum fee)



Building, Mechanical and Electrical

 

Plumbing

 

Energy

 

Zoning

 

Fire Sprinkler

 

Occupancy




Up to 3,000

 

$930

 

$240

 

$240

 

$75

 

$240

 

$90




Over 3,000

 

$0.31/s.f.

 

$0.08/s.f.

 

$0.08/s.f.

 

$0.025/s.f.

 

$0.08/s.f.

 

$0.03/s.f.




 



      (6)   Fees for additional inspections.  Inspection fees are
based on up to two of each type of required inspection. The fees for
additional inspections shall be $80 per each, and payment shall be required
at time of scheduling the inspection.



      (7)   Supplemental fees.  If the scope of work includes work
of the types listed in § 6-13-3(C), and such work is not, in the judgment of
the building official, a customary part of new one- and two-family
residential construction, then the fees for such work as listed in §
6-13-3(C) shall be required, as applicable, in addition to those listed in
this section.



      (8)   Water and sewer fees.  Fees for connection to the Carol
Stream water distribution system and/or sanitary sewer system shall be in
accordance with § 6-13-8.



      (9)   Engineering fees and securities.  If engineering plans
are required, fees shall be in accordance with § 6-13-9.  A public
improvement preservation bond shall be required in accordance with § 12-3-17.



      (10)   Expedited review fee.  Expedited review is offered for
permits for which the plan review is conducted solely by the village’s
building codes consultant.  The fee for expedited review shall be in
accordance with § 6-13-6(B).



   (B)   Type B - additions, alterations and accessory structures.



      (1)   All plan review and clerical fees shall be due and
payable at the time an application for permit is submitted. The development
services fee and inspection fees shall be due and payable at the time of
issuance of a permit. Fees as specified in this section shall pertain to the
following types of building permits:



         (a)   Garage, attached1;



         (b)   Garage, detached1;



         (c)   Porch1;



         (d)   Remodel (includes finished basement);



         (e)   Restoration;



         (f)   Room addition1;



         (g)   Seasonal room1; and



         (h)   Work not listed herein but similar to one of the
above, as directed by the building official.



         1 Public improvement preservation bond required.  See §
12-3-17.



      (2)   Clerical fee.  $80.00;



      (3)   Plan review fees.  Plan review fees for one- and
two-family residential additions, alterations and accessory structures shall
be in accordance with Table 6-13-3(B)(1), based on the types of reviews
required.



 

Size of Structure or work area, incl. basement
(sq. ft.)
 
Table 6-13-3(B)(1)
1&2-Family Residential Plan Review Fees
Type B - Additions, Alterations and Accessory Structures
(cost per square foot or minimum fee)


Building
 
Zoning
 
Plumbing
 
Mechanica l
 
Electrica l
 
Energy


Up to 400
 
$80
 
$20
 
$20
 
$20
 
$40
 
$40


Over 400
 
$0.20/s.f.
 
$0.05/s.f.
 
$0.05/s.f.
 
$0.05/s.f.
 
$0.10/s.f.
 
$0.10/s.f.



 



      (4)   Fees for additional reviews.  Review fees are based on
up to two review cycles. If additional review is required, and if it is
determined by the building official that the need for additional review is
owing to nonresponsiveness to review comments on the part of the permit
applicant, then an additional plan review fee in the amount of 25% of the
total initial plan review fees shall be charged for each additional review
cycle, and payment shall be required at time of resubmittal for review.



      (5)   Development services fee.  The development services fee
for one- and two-family residential additions, alterations and accessory
structures shall be based on the estimated valuation of the cost of
construction provided by the permit applicant.  The fee shall be $6.70 per
$1,000 of valuation, with a minimum fee of $50.  See § 6-13-5.



      (6)   Inspection fees.  Inspection fees for new one- and
two-family residential construction shall be in accordance with Table
6-13-3(D), based on the types of inspections required.



 

Size of Structure or Work Area, incl. basement (sq. ft.)
 
Table 6-13-3(B)(2)
1&2-Family Residential Inspection Fees
Type B - Additions, Alterations and Accessory Structures
(cost per square foot or minimum fee)


Building
 
Zoning
 
Plumbing
 
Mechanic al
 
Electrical
 
Energy
 
Occupanc y


Up to 400
 
$80
 
$40
 
$160
 
$20
 
$40
 
$40
 
$40


Over 400
 
$0.20/s.f.
 
$0.10/s.f.
 
$0.40/s.f.
 
$0.05/s.f.
 
$0.10/s.f.
 
$0.10/s.f.
 
$0.10/s.f.



 



      (7)   Fees for additional inspections.  Inspection fees are
based on up to two of each type of required inspection.  The fees for
additional inspections shall be $80 per each, and payment shall be required
at time of scheduling the inspection.



      (8)   Supplemental fees.  If the scope of work includes work
of the types listed in § 6-13-3(C), and such work is not, in the judgment of
the building official, a customary part of the construction of one- and
two-family residential additions, alterations or accessory structures, then
the fees for such work as listed in § 6-13-3(C) shall be required, as
applicable, in addition to those listed in this section.



      (9)   Engineering securities.  A public improvement
preservation bond, if required, shall be in accordance with § 12-3-17.



      (10)   Expedited review fee.  Expedited review is offered for
permits for which the plan review is conducted solely by the village’s
building codes consultant.  The fee for expedited review shall be in
accordance with § 6-13-6(B).



   (C)   Type C - miscellaneous residential construction.  All plan
review, clerical and inspection fees are included in the permit fees as
listed in this section, below.  There is no development services fee for
miscellaneous residential construction.  Permit fees shall be due and
payable at the time an application for permit is submitted.



 



Air conditioner
 

$64



Air conditioner and furnace as one project
 

$96



Construction and sales trailers, temporary
 

See § 6-13-4(B)



Deck
 

$96



Demolition, minor or emergency
 

$32



Demolition, primary structure 1
 

$400



Driveway 1
 

$96



Electrical, minor (includes service upgrade)
 

$64



Fence, including dog run
 

$64



Fireplace, masonry
 

$128



Fireplace, prefab
 

$96



Fire sprinkler
 

$450



Flagpole
 

$64



Foundation (preliminary work for a principal project)
 

$120



Furnace, heat pump and other heating systems
 

$64



Garage floor1
 

$64



Gazebo
 

$96



Hot tub or spa
 

$96



Landscape structures 1
 

$64



Lawn irrigation system
 

$96



Mechanical
 

$64



Patio 1
 

$64



Patio with foundation 1
 

$96



Plumbing
 

$96



Shed (no greater than 168 square feet in area) 1
 

$64



Sidewalk (greater than 4 feet in width) 1
 

$64



Signs
 

See § 6-13-4(B)



Solar panels
 

$128



Stoop 1
 

$64



Structural modification, minor 1
 

$96



Swimming pool, above-ground
 

$96



Swimming pool, in-ground 1
 

$256



Utility service connection or repair 1, 2
 

$64



Water heater
 

$48



Window and/or door replacement (with change in size or location)
 

$64



Wireless communications dish/antenna/tower
 

See § 16-13-4(B)



Work not listed herein but similar to one of the above, as directed by the
building official
 

As determined by the building official



1 Public improvement preservation bond required unless waived by the building
official. See § 12-3-17


2 Water and sewer fees are required for new utility service connections, or
increases in the sizes of existing connections. See § 6-13-8.




 



      (1)   Fees for additional reviews.  Review fees are based on
up to two review cycles. If additional review is required, and if it is
determined by the building official that the need for additional review is
owing to nonresponsiveness to review comments on the part of the permit
applicant, then an additional plan review fee in the amount of 25% of the
total initial plan review fees shall be charged for each additional review
cycle, and payment shall be required at time of resubmittal for review.



      (2)   Fees for additional inspections.  Inspection fees are
based on up to two of each type of required inspection. The fees for
additional inspections shall be $80 per each, and payment shall be required
at time of scheduling the inspection.



      (3)   Engineering securities.  A public improvement
preservation bond, if required, shall be in accordance with § 12-3-17.



   (D)   Permit not required.  Building permits shall not be required
for the following one- and two-family residential work. Nonetheless, all work
must comply with applicable village codes and ordinances.



      (1)   Decorative landscape features;



      (2)   Dish antenna no greater than three feet in diameter;



      (3)   Fire pit;



      (4)   Low voltage system;



      (5)   Mailbox (must comply with Public Works Department
installation requirements);



      (6)   Remodeling with no addition, alteration or relocation of
walls or utilities (plumbing, heating or electrical);



      (7)   Replacement of existing electrical fixtures, switches,
receptacles and circuit breakers;



      (8)   Replacement of existing plumbing fixtures with no
alteration of existing piping;



      (9)   Recreational apparatus, such as a swing set or
basketball hoop;



      (10)   Roof (not including structural repair or modification);



      (11)   Routine maintenance;



      (12)   Security alarm system;



      (13)   Sidewalk (four feet or less in width and located
entirely on the private lot);



      (14)   Shed equal to or less than 64 square feet in area;



      (15)   Siding;



      (16)   Tent or canopy (temporary, residential);



      (17)   Window or door replacement with no change in the size
or location of opening.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013; Ord.
2017-02-06, passed 2- 21-2017; Ord. 2019-02-05, passed 2-19-2019)



§ 6-13-4  BUILDING PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES FOR COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL,
INSTITUTIONAL AND MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Type D - new construction, additions, alterations and
accessory structures. 



      (1)   All plan review and clerical fees shall be due and
payable at the time an application for permit is submitted. The development
services fee and inspection fees shall be due and payable at the time of
issuance of a permit. Fees as specified in this section shall pertain to the
following types of building permits:



         (a)   Accessory structure, miscellaneous 1;



         (b)   Building addition 1;



         (c)   Demolition, major or structural 1;



         (d)   Interior remodeling;



         (e)   New principal building 1;



         (f)   Restoration; and



         (g)   Work not listed herein but similar to one of the
above, as directed by the building official.



         1 Public improvement preservation bond required unless
waived by the building official.  See § 12-3-17.



      (2)   Clerical fee:  $160.00.



      (3)   Plan review fees.  Plan review fees for commercial,
industrial, institutional and multiple-family residential new construction,
additions, alterations and accessory structures shall be in accordance with
Table 6-13-4(A)(1), based on the types of reviews required.



 

Volume of Building or Work Area (cubic ft.)
 
Table 6-13-4(A)(1)
Commercial, Industrial, Institutional and Multiple-Family Residential Plan
Review Fees
Type D - New Construction, Additions, Alterations and Accessory Structures


Building
 
Zoning
 
Plumbing
 
Mechanical
 
Electrical
 
Energy
 
Fire Code, High Hazard and NFPA Reviews




Up to 60,000
 
$360
 
$80
 
$90
 
$90
 
$180
 
$200
 
See § 6-13-7


60,001 to 80,000
 
$480
 
$80
 
$120
 
$120
 
$240
 
$240


80,001 to 100,000
 
$560
 
$80
 
$140
 
$140
 
$280
 
$280


100,001 to 150,000
 
$640
 
$80
 
$160
 
$160
 
$320
 
$320


150,001 to 200,000
 
$720
 
$80
 
$180
 
$180
 
$360
 
$360


Over 200,000
 
$840 plus $10 per each additional 10,000 c.f.
 
$80
 
25% of building fee
 
25% of building fee
 
50% of building fee
 
50% of building fee




 



      (4)   Fees for additional reviews.  Review fees are based on
up to two review cycles.  If additional review is required, and if it is
determined by the building official that the need for additional review is
owing to nonresponsiveness to review comments on the part of the permit
applicant, then an additional plan review fee in the amount of 25% of the
total initial plan review fees shall be charged for each additional review
cycle, and payment shall be required at time of resubmittal for review.



      (5)   Development services fee.  The development services fee
for commercial, industrial, institutional and multiple-family residential
construction shall be based on the estimated valuation of the cost of
construction provided by the permit applicant.  The fee shall be $6.70 per
$1,000 of valuation, with a minimum fee of $50.  See § 6-13-5.



      (6)   Inspection fees.  Inspection fees for commercial,
industrial, institutional and multiple-family residential construction shall
be in accordance with Table 6-13-4(A)(2), based on the types of inspections
required.



 

Volume of Building or Work Area (cubic ft.)
 
Table 6-13-4(A)(2)
Commercial, Industrial, Institutional and Multiple-Family Residential
Inspection Fees
Type D - New Construction, Additions, Alterations and Accessory Structures


Building
 
Zoning
 
Plumbing
 
Mechanical
 
Electrical
 
Energy
 
Fire Code
 
Occupancy




Up to 60,000
 
$420
 
$80
 
$240
 
$100
 
$180
 
$100
 

 

See § 6-13-7
 
$80


60,001 to 80,000
 
$525
 
$100
 
$300
 
$125
 
$225
 
$125
 
$100


80,001 to 100,000
 
$630
 
$120
 
$360
 
$150
 
$270
 
$150
 
$120


100,001 to 150,000
 
$735
 
$140
 
$420
 
$175
 
$315
 
$175
 
$140


150,001 to 200,000
 
$840
 
$160
 
$480
 
$200
 
$360
 
$200
 
$160


Over 200,000
 
$945
 
$180
 
$540
 
$225
 
$405
 
$225
 
$180




 



      (7)   Fees for additional inspections.  Inspection fees are
based on up to two of each type of required inspection.  The fees for
additional inspections shall be $80 per each, and payment shall be required
at time of scheduling the inspection.



      (8)   Supplemental fees.  If the scope of work includes work
of the types listed in § 6-13-4(B), and such work is not, in the judgment of
the building official, a customary and ancillary part of the construction,
then the fees for such work as listed in § 6-13-4(B) shall be required, as
applicable, in addition to those listed in this section.



      (9)   Fire prevention fees.  If the scope of work includes
work regulated by the adopted Fire Code of the Village of Carol Stream, then
the fees for plan review and inspection of such work as listed in §
6-13-7(A) shall be required, as applicable, in addition to the fees listed in
this section.



      (10)   Water and sewer fees.  If connection to the Carol
Stream water distribution system and/or sanitary sewer system is required,
fees shall be in accordance with § 6-13-8.



      (11)   Engineering fees and securities.  If engineering plans
are required, fees shall be in accordance with § 6-13-9.  A public
improvement preservation bond, if required, shall be in accordance with §
12-3-17.



      (12)   Expedited review fee.  Expedited review is offered for
permits for which the plan review is conducted solely by the village’s
building codes consultant.  The fee for expedited review shall be in
accordance with § 6-13-6(B).



   (B)   Type E - miscellaneous commercial industrial, institutional
and multiple-family residential.  All plan review, clerical and inspection
fees are included in the fees as listed in this section, below.  The
development services fee shall be as prescribed in § 6-13-4(B)(2).  All
fees for miscellaneous commercial industrial, institutional and
multiple-family residential construction shall be due and payable at the time
an application for permit is submitted.



      (1)   Plan review, clerical and inspection fees.



 



Accessory structure, minor 2
 

$120



Construction and sales trailers, temporary
 

$200



Conveyor system 1
 

$240 per level



Demolition, minor, nonstructural or emergency 1
 

$40



Driveway (per each) 2
 

$80



Electrical (includes service upgrade)
 

$240



Electrical, minor (includes fixture replacement)
 

$80, plus $1 per fixture



Elevator 1
 

$600 per elevator bank



Emergency repair
 

$320



Equipment (includes removal, installation, relocation) 1
 

$80, plus $20 per piece, plus $40 per discipline, plus $80 for special permit
process



Fence, exterior (includes trash enclosure)
 

$80



Fence, interior 1
 

$120



Fire alarm system 1
 

$80



Fire pump test 1
 

$40



Fire suppression system 1
 

$160



Flagpole
 

$120



Foundation (preliminary work for a principal project)
 

25% of building fee
See Table 6-13-4(A)(1)
Minimum $480



Furniture panels, with electrical work
 

$80



Hood and duct (type 1) 1
 

$80



Hood and duct (type 2) 1
 

$80



HVAC equipment, new or replacement (boiler, furnace, heat pump, a/c, etc.)
 

$120 plus $20 per unit



HVAC system, new 1
 

$240



Hydrostatic test 1
 

$40



Lawn irrigation system
 

$160



Low voltage wiring
 

$120



Mechanical
 

$120



Parking lot maintenance (sealcoating and striping)
 

$160



Parking lot patching, overlay, expansion or reconstruction 2
 




   Less than 20,000 square feet
 

$160



   20,000 to 100,000 square feet
 

$200



   Greater than 100,000 square feet
 

$240



Parking lot, temporary 2
 

$160



Patio 2
 

$120



Plumbing
 

$300



Racking system (does not include sprinkler system) 1
 




   Less than 5.75 feet in height
 

No permit required



   5.75 to 12 feet in height
 

$280



   12.01 to 40 feet in height
 

$320



   Greater than 40 feet in height
 

$360



Roofing and siding
 

$160



Security alarm system
 

No permit required



Sidewalk  2
 

$120



Sign, face change
 

$40 plus $10 per additional sign of the same type



Sign, permanent, no electrical
 




   Ground
 

$120 plus $20 per additional sign of the same type



   Wall
 

$80 plus $20 per additional sign of the same type



Sign, permanent with electrical
 




   Ground
 

$160, plus $20 per additional sign of the same type



   Wall
 

$120, plus $20 per additional sign of the same type



Sign, temporary
 

$40, plus $10 per additional sign of the same type



Sign, temporary, special event
 

$40, plus $10 per type of sign used



Solar panels
 

$240



Spray booth 1
 

$480 per booth



Stocking and training, temporary 15-day
 

$80



Storage tank
 

$80



Structural modification, minor 2
 

$200



Swimming pool, commercial or public 2
 

$700



Tent, temporary 1
 

$160



Utility service connection  2, 3
 

$200



Utility service repair 2
 

$120



Wireless communications dish/antenna/tower
 

$300, plus $100 per each additional review



Work not listed herein, but similar to one of the above, as directed by the
building official
 

As determined by the building official



1 Fire prevention plan review and inspection fees required. See § 6-13-7(B).

2 Engineering fees and/or securities required unless waived by the building
official. See § 6-13-9 and § 12-3-17.

3 Water and sewer fees required. See § 6-13-8.




 



      (2)   Fees for additional reviews. Review fees are based on up
to two review cycles. If additional review is required, and if it is
determined by the building official that the need for additional review is
owing to nonresponsiveness to review comments on the part of the permit
applicant, then an additional plan review fee in the amount of 25% of the
total initial plan review fees shall be charged for each additional review
cycle, and payment shall be required at time of resubmittal for review.



      (3)   Development services fee. The development services fee
for miscellaneous commercial, industrial, institutional and multiple-family
residential construction shall be based on the estimated valuation of the
cost of construction provided by the permit applicant. The fee shall be $6.70
per $1,000 of valuation, with a minimum fee of $50. See § 6-13-5.



      (4)   Fees for additional inspections. Inspection fees for
miscellaneous commercial industrial, institutional and multiple-family
residential permits are based on up to two of each type of required
inspection.  Additional inspections shall be compensated at $80 per each,
and such payment shall be required at time of scheduling the inspection.



      (5)   Expedited review fee.  Expedited review is offered for
permits for which the plan review is conducted solely by the village’s
building codes consultant.  The fee for expedited review shall be in
accordance with § 6-13-6(B).



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2011-04-11, passed 4-18-2011; Ord.
2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013; Ord. 2017-02-06, passed 2-21-2017; Ord.
2019-02-05, passed 2-19-2019)



§ 6-13-5  DEVELOPMENT SERVICES FEE.



   For every type of permit requiring a development services fee, the
applicant shall provide an estimated building valuation at the time of
application for permit. Building valuations shall include the total cost of
construction materials and labor for the types of work associated with the
permit, such as foundation work; structural and nonstructural building
components; permanent systems such as electrical, gas, mechanical and
plumbing; and interior finish material. The building valuation does not
include such items as appliances, decorations, furnishings or
non-building-related items. The development services fee shall be based on
the estimated building valuation as approved by the Building Official. If, in
the opinion of the Building Official, the building valuation is
underestimated on the permit application, the application shall be denied,
unless the applicant is able to provide detailed information in support of
the estimate to meet the approval of the Building Official. In the event of a
dispute, the Building Official shall use the latest version of the Building
Valuation Data published in the International Code Council's Building Safety
Journal or other similar cost-per-square-foot resource to determine the
minimum acceptable valuation. The final building permit valuation shall be
set by the Building Official.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)



§ 6-13-6  CONSULTANT AND AGENCY FEES.



   (A)   Consultant services. The village's costs of legal review,
structural engineering review, and other special reviews required by the
Community Development Director to be performed by means of outside consultant
services shall be paid for at the billed rate as charged to the village by
the consultant. This shall not include consultant fees for plan review or
inspections performed by the village's building codes consultant. Payment for
consultant services fees shall be due and payable at the time of issuance of
a permit.



   (B)   Expedited consultant review fee. The cost of expedited
consultant review shall be paid for at the billed rate as charged to the
village by the consultant plus a 10% administrative fee, and shall be paid at
the time of permit application.



   (C)   Recording fees. Fees incurred by the village for the recording
of documents with DuPage County by the Village Clerk shall be reimbursed by
the applicant at a cost of 100% of the actual recording cost.



   (D)   DuPage County impact fees. It shall be the responsibility of
the permit applicant to comply with the requirements of the DuPage County
Fair Share Road Improvement Impact Fee Program. Evidence of such compliance
shall be required prior to issuance of a building permit.



   (E)   Other agency fees. It shall be the responsibility of the
permit applicant to comply with the requirements of all applicable regulatory
agencies, including but not limited to the DuPage County Health Department,
the Illinois State Fire Marshal and the Illinois Department of Public Health.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)



§ 6-13-7  FIRE PREVENTION FEES.



   Fees for plan review and inspection of commercial, industrial,
institutional and multiple-family residential construction in accordance with
the requirements of the adopted Fire Code of the Village of Carol Stream
shall be as prescribed herein.



   (A)   Type D – New construction, additions, alterations and
accessory structures.



      (1)   All fees for fire prevention plan review shall be as
prescribed in  this section, shall be required in addition to the fees given
in Tables 6-13-4(A)(1) and 6-13-4(A)(2), and shall be due and payable at the
time an application for permit is submitted.  Fees as specified in this
section shall pertain to the following types of building permits:



         (a)   Accessory structure, miscellaneous;



         (b)   Building addition;



         (c)   Demolition, major or structural;



         (d)   Interior remodeling;



         (e)   New principal building;



         (f)   Restoration;



         (g)   Work not listed herein but similar to one of the
above, as directed by the building official.



      (2)   Plan review fees.  Fees for fire prevention plan review
for commercial, industrial, institutional and multiple-family residential new
construction, additions, alterations and accessory structures shall be in
accordance with Table 6-13-7(A)(1), based on the types of reviews required.



 

Volume of Building or Work Area (cubic ft.)
 
Table 6-13-7(A)(1)
Fire Prevention Plan Review Fees
Type D - New Construction, Additions, Alterations and Accessory Structures



Fire Code

 

High Hazard Area

 

NFPA






Up to 60,000

 

$180

 

$540

 

$300




60,001 to 80,000

 

$240

 

$720

 

$300




80,001 to 100,000

 

$280

 

$840

 

$300




100,001 to 150,000

 

$320

 

$960

 

$300




150,001 to 200,000

 

$360

 

$1,080

 

$300




Over 200,000

 

50% of building fee

 

150% of building fee

 

25% of building fee
(min. $300)





 



      (3)   Fees for additional reviews.  Review fees are based on
up to two review cycles.  If additional review is required, and if it is
determined by the building official that the need for additional review is
owing to nonresponsiveness to review comments on the part of the permit
applicant, then an additional plan review fee in the amount of 25% of the
total initial plan review fees shall be charged for each additional review
cycle, and payment shall be required at time of resubmittal for review.



      (4)   Inspection fees.  Fire prevention inspection fees for
commercial, industrial, institutional and multiple-family residential new
construction, additions, alterations and accessory structures shall be in
accordance with Table 6-13-7(A)(2), based on the types of inspections
required.



 

Volume of Building or Work Area (cubic ft.)
 
Table 6-13-7(A)(2)
Fire Prevention Inspection Fees
Type D - New Construction, Additions, Alterations and Accessory Structures



Fire Code

 

High Hazard

 

Final Occupancy






Up to 60,000

 

$80

 

$80

 

$80




60,001 to 80,000

 

$100

 

$100

 

$100




80,001 to 100,000

 

$120

 

$120

 

$120




100,001 to 150,000

 

$140

 

$140

 

$140




150,001 to 200,000

 

$160

 

$160

 

$160




Over 200,000

 

$180

 

$180

 

$180





 



      (5)   Fees for additional inspections.  Inspection fees are
based on up to two of each type of required inspection.  The fees for
additional inspections shall be $80 per each, and payment shall be required
at time of scheduling the inspection.



      (6)   Supplemental fees.  If the scope of work includes work
of the types listed in § 6-13-7(B), and such work is not, in the judgment of
the building official, a customary and ancillary part of the construction,
then the fees for such work as listed in § 6-13-4(B) shall be required, as
applicable, in addition to those listed in this section.



   (B)   Type E - Miscellaneous commercial industrial, institutional
and multiple-family residential.  All fees for fire prevention plan review
and inspection shall be as prescribed in this section, and shall be required
in addition to the fees given in § 6-13-4(B).



      (1)   Plan review fees.



 



Fire alarm system
 
$0.01 per square foot

($220 minimum)


Fire suppression system
 
 


   Carbon dioxide or clean agent system
 
 


      Up to 105 pounds
 
$120

$1.50 per each additional pound


Dry chemical system
 
$420


Sprinkler system (dry, wet, pre-action, etc.)
 
 


   Technical submittal (required for all)
 
$100 for initial design area

$50 for each additional design area


   Up to 15 heads
 
$150


   16 to 100 heads
 
$420


   101 to 200 heads
 
$520


   201 to 300 heads
 
$620


   301 to 500 heads
 
$720


   Over 500 heads
 
$820 plus $1 each


Hood and duct (type 1)
 
$320 per system


Hood and duct (type 2)
 
$220 per system


Work not listed herein, but similar to one of the above, as directed by the
building official
 
As determined by the building official




 



      (2)   Inspection fees.



 



Conveyor system
 

$80 per level



Demolition, minor, nonstructural or emergency
 

$40



Elevator
 

$40 per elevator bank



Equipment (includes removal, installation, relocation)
 

$40



Fence, interior
 

$80



Fire alarm system
 

$160



Fire pump test
 

$240



Fire suppression system
 





Carbon dioxide or clean agent system

 





Up to 105 pounds

 

$80




Dry chemical system

 

$80




Sprinkler system (dry, wet, pre-action, etc.)

 





Up to 15 heads

 

$80




16 to 100 heads

 

$80




101 to 200 heads

 

$80




201 to 300 heads

 

$80




301 to 500 heads

 

$80




Over 500 heads

 

$80



Hood and duct (type 1)
 

$160



Hood and duct (type 2)
 

$160



HVAC system, new
 

$80



Hydrostatic test
 

$160



Racking system (does not include sprinkler system)
 




   Less than 5.75 feet in height
 

No permit required



   5.75 to 12 feet in height
 

$60



   12.01 to 40 feet in height
 

$80



   Greater than 40 feet in height
 

$100



Solar panels
 

$80



Spray booth
 

$80 per booth



Tent, temporary
 

$40



Work not listed herein, but similar to one of the above, as directed by the
building official
 

As determined by the building official





 



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013; Ord.
2017-02-06, passed 2-21-2017; Ord. 2019-02-05, passed 2-19-2019)



§ 6-13-8  WATER AND SEWER FEES.



   Permit fees for connection to the water distribution system and sewer
system of the village shall be as prescribed in §§ 6-13-3 and 6-13-4. Water
and sewer fees shall be due and payable at the time of issuance of a permit.



   (A)   Water meter fee. Water meter fee shall be based on the current
cost to the village of the water meter, as determined by the Director of
Public Works and given on the current schedule of costs produced by the
Public Works Department.



   (B)   Water connection tap-on fee, potable water. The potable water
connection tap-on fee shall be based upon the size of each service connection
tap made into the water system, as follows:



 

Size of Tap
 
Tap-On Fee*




3/4-inch
 
$150


1-inch
 
$200


1-1/2-inch
 
$250


2-inch
 
$300


3-inch
 
$600


4-inch
 
$1,000


6-inch
 
$1,500


8-inch
 
$2,000


10-inch
 
$2,500


NOTES TO TABLE:

* In the event any building or premises contains more than one dwelling or
commercial unit, an additional fee of $150 per each additional unit shall be
required.




   (C)   Water connection tap-on fee, fire suppression. The fire
suppression system water connection tap-on fee shall be based upon the size
of each service connection tap made into the water system, as follows:



 

Size of Tap
 
Tap-On Fee




3/4-inch
 
$50


1-inch
 
$50


1-1/2-inch
 
$50


2-inch
 
$50


3-inch
 
$60


4-inch
 
$100


6-inch
 
$150


8-inch
 
$200


10-inch
 
$250




   (D)   Water connection tap-on fee, combined system. If a connection
to the water system shall be of a size sufficient to provide potable water to
the facility as well as water for a fire suppression system, the water
connection tap-on fee shall be based upon the size of the water tap made into
the water system, as prescribed in § 6-13-8(B).



   (E)   Sanitary sewer connection tap-on fee. The sanitary sewer
connection tap-on fee shall be based upon the size of each separate service
connection tap made into the sanitary sewer system, as follows:



 

Size of Tap
 
Tap-On Fee *


6-inch
 
$200


8-inch
 
$700


10-inch
 
$1,200


12-inch
 
$1,800


15-inch
 
$2,500


* In the event any building or premises contains more than one dwelling or
commercial unit, an additional fee of $150 per each additional unit shall be
required.



   (F)   Water and sewer expansion connection fee, residential. The
water and sewer expansion connection fee for residential units shall be based
upon the number and type of residential units, as follows:



 

Type of Property
 
Fee per Unit


Multiple-family residential building


   Efficiency or studio apartment
 
$865


   1-bedroom apartment
 
$1,297


   2-bedroom apartment
 
$1,730


   3-bedroom apartment
 
$2,162


Single-family residence, attached or detached
 
$2,595



   (G)   Water and sewer expansion connection fee,
commercial/industrial/institutional. The water and sewer expansion connection
fee for commercial, industrial and institutional users shall be $865 per 100
gallons of estimated average daily water consumption, with a minimum fee of
$865. The estimate must be submitted by the party in responsible charge of
the design and approved by the Building Official or his or her designee.



   (H)   Water and sewer expansion connection fee, water connection
only. The water and sewer expansion connection fee for a user who seeks a
connection only to the water system of the village shall be 28% of the water
and sewer expansion connection fee otherwise applicable to the property. The
water and sewer expansion connection fee for a user who seeks a connection
only to the sanitary sewer system of the village shall be 72% of the water
and sewer expansion connection fee otherwise applicable to the property.



   (I)   Water and sewer service connection repair permit fee. The
permit fee for the repair of service connections to the village’s water and
sewer systems shall be as prescribed in § 6-13-3(C) and § 6-13-4(B).



   (J)   Insurance and performance bond requirements. No permit for a
water or sewer connection shall be issued unless the person applying
therefor, or the contractor, shall have first procured public liability
insurance meeting the requirements of § 13-2-7, and have filed with the
village a performance bond meeting the requirements of § 13-2-8.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)



§ 6-13-9  ENGINEERING FEES AND DEPOSITS.



   (A)   Engineering plan review fee and deposit. Except as otherwise
provided herein, the engineering fee for the review of plans by the Village
Engineer, or his or her designee, shall be based on the design engineer's
estimated probable cost of construction which has been approved by the
Village Engineer. A plan review deposit is payable at the time of permit
application. Plan reviews shall not be performed until the deposit has been
paid. This plan review deposit amount may be amended by the Village Engineer,
but only upon approval of a preliminary probable cost of construction
estimate. This deposit will be utilized for payment of the required plan
review fee. If the plan review fee exceeds the deposit amount, then the
required additional amount shall be payable at the time of approval of final
engineering plans. If a reimbursement of deposited funds is due the permit
applicant, then remittance will be made upon approval of the final estimated
probable cost of construction.



      (1)   Engineering plan review deposit.  The engineering plan
review deposit shall be $2,500.



      (2)   Engineering plan review fee, subdivision improvement
plans. The engineering fee for the review of subdivision improvement plans by
the Village Engineer, or his or her designee, shall be ½% of the design
engineer's estimated probable cost of construction which has been approved by
the Village Engineer.



      (3)   Engineering plan review fee, all other improvement
plans. The engineering fee for the review of plans by the Village Engineer,
or his or her designee, shall be 1% of the design engineer's estimated
probable cost of construction which has been approved by the Village
Engineer. The engineering fee for the review of plans by the Village
Engineer, or his or her designee, for minor parking lot maintenance repairs
such as resurfacing or patching as determined by the Village Engineer, or his
or her designee, shall be $175 per application.



   (B)   Engineering inspection fee. The engineering fee for
inspections performed during the course of construction by the Village
Engineer, or his or her designee, shall be 2% of the probable cost of
construction as estimated by the design engineer and approved by the Village
Engineer, such fee to be payable at the time of approval of final engineering
plans. The engineering fee for inspections performed during the course of
construction by the Village Engineer, or his or her designee, for minor
parking lot maintenance repairs such as resurfacing or patching as determined
by the Village Engineer, or his or her designee, shall be 1% of the probable
cost of the repairs or construction, as estimated by the design engineer and
approved by the Village Engineer.



   (C)   Stormwater management plan review and inspection fees and
deposit. The village's costs of stormwater management plan review and
inspections, performed by means of outside consultant services, shall be paid
for at the billed rate as charged to the village by the consultant. A
stormwater management deposit in an amount as determined by the Village
Engineer, in accordance with the village's schedule of stormwater management
deposits, plus a non-refundable processing fee of $120, shall be payable at
the time of permit application. Plan reviews shall not be performed until
this stormwater management deposit and processing fee have been paid. The
stormwater management deposit shall be remitted to the permit applicant only
at such time as all village invoices for consultant services and the
processing fee have been paid.



   (D)   Land movement permit fee. Engineering review and inspection
fees and deposits for issuance of a permit for any land movement within the
jurisdiction of the village shall be in accordance with §§ 6-13-9(A),
6-13-9(B) and 6-13-9(C).



   (E)   Excavation or street cut permit fee. Engineering review and
inspection fees and deposits for issuance of a permit for any street cut or
excavation within public right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the village
shall be in accordance with §§ 6-13-9(A) and 6-13-9(B).



   (F)   Grading guarantee deposit for new one- and two-family
residential construction. In addition to any other permit fees payable for
new one- and two-family residential construction, there shall be deposited
with the village cash, or adequate security, in the amount of $500 per lot,
which shall be known as the grading guarantee deposit. This deposit shall be
in addition to any project performance bond or letter of credit previously
established with regard to the property. The purpose of this grading
guarantee deposit shall be to ensure that the individual lot has been
properly graded so as to provide acceptable drainage, and that a minimum of
four inches of topsoil has been spread across the lot.



      (1)   The village shall return the amount of the deposit or
release the amount of the security once the grading conditions of the lot
have been tested by usage, settling, rainfall and other conditions. The
amount of the grading guarantee deposit shall be held or shall remain
available for the benefit of the village for a period of no more than one
year after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or occupancy variance,
unless the village notifies the party responsible for the grading guarantee
deposit of the specific defect existing in the grading and drainage of the
lot.



      (2)   In the event that the grading defect is determined, but
not corrected after reasonable notice, the village may utilize the funds to
correct the defect. However, the utilization of this grading guarantee
deposit shall not prevent the village from taking other action against the
party responsible for the defect. Without regard to any other provision of
this section, the grading guarantee deposit shall not be released by the
village until the entire area immediately affected by the drainage
characteristics of the individual lot shall have also been found to comply
with the ordinances of the village relating to drainage.



   (G)   Security for subdivision improvements. For the requirements of
securities for subdivision improvements, see § 7-2-8.



   (H)   Public improvement preservation bond. For the requirements of
public improvement preservation bonds, see § 12-3-17.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2010-11-53, passed 11-15-2010; Ord.
2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)



§ 6-13-10  OCCUPANCY VARIANCE AND PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE DEPOSITS.



   (A)   Occupancy variance deposit. A variance from the requirements
for occupancy may be granted by the building official, or his or her
designee, in light of an inability of the builder to complete such
requirements due to inclement weather or upon other good cause shown as being
beyond the control of the builder. Such requirements for occupancy shall
include completion of all work items associated with the approved building
permit or permits for the occupied space within the premises. A variance
shall not be granted from health or life safety code requirements.



      (1)   When a variance is so issued, there shall be submitted
to the village a cash deposit in the amount of 125% of the estimated probable
cost of construction of the incomplete work, including the cost of completion
of as-built plans if so required by the Village Engineer. The estimated
probable cost of construction shall be approved by the building official or
his or her designee.



      (2)   The purpose of the occupancy variance deposit shall be
to ensure that the items not completed at time of occupancy will be completed
within 60 days after the weather, soil conditions or other impediment to
completion allows for the incomplete work to be finished. Upon granting of an
occupancy variance, occupancy of the premises shall be permitted. The amount
of the deposit shall be held by the village, and the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy shall be withheld until such time as the work has
been completed.



      (3)   If the specific defects pertaining to the occupancy
variance deposit are not corrected within the 60-day period set forth above,
the village shall notify the party which submitted the occupancy variance
deposit of the specific defect still preventing the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy and the release of the deposit. The village may,
after reasonable notice, utilize the funds to correct the defect. The
utilization of this occupancy variance deposit shall not prevent the village
from taking other action against the person responsible for the defect
preventing the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, including but not
limited to the filing of a lawsuit for injunction, ordinance violation or the
withdrawal of the occupancy permit.



      (4)   Without regard to any provision contained within this
code, the occupancy variance deposit shall not be released by the village
until the entire area immediately affected by the incomplete work items shall
have also been found to comply with the ordinances of the village.



   (B)   Performance guarantee deposit. A temporary postponement of the
requirements for completion of landscaping or landscape appurtenances may be
granted by the building official, or his or her designee, in light of an
inability of the builder to complete such work due to inclement weather or
upon other good cause shown as being beyond the control of the builder. Such
requirements shall include completion of all landscaping or landscape
appurtenance work items associated with the approved building permit or
permits for a premises or common area adjacent thereto, if applicable.
Approval of such postponement shall not be granted unless the premises has
otherwise been deemed ready for occupancy and all health and life safety code
requirements have been completed.



      (1)   When a temporary postponement of the requirements for
completion of landscaping or landscape appurtenances is approved by the
building official, there shall be submitted to the village a cash deposit in
the amount of 125% of the estimated probable cost of construction of the
incomplete work. The estimated probable cost of construction shall be
approved by the building official or his or her designee. Such cash deposit
shall be known as the performance guarantee deposit.



      (2)   The purpose of the performance guarantee deposit shall
be to ensure that the items not completed at time of occupancy will be
completed within 60 days after the weather, soil conditions or other
impediment to completion allows for the incomplete work to be finished. Upon
granting of a temporary postponement of the requirements for completion of
landscaping or landscape appurtenances, a certificate of occupancy shall be
issued and occupancy of the premises shall be permitted. The amount of the
deposit shall be held by the village until such time as the work has been
completed.



      (3)   If the specific defects pertaining to the performance
guarantee deposit are not corrected within the 60-day period set forth above,
the village shall notify the party which submitted the performance guarantee
deposit of the specific defect still preventing the release of the deposit.
The village may, after reasonable notice, utilize the funds to correct the
defect. The utilization of this performance guarantee deposit shall not
prevent the village from taking other action against the person responsible
for the defect preventing the release of the deposit, including but not
limited to the filing of a lawsuit for injunction or ordinance violation.



      (4)   Without regard to any provision contained within this
code, the performance guarantee deposit shall not be released by the village
until the entire area immediately affected by the incomplete work items shall
have also been found to comply with the ordinances of the village.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)



§ 6-13-11  ELEVATOR INSPECTION FEES.



   As the local permitting authority, the village is responsible for the
permitting of new elevator construction and elevator alterations. The
building permit and inspection fees for such work shall be as indicated in §
6-13-4(B). However, the authority to regulate and inspect public elevators
lies within the jurisdiction of the Office of the State Fire Marshal, and so
the requirements of that office shall also apply.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)



§ 6-13-12  ZONING AND PLAT APPROVAL FEES.



   All fees shall be due and payable at the time an application for zoning
or plat approval is submitted. No such request for approval shall be
forwarded to the Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals for review
without full payment of the required fee. Payment of the fee is no way
contingent on whether the plan of subdivision submitted is approved or
disapproved.



 



Annexation approvals


   New development
 
$2,000


   Other
 
$800


Annexation agreement amendment
 
$800


Appearance fee for approvals required by the zoning code but not listed herein
 
$500


Concept plan review
 
$640


Easement encroachment
 
$300


Executive Development Committee review
 
$640


Gary/North Avenue Corridor review


   Existing property
 


      New or replacement ground signs or pole signs
 
$500


      One discipline (site design, architecture or landscaping)
 
$500


      Two disciplines
 
$1,000


      Three disciplines
 
$1,500


   New development
 
$1,500


Parking approval as required by § 16-13-3
 
$640


Performance guarantee
 
$80


Planned unit development


   Existing PUD, minor change
 
$500


   Existing PUD, major change
 
$1,000


   New PUD
 
$1,500


Plat of easement
 
$160


Plat of subdivision


   Less than 5 acres
 
$400


   Five to 50 acres
 
$700


   Greater than 50 acres
 
$1,000


Plat of consolidation, no new lot created
 
$400


Rezoning
 
$640


Special use


   First
 
$800


   Each additional
 
$200


Special use amendment
 
$800


Temporary building, structure or use
 
$120


Text amendment (Building Codes, Fence Code, Sign Code, Subdivision Code)
 
$240


Text amendment (Zoning Code)
 
$640


Variation (Fence Code, Sign Code, Subdivision Code, Zoning Code)


   First
 
$640


   Each additional
 
$200


Zoning verification letter
 
$80


Work not listed herein, but similar to one of the above, as directed by the
Community Development Director
 
As determined by the Community Development Director




(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)



§ 6-13-13  ANNEXATION FEES.



   See Ch. 12, Art. 1.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)



§ 6-13-14  LAND AND CASH DONATIONS.



   See Ch. 7, Art. 8.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)



§ 6-13-15  CODE APPEAL FEES.



   The fee for an appeal of the application of the building construction
and maintenance codes of the village shall be $400.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)



§ 6-13-16  DOCUMENT SALES AND REPRODUCTION COSTS.



   (A)   Publication costs.



 

Zoning Code
 
$25


Subdivision Code
 
$20


Engineering Design Manual
 
$30


Local amendments to the adopted building codes
 
$25


Any part of the above documents, per page
 
$0.20



   (B)   Document sales.



 



Official Zoning Map


   11-inch x 17-inch
 
$3


   36-inch x 48-inch
 
$15


Future Land Use Plan


   11-inch x 17-inch
 
$3


   36-inch x 48-inch
 
$15


Reproduction of archive records, per page (11-inch x 17-inch or smaller)
 
B&W $0.20

Color $0.40


Duplication, per copy per page (11-inch x 17-inch or smaller)
 
B&W $0.20

Color $0.40




 

Duplication of plans (larger than 11" x 17"), per copy, shall be in
accordance with the following costs per sheet:


Size
 
Paper (B&W)
 
Paper (Color)
 
Glossy
 
Mylar


36" x 24"
 
$3.00
 
$5.00
 
$8.00
 
$10.00


36" x 36"
 
$5.00
 
$9.00
 
$14.00
 
$17.00


36" x 48"
 
$7.00
 
$13.00
 
$19.00
 
$24.00


36" x 60"
 
$9.00
 
$16.00
 
$25.00
 
$31.00


36" x 72"
 
$11.00
 
$20.00
 
$31.00
 
$38.00



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)



§ 6-13-17  PENALTY.



   If work is commenced prior to obtaining a required permit, the permit
fee shall be increased by 50%, with the stipulation that such permit fee
increase shall be not less than $75, nor more than $750.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)



§ 6-13-18  WAIVER OF PERMIT FEES FOR GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES.



   Building, zoning and engineering permit fees as set forth in this
article of the Carol Stream Code of Ordinances for construction, alteration,
demolition and other building operations in the Village of Carol Stream shall
be waived for governmental agencies, with the exception of actual costs
incurred and paid by the village; provided that, the construction,
alteration, demolition and other building operations are for a governmental
purpose. The term GOVERNMENTAL AGENCY shall refer to a unit of local
government, public taxing body or extension thereof.



(Ord. 2011-11-36, passed 11-7-2011; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)



§ 6-13-19 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE FEES.



   (A)   Contract services. The Village's costs of mowing, weed
control, property securement, and other measures deemed necessary to abate or
correct a violation of the Property Maintenance Code, performed by means of
contract services after failure of the property owner or responsible party to
comply with the requirements of the Property Maintenance Code, shall be paid
for at the billed rate as charged to the village by the contractor(s).



   (B)   Administrative fee. The administrative fee for an action taken
by the village to abate or correct one or more violations of the Property
Maintenance Code, after failure of the property owner or responsible party to
comply with the requirements of the Property Maintenance Code, shall be $840.



   (C)   Property lien. The administrative fee and the fees for
contract services shall be charged against the real estate upon which the
violation was abated and shall be a lien upon such real estate.



( Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)



ARTICLE 14:  COUNTYWIDE STORM WATER AND FLOODPLAIN CODE



Section



   6-14-1   Adoption of various provisions of DuPage County countywide
stormwater and floodplain ordinance



   Appendix A: General Certifications



Cross-references:



   Building construction and maintenance, see Ch. 6, Art. 9



   Land Movement Regulations, see Ch. 7, Art. 5



   Storm water detention, see Ch. 7, Art. 9



   Subdivisions, see Ch. 7, Art. 7



§ 6-14-1  ADOPTION OF VARIOUS PROVISIONS OF DUPAGE COUNTY COUNTYWIDE
STORMWATER AND FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE.



   (A)   In order to ensure that the provisions of the existing
ordinances of the village and those which may be adopted in the future are
consistent with and at least as stringent as the DuPage County Stormwater
Management Plan and the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain
Ordinance (stormwater ordinance) which was originally adopted by the County
by Ordinance SMO-0001-91 on 9-24-1991, the Mayor and Board of Trustees of the
Village of Carol Stream passed Ordinance No. 92-01-03, “An Ordinance
Adopting Various Provisions of the County of DuPage Countywide Stormwater and
Floodplain Ordinance to take effect at the time the Stormwater Management
Committee of the DuPage County Board Acts Upon the Waiver Petition” on
1-14-1992, adopting those provisions of the stormwater ordinance which was
attached to Ordinance No. 92-01-03 as Appendix A and subsequently amended
from time to time.



   (B)   (1)   Section 15-32 of the Stormwater Ordinance establishes
that General Certifications (GCs) which when found applicable to the
particular circumstances of a development, will serve as the Stormwater
Management Certification for the development activity and may provide
clarification or interpretation of technical requirements.  GCs are intended
to address common and generally low impact development, reducing submittal
requirements, design costs and public burden to apply for certification and
review such development cases and the DuPage County Stormwater Management
Division, DuPage County municipal engineers and DuPage County stormwater
stakeholders have developed a set of GCs for the stormwater ordinance.  GCs
shall be adopted by the Mayor and Board of Trustees by separate ordinance of
the village and shall where applicable serve as the stormwater management
certification for the development activity and may provide clarification or
interpretation of technical requirements.



      (2)   The general certifications (GCs) set forth in Appendix
A, at the end of this article, are adopted.



   (C)   Those provisions identified in (A) and (B) above are not
adopted by reference, but rather, are adopted as a specific and integral part
of this section. The provisions adopted by this section shall be in full
force and effect and shall supersede any other ordinances of the village with
which they are inconsistent or which are less stringent than the terms of
this section.



   (D)   Any new annexation or pre-annexation agreement entered into by
this village after such date as the county acts on granting the village a
complete waiver shall require that every developer comply with the stormwater
standards of this section or as this section may be amended in the future to
make its terms consistent with the stormwater ordinance which shall apply to
any plat of the subdivision within such newly annexed territory.



   (E)   Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $200 nor more than $1,000 for each day
that a violation occurs. The village may also take other legal steps to
enforce the provisions of this section as shall exist within its common law
and home rule powers. Such additional legal steps, however, shall be
consistent with and shall not be less strict than Article XIV of the
stormwater ordinance.



(Ord. 92-01-03, passed 1-14-1992; Ord. 92-03-26, passed 3-10-1992; Ord.
2011-11-36, passed 11-7-2011; Ord. 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012; Ord.
2013-10-43, passed 10-21-2013; Ord. 2013-10-44, passed 10-21-2013)



APPENDIX A: GENERAL CERTIFICATIONS



DUPAGE COUNTY STORMWATER MANAGEMENT



421 N. COUNTY FARM ROAD



WHEATON, IL 60187



GENERAL CERTIFICATION NO. ____



PERTAINING TO THE ELEVATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS IN FLOOD PLAINS



PURPOSE



Pursuant to Article IV, Section 15-32, of the DuPage County Countywide
Stormwater And Flood Plain Ordinance (Ordinance) the Director, or the
Administrator in a Waiver Community, may issue General Certifications (GCs)
which, when found applicable to the particular circumstances of a
development, will serve as the Stormwater Management Certification for the
development activity, or a portion of the development activity. The purpose
of a GC under the Ordinance is to provide a simplified and expeditious means
to review and certify activities that meet the requirements of the Ordinance
by following the specified terms and conditions described within the GC. This
GC provides certification under the Ordinance and is only valid upon approval
by the Director or Administrator for a specific project. The Director or
Administrator shall make the final determination as to whether a project
meets all the terms and conditions of this GC. If a project does not meet all
of the terms and conditions of this GC, an individual certification shall be
required per the Ordinance. This GC shall remain in effect until such time
that it is modified, suspended or revoked by the Director or Administrator.



APPLICABILITY



This GC applies to elevation of existing buildings located within the
regulatory floodway, flood plain or buffer, but not in a wetland. Applicants
seeking to use this GC shall submit a stormwater management certification
application with the required supporting information and obtain a building
permit or other local jurisdiction authorization prior to commencing a
proposed development activity.



COORDINATION WITH OTHER AGENCIES



This GC does not supersede nor relieve any responsibility to obtain other
federal, state or local permits or jurisdictional authorizations.



GENERAL CONDITIONS



   1.   The applicant shall comply with all rules, regulations and
provisions of the Ordinance unless specifically modified or specified in this
GC.



   2.   The minimum stormwater submittal and design requirements shall
be as delineated below in the Submittal Requirements and the Special
Conditions & Design Requirements sections of this GC. Other items may be
required by the Director or Administrator to demonstrate compliance with the
Ordinance.



   3.   In a non-waiver or partial waiver community, authorization is
required from the Director for work in wetland buffers excluding turf grass
area buffers and foundation planting beds.  If required by the Director or
Administrator in a Complete Waiver Community, site buffer boundaries shall be
demarcated in the field and verified by an Environmental Scientist
representing the County or Community.  Mitigation measures for direct and
indirect impact to buffer or wetland may be required as directed by the
Director or the Administrator in a Complete Waiver Community



   4.   All disturbed areas are to be seeded, sodded, or planted with
other vegetation as approved by the Director or Administrator; if seeded, the
restored area must be protected with erosion control measures until the
vegetation has been established and the ground is stabilized.



   5.   Minor temporary stockpiling of materials or fills within the
flood plain may be allowed. The Director or Administrator may place limits on
how long and where the temporary stockpiling can take place.



   6.   Construction activities shall commence within one hundred
eighty (180) calendar days after the issuance of any local permit or
jurisdictional authorization otherwise this GC shall be null and void. If in
the opinion of the Director or the Administrator conditions existed beyond
the control of the applicant preventing construction activities to commence,
additional time may be granted beyond the one hundred eighty (180) calendar
day time limit.



   7.   A certification under this GC expires one (1) year following
the date of certification issuance unless extended in accordance with Section
15-32 of the Ordinance.



   8.   A security as required in accordance with Article VI of the
Ordinance may be waived by the Director or Administrator.



SPECIAL CONDITIONS & DESIGN REQUIREMENTS



The following conditions and minimum design requirements must be met for this
GC unless waived by the Director or Administrator:



   1.   There shall be a pre-application meeting with the Director or
Administrator to establish the FPE in accordance with the Ordinance. 



   2.   Consultation with an environmental scientist will be required
for work in or impacts to buffers unless the work or impact has been
determined by the Director or Administrator in a Complete Waiver Community to
be minor.



   3.   The construction shall not result in any change in existing
ground elevations.



   4.   The elevated building must comply with Section 15-81.B of the
Ordinance.



   5.   The outside wall of any new foundation shall be located within
10' of the outside of an existing foundation wall.  The area added to the
existing structure shall not exceed 150 square feet.



   6.   Existing basements or crawl spaces must be filled in to meet
the existing grades surrounding the existing building.  The new foundation
must be flood vented in accordance with section 15-81.B of the Ordinance.



   7.   Stairs and utility supports for elevated buildings shall be
open to the flow of water below the FPE.



   8.   The location of the structure shall remain substantially the
same.  Footprints of existing structures within the regulatory floodway
cannot be enlarged per Section 15-82.A.8 of the Ordinance and the location of
the structure must remain the same, or in a place where the hydraulics of the
regulatory floodway are improved.



   9.   Compensatory storage shall not be required for the construction
of the new foundation. 



SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS



The applicant shall provide the Director or Administrator with a minimum of
the following information unless waived by the Director or Administrator:



   1.   Stormwater certification application form.



   2.   Project description.



   3.   An exhibit to an engineering scale annotated to show the limit
of the proposed development contemplated; limits of any floodway and flood
plain, verified wetland boundaries, or buffers; and planned access routes.



   4.   Elevation of the existing lowest floor of the building to be
raised.



   5.   Elevation of the proposed lowest floor of the building.



   6.   Representative photographs of the building to be elevated.



   7.   Foundation plans, including the size, area, location and
elevation of all flood openings; interior and exterior grades; and square
footage of enclosed areas subject to flooding.



   8.   Construction details including type, material and dimensions.



   9.   A soil and erosion control plan meeting the requirements of the
Ordinance.



   10.   A restoration plan, if required.



   11.   FEMA DFIRM and DuPage County RFM maps, with site location
identified.



   12.   Copies of all applicable federal, state, and local permits, or
appropriate delegation letters.



   13.   Following completion of construction, a post construction
elevation certificate, along with representative as-built photographs of the
structure.



APPROVED:



_________________________________       _______________



Anthony J. Charlton, P.E                     Date



Director of Stormwater Management



DuPage County



(Ord. 2013-10-44, passed 10-21-2013)



ARTICLE 15:  CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL SYSTEM



Section



   6-15-1   Backflow prevention required



   6-15-2   Connection prohibited



   6-15-3   Surveys



   6-15-4   Mandatory inspection



   6-15-5   Shut off authorized



   6-15-6   Cost of clean-up



   6-15-7   Regulations



   6-15-8   Penalty



§ 6-15-1  BACKFLOW PREVENTION REQUIRED.



   If the Director of Public Works determines that a backflow prevention
device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system for an
existing or new water customer, the Director will give notice to the water
customer to install an approved backflow device within such reasonable period
of time as shall be contained within the notice. The water customer shall, at
the customer’s own expense, install such an approved device at a location
and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency and all applicable local regulations, and
shall have inspections and tests made of such approved devices upon
installation and as required by the Illinois Plumbing Code, Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency and local regulations. Approved backflow
devices shall be as determined by the Director of Public Works.



(Ord. 2004-04-23, passed 4-19-2004)



§ 6-15-2  CONNECTION PROHIBITED.



   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a
private,



auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water
supply of the village may enter the supply or distribution system, unless
such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of
connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the Director of
Public Works and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.



(Ord. 2004-04-23, passed 4-19-2004)



§ 6-15-3  SURVEYS.



   It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works to cause surveys
and investigations to be made of industrial and other properties served by
the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to
the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be
made a matter of public record and shall be repeated as often as the Director
of Public Works shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be
maintained and available for review for a period of at least five years.



(Ord. 2004-04-23, passed 4-19-2004)



§ 6-15-4  MANDATORY INSPECTION.



   The approved cross-connection control device inspector shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply or distribution system of the village for the purpose
of verifying the presence or absence of cross-connections, and the Director
of Public Works or an authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any
reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water
supply or distribution system of the village for the purpose of verifying
information submitted by the customer regarding the required cross-connection
control inspection. On demand, the owner, lessees or occupants of any
property so served shall furnish to the Director of Public Works any
information which the Director may request regarding the piping system or
systems or water use on such property. The refusal of such information when
demanded, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as
provided in this article.



(Ord. 2004-04-23, passed 4-19-2004)



§ 6-15-5  SHUT OFF AUTHORIZED.



   The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized and directed to
discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof and opportunity
for a hearing before the Director, the water service to any property wherein
any connection in violation of the provisions of this code, or rules
promulgated pursuant hereto, is reasonably believed to exist, and to take
such other precautionary measures as he or she may deem necessary to
eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply distribution
mains. Water service to such property shall not be restored until such
conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the
provisions of this article, and until a reconnection fee, in an amount set
from time-to-time, but not less than $200, is paid to the village. Immediate
disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the Director of Public
Works reasonably believes that imminent danger of harmful contamination of
the public water supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by
written notification of the cause of disconnection and opportunity for a
hearing. The village and its agents shall not be liable to any person for any
injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from termination of any
customer’s water supply in accordance with the terms of this section.



(Ord. 2004-04-23, passed 4-19-2004)



§ 6-15-6  COST OF CLEAN-UP.



   The consumer responsible for back siphoned or back pressured material
or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water
supply system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly
installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been
bypassed, shall bear the cost of clean-up of the potable water supply system.



(Ord. 2004-04-23, passed 4-19-2004)



§ 6-15-7  REGULATIONS.



   The Director of Public Works may make regulations regarding
implementation and enforcement of this article. The provisions of this
article and any regulations adopted shall constitute a term and condition of
receiving water from the village’s potable water system.



(Ord. 2004-04-23, passed 4-19-2004)



§ 6-15-8  PENALTY.



   Violation of this article, or any rule promulgated pursuant hereto,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100,
nor more than $750.



(Ord. 2004-04-23, passed 4-19-2004)



ARTICLE 16:  FUEL GAS CODE



Section



   6-16-1   Adoption of Fuel Gas Code



§ 6-16-1  ADOPTION OF FUEL GAS CODE.



   The ICC International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, as published by the
International Code Council Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas
Code of the  village for the control of buildings and structures as therein
provided; and each and all regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of
offenses thereunder of the ICC International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition, are
hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set out in this
article, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in other village ordinances which contain local amendments to
national codes.  Three document copies of said Code, in accordance with 50
ILCS 220/2 and 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, have been available for public use,
inspection and examination for 30 days and one copy for permanent public use
in the office of the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 2004-06-37, passed 6-21-2004; Ord. 2009-05-20, passed 5-4-2009; Ord.
2014-02-07, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 2014-06-21, passed 6-2-2014)



ARTICLE 17:  ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE



Section



   6-17-1   Adoption of Energy Conservation Code



§ 6-17-1  ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.



   The ICC International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 Edition, as
published by the International Code Council Inc., be and is hereby adopted as
the Energy Conservation Code of the village for the control of buildings and
structures as therein provided; and each and all regulations, provisions,
conditions and terms of offenses thereunder of the ICC International Energy
Conservation Code, 2012 Edition, are hereby referred to, adopted and made
part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in other village ordinances which
contain local amendments to national codes.  Three document copies of said
Code, in accordance with 50 ILCS 220/2 and 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, have been
available for public use, inspection and examination for 30 days and one copy
for permanent public use in the office of the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 2004-06-37, passed 6-21-2004; Ord. 2009-05-20, passed 5-4-2009; Ord.
2014-06-21, passed 6-2-2014)



CHAPTER 7: SUBDIVISION CODE



      Article



         1.   IN GENERAL



         2.   PRELIMINARY PLAN AND FINAL PLAT



         3.   DESIGN STANDARDS



         4.   ENGINEERING



         5.   LAND MOVEMENT REGULATIONS



         6.   MISCELLANEOUS



         7.   FLOOD PRONE AREAS



         8.   LAND AND CASH DONATIONS



         9.   STORM WATER DETENTION



ARTICLE 1:  IN GENERAL



Section



   7-1-1   Title



   7-1-2   Purposes



   7-1-3   Application of chapter



   7-1-4   General provisions



   7-1-5   Interpretation



   7-1-6   Rules



   7-1-7   Definitions



§ 7-1-1  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the
“Subdivision Code for the Village of Carol Stream, Illinois”.



§ 7-1-2  PURPOSES.



   While it is obvious that regulations are needed to assure orderly
extension of village streets, the other purposes of these regulations are:



   (A)   To ensure sound, harmonious subdivision development and
community growth, and to safe-guard the interests of the home owner, the
subdivider, the investor and the village;



   (B)   To provide permanent assets to the locality and to the village;



   (C)   To prevent scattered development beyond existing public
utilities and prevent excessive development costs;



   (D)   To assure the development of land for optimum use with
necessary protection against deterioration and obsolescence;



   (E)   To limit and control the pollution of the environment that can
be caused by inadequate or incomplete urban development;



   (F)   To provide common grounds of under-standing and a sound
working relationship between the village and the subdivider; and



   (G)   To otherwise promote realization of the Comprehensive Plan.



§ 7-1-3  APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.



   No person shall divide any tract of land or plat any street or easement
or otherwise improve any tract of land, right-of-way or easement even if such
improvement does not entail the subdivision or platting of land within the
village or in any unincorporated area which is located entirely or in part
within one and one-half miles of the nearest limits of the village, except in
conformity with the provisions of this Subdivision Code. The plans and plats,
proposed improvements to be installed, and all procedures relating thereto,
shall in all respects be in full compliance with the regulations herein.
Acceptance by the village of any improvements made on public property shall
be based on the conformity of such improvements with the provisions of this
code and in accordance with the procedure stipulated in this Subdivision Code.



§ 7-1-4  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Wherever any subdivision of land or any street for public use
shall hereafter be laid out within contiguous territory not more than one and
one-half miles beyond the incorporated boundaries of the village, the
subdivider thereof, or his or her agent, shall submit first a preliminary
plan and then a final plat to the village for its approval of the land to be
subdivided or served by the street or easement. The preliminary plan and
final plat and all procedures relating thereto shall in all respects be in
full compliance with these regulations.



   (B)   Until a preliminary plan for the proposed subdivision or
street or easement for public use or the planned unit development is approved:



      (1)   No land shall be subdivided, nor any street laid out,
nor any improvement made to the natural land;



      (2)   No lot, tract or parcel of land within the proposed
subdivision shall be offered for sale, nor shall any sale, contract for sale
or option be made or given; and/or



      (3)   No improvements, such as sidewalks, water supply, storm
water drainage, sanitary sewer facilities, gas service, electric service,
lighting, grading, paving or surfacing of streets shall hereafter be made by
any owner or owners, or his, her or their agent, or by any public service
corporation at the request of such owner or owners of his, her or their agent.



   (C)   All offerings or dedications of land to the village for use as
streets, highways, alleys, schools, parks, playgrounds or other public uses
shall be referred to the Plan Commission for review and recommendation before
being accepted by the Village Board or by any other governing authority of
the village.



   (D)   Where a tract of land proposed for subdivision is part of a
larger, logical subdivision unit in relation to the village as a whole, the
Plan Commission may, before recommending approval, cause to be prepared a
plan for the entire area or neighborhood, such plan to be used by the Plan
Commission as an aid in judging the proposed plat.



§ 7-1-5  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   In interpretation and application, the provisions of this
Subdivision Code shall be held to the minimum requirements.



   (B)   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this
Subdivision Code upon the use of land are either more restrictive or less
restrictive to the comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of
this chapter or any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of
any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher
standards or requirements shall govern.



   (C)   This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement,
covenant or any other private agreement, provided that where the regulations
of this code are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements
than such easements, covenants or other private agreements, the requirements
of this Subdivision Code shall govern.



   (D)   The recommendations of the Plan Commission or lack thereof
shall not limit the power of the Board of Trustees to act.



§ 7-1-6  RULES.



   (A)   In the interpretation of this Subdivision Code, the rules and
definitions contained in this section shall be observed and applied, except
when the context clearly indicates otherwise.



   (B)   The language set forth in the text of this chapter shall be
interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction.



      (1)   Words used in the present tense shall include the
future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural
number, and the plural singular.



      (2)   The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary.



      (3)   The word “may” is permissive.



      (4)   The word “lot” shall include the words “plat”
and “piece” and “parcel”.



      (5)   The phrase “used for” shall include the phrases
“arranged for”, “designed for”, “intended for”, “maintained
for” and “occupied for”.



      (6)   The phrase “designed for” shall include the phrases
“arranged for” and “intended for.”



§ 7-1-7  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY. Any right-of-way which is used primarily for vehicular traffic
along the side or in the rear of properties and which affords only a
secondary means of access to abutting properties.



   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of
streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad right-of-way, bulkhead lines
or shore lines of waterways, or corporate boundary lines of the village.



   BOARD OF TRUSTEES. The President and Board of Trustees of the Village
of Carol Stream, Illinois.



   BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATIONS. The provision of the ability to transmit
voice, data, text, sound or video programming. A BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
UTILITY is any entity engaged in operating, maintaining and/or providing a
broadband telecommunications network to subscribers for a fee, and may be
operated via an open and/or closed transmission path. A telecommunications
utility may be based on a single technology or a combination of technologies.



   BUILDING. Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely
affixed to the land and entirely separated on all sides from any other
structure by space or by walls in which there are no communicating doors,
windows or openings, and which is designed or intended for shelter, enclosure
or protection of persons, animals or chattel.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The composite of the functional and geographic
elements of the official Comprehensive Plan of the village and environs or
any segment thereof, in the form of plans, maps, charts, text of reports,
implementing ordinances and the official map.



   CROSSWALK. A public right-of-way located across a block to provide
pedestrian access to adjacent streets or alleys.



   CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street having one open end and being permanently
terminated in a vehicular turnaround.



   DATUM PLANE. A reference point from which elevations are measured. The
DATUM PLANE is mean sea level as established by the United States Geological
Survey (USGS).



   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by
the general public, a corporation or a certain person or persons for a
specific purpose or purposes.



   FARMLAND. Land actively used for commercial agricultural purposes.



   GROSS LAND AREA. The entire area of a development, including lots,
streets and alleys, measured to the centerline of any bounding streets.



   LAND IMPROVEMENT. Any sanitary sewer system, storm sewer system, water
supply and distribution system, roadway, side strip, sidewalk, pedestrian
way, no-access strip, off-street parking area or other improvement which the
village may require under this chapter.



   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a THROUGH LOT, both
street lines shall be deemed front lines.



   NO-ACCESS STRIP. A land area of at least ten feet wide along the rear
lot line of a double frontage lot and abutting a thoroughfare within which no
vehicular driveway shall be permitted.



   OFFICIAL MAP. The map showing the streets, highways and parks of the
village laid out, adopted and established by law and any amendments or
additions thereto resulting from the Board of Trustee’s action or the
approval of subdivision plats.



   PARKWAY. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street,
sidewalk, trail, path or driveway apron.



   PEDESTRIAN WAY. A right-of-way across or within a block designated for
pedestrian use.



   PLAN, PRELIMINARY. A detailed map, drawing or chart on which the
subdivider’s design for the subdivision of land is presented and which he
or she submits in form for review and approval, but not for recording.



   PLAN, SKETCH. A general map or drawing on which the subdivider’s
design for the subdivision of land is presented for discussion purposes prior
to the preparation of the preliminary plan.



   PLAT, FINAL. A map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider’s plan
for the subdivision of land is presented and which he or she submits for
final approval and intends to record in final form.



   PROTECTIVE COVENANT. Contract entered into between private parties,
which constitutes a restriction on the use of all private property within a
subdivision for the benefit of property owners and to provide mutual
protection against undesirable aspects of development which would tend to
impair stability of values.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH. The shortest distance between lines of lots
delineating the public street.



   ROADWAY. The paved area within a street right-of-way intended for
vehicular traffic, including all curb and gutter facilities.



   SIDE STRIP. The unpaved strip of land within a street right-of-way
which is parallel to the roadway.



   SIDEWALK. A walk for pedestrian use.



   STREET. A way for vehicular traffic.



   STREET, APPROVED. Any streets, whether public or private, meeting
standards and specifications of the village.



   STREET, COLLECTOR. A street which carries traffic from subcollector and
minor streets to the major street system, including the principal entrance
streets of residential developments.



   STREET, MAJOR. A street which serves a high volume of traffic moving
between principal places within an urban area as well as to serve traffic
moving through the urban area. Whenever the words MAJOR STREET are used, and
there is no reference made to “secondary major streets”, the term MAJOR
STREET shall include both major and secondary major streets.



   STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS. A minor street which is parallel and adjacent
to highway and major streets and which provides access to abutting properties
and protection to local traffic from fast, through-moving traffic on the
highways and major streets.



   STREET, MINOR. A street primarily used as access to abutting properties.



   STREET, PRIVATE ACCESS. A private street contained within any zoning
district or category, including planned unit development as defined in the
Zoning Code of the village, which is available for public use.



   STREET, PUBLIC. Any major or secondary major street or minor street
which is shown on the subdivision plat and is or is to be dedicated for
public use.



   STREET, SECONDARY MAJOR. A street of considerable continuity which
serves or is intended to serve as a major traffic artery connecting various
sections of the village.



   STREET, SUBCOLLECTOR. A street which carries traffic from minor streets
to the collector street system, including streets for circulation within
residential development.



   STREET TREE. A tree which is planted between the lot line along a
street right-of-way and the building setback line on any yard adjoining a
street right-of-way. Such tree shall be planted in accordance with the
provisions of this code.



   SUBDIVIDER. The person or persons proposing a subdivision or planned
unit development of land under his or her control.



   SUBDIVISION. The division of land into two or more parts, any of which
is less than five acres, or any division of land which involves new streets
or easements of access. The term includes resubdivision, and when
appropriate, the context shall relate to the process of subdividing, or to
the land subdivided.



(Ord. 2008-10-49, passed 10-6-2008)



ARTICLE 2:  PRELIMINARY PLAN AND FINAL PLAT



Section



   7-2-1   Procedure for approval and requirements generally



   7-2-2   Preapplication procedure



   7-2-3   Procedure for approval of preliminary plan



   7-2-4   Drawings and data for approval of preliminary plan



   7-2-5   Plans and specifications and review fees for land
improvements



   7-2-6   Procedure for approval of final plat



   7-2-7   Drawings and data for final approval



   7-2-8   Security for subdivision improvements



§ 7-2-1  PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL AND REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY.



   Any owner of land which is within the corporate limits of the village
or within one and one-half miles of such corporate limits on unincorporated
land wishing to divide the same into lots or to resubdivide for the purpose
of sale or assessment, or both, or wishing to dedicate streets, alleys or
other lands for public use, shall follow the procedures and requirements of
this Subdivision Code.



§ 7-2-2  PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Prior to filing of an application for approval of the
preliminary plan, the subdivider may submit to the office of the Plan
Commission plans and data as specified below. The subdivider may request a
meeting with the Plan Commission in order to discuss his or her plans and
particular problems relative to compliance with the Comprehensive Plan,
official map, Zoning Code and other applicable village ordinances. This step
does not require formal application fees.



   (B)   Preapplication information to be presented by the subdivider
is suggested to be as follows.



      (1)   General subdivision information which shall describe or
outline the existing conditions of the site and the proposed development as
necessary to supplement the submitted plans. This information may include
data on existing covenants, land characteristics and available community
facilities and utilities; and information describing the subdivision
proposal, such as number of residential lots, typical lot width and depth,
price range, business areas, school, playground and park areas, and other
public areas, proposed protective covenants and proposed utilities and street
improvements.



      (2)   Sketch plan on topographic survey which shall show in
simple sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in
relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a free hand pencil
sketch made directly on a print of the topographic survey. The sketch plan
shall include the existing topographic data and contours of not less than
ten-foot intervals.



§ 7-2-3  PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAN.



   (A)   (1)   The subdivider shall cause to be prepared a
preliminary plan, which plan shall include:



         (a)   All of the property owned or controlled by the
applicant;



         (b)   All properties adjacent to or considered to be
contiguous to the proposed subdivision or served by the street or easement
for public use; and



         (c)   Improvement plans and other supplementary material
as specified in § 7-2-4.



      (2)   This information shall be submitted to the Village
Manager, with written application for approval. The required filing fee and
five copies of the preliminary plan shall accompany the application.



   (B)   The Village Manager shall refer the preliminary plan to the
Plan Commission at the next regular meeting of the Commission after the
application is submitted to the Village Manager. The Village Manager shall
instruct the Village Engineer to collaborate with the Plan Commission in
reviewing the preliminary plan for compliance with these regulations and
other ordinances of the village. The Plan Commission shall notify the owner
or subdivider as to the time and place of the Plan Commission meeting at
which he or she will be afforded an opportunity of being heard.



   (C)   The Plan Commission may submit the preliminary plan to the
Village Planner and/or Village Attorney. The Village Planner and/or Village
Attorney shall prepare a report on such preliminary plan, which he or she
shall submit to the Commission. The Village Planner and/or Village Attorney
may be requested by the Plan Commission, Village Manager or Village President
to prepare additional reports and/or opinions relating to the preliminary and
subsequent plans and other items to be submitted to the village prior to the
final approval by the village. The subdivider shall be notified in writing
that his or her plans are being reviewed or opinions regarding this
subdivision are being sought from the Village Planner and/or Village
Attorney. The Village Planner and/or Village Attorney shall submit their
itemized bills for services to the village which shall transmit a bill to the
subdivider. The Village Planner and/or Village Attorney shall bill for their
services at the same hourly rate which they normally charge the village. The
subdivider shall pay the village for the services rendered by its planner and
attorney within ten days after the submission of the bill from the village to
him or her.



   (D)   The Plan Commission, within three months and ten days from its
first regular meeting following the referral of the preliminary plan by the
Village Manager shall:



      (1)   Approve or disapprove the preliminary plan and shall
submit its written recommendations, which may include the recommendations of
the Village Engineer, Village Planner or Village Attorney, to the Village
Board of Trustees and to the subdivider; or



      (2)   Advise the subdivider in writing, if the Plan Commission
finds that changes, additions or corrections are required on the preliminary
plan. The subdivider may resubmit the preliminary plan to the Plan
Commission, without paying an additional fee, for its consideration at the
next regular meeting of the Commission following the resubmission of the
preliminary plan by the subdivider; provided that, it is resubmitted at least
ten days prior to the meeting of the Commission. The Plan Commission shall,
at the meeting, approve or disapprove the preliminary plan and submit its
recommendation in writing, which may include the recommendations of the
Village Engineer, Village Planner, Village Attorney or Village Board of
Trustees, to the subdivider.



   (E)   The Village Board of Trustees shall accept or reject the plan
within one month after its next regular meeting following the action of the
Plan Commission. The applicant and the Village Board of Trustees may mutually
agree to extend the one month period.



      (1)   If the preliminary plan is disapproved, the Board of
Trustees shall state in writing the reasons for the disapproval, and it shall
be filed in the office of the Village Clerk and a copy shall be sent to the
applicant.



      (2)   If the preliminary plan is approved, the following
qualifications shall govern:



         (a)   Approval of the preliminary plan by the Village
Board of Trustees is tentative only, involving merely the general
acceptability of the layout as submitted;



         (b)   The Plan Commission with the approval of the
Village Board of Trustees, or the Village Board of Trustees itself, may
require or allow such changes or revisions as are deemed necessary in the
interest of the needs of the community; and



         (c)   Approval of the preliminary plan shall be
effective for a maximum period of one year, unless upon application of the
subdivider, the Village Board of Trustees grants an extension. The
application for the extension shall not require an additional filing fee or
the submittal of additional copies of the approved preliminary plan.



   (F)   Upon approval of the preliminary plan by the Board of
Trustees, the following notice of approval shall be stamped upon four prints
thereof and required signatures affixed:



 

NOTICE OF APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAN

   Notice is hereby given that the preliminary plan of a subdivision shown
hereon has received approval by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Carol
Stream, Illinois, and upon compliance by the subdivider with requirements of
qualifications governing the approval of preliminary plans and with other
revisions and stipulations that may be required, the Board of Trustees will
receive the final plat for consideration when submitted by the subdivider in
such form and within such time as required by this ordinance.

 

The Board of Trustees of the Village of Carol Stream, Illinois

 

Date:                      

By:                                               
  , President

Attest:                                            
  , Village Clerk



 



   (G)   Four prints of such approved preliminary plan shall be
distributed by the village as follows.



      (1)   One print shall be sent to the Plan Commission.



      (2)   One print shall be sent to the Village Engineer.



      (3)   One print shall be retained by the village for filing.



      (4)   One print shall be returned to the subdivider.



§ 7-2-4  DRAWINGS AND DATA FOR APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAN.



   The preliminary plan and required accompanying maps shall be drawn on
tracing medium in a manner that clear and legible prints can be made
therefrom, and shall be at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or, if the
area of the subdivision is more than 200 acres, one inch equals 200 feet. It
shall show the following.



   (A)   Identification and description.



      (1)   Name of the subdivision. Not a duplication of a name of
any plat heretofore recorded in the village or in DuPage County, Illinois;



      (2)   Location of the subdivision. Location by section, town
and range, or by other approved legal description, including present tract
designation according to official county records;



      (3)   Survey of the subdivision. Boundary line survey on an
accompanying map which is prepared and certified by a registered land
surveyor;



      (4)   Designer of the subdivision. Name and address of the
site planner and/or engineer;



      (5)   Owner of the subdivision. Name and address of the owner
and/or subdivider; and



      (6)   Other information. Title, scale, north point and date.



   (B)   Existing conditions.



      (1)   Boundary lines. In accordance with division (A)(3) of
this section;



      (2)   Total acreage. Within the boundary lines;



      (3)   Existing zoning districts. Both in proposed subdivision
and adjacent tracts;



      (4)   Existing improvements. Location, widths and names of all
existing or previously platted streets or other rights-of-way showing type of
improvement (if any), railroad and utility rights-of-way, parks and other
public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures, easements and
sections and corporate lines within the tract and to a distance of 200 feet
beyond the tract;



      (5)   Utilities on and adjacent to the tract. Location and
size of existing sewer lines, water mains, culverts or other underground
facilities within the tract and to a distance of 200 feet beyond the tract,
also indicating such data as locations and surface and invert grade
elevations of catch basins, manhole covers and fire hydrants. If water mains
and sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract, indicate the direction and
distance to, and the size of nearest usable facilities;



      (6)   Location map. Draw at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 1,000 feet showing boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or
subdivided land within an area bounded by nearest arterial streets or other
natural boundaries, but not less than one-half mile beyond the subdivision
boundaries in subdivisions located beyond the village limits, identifying
type of use and ownership of surrounding land and showing alignments of
existing streets;



      (7)   Topographic and profile data. A study or studies which
shall show topographically and by profile, at vertical intervals of not more
than two feet, except in unusual topographic conditions when such vertical
intervals may be required to be altered as determined by the Village
Engineer, the elevation of the land prior to the commencement of any change
in elevations as a part of any phase of subdividing. In addition, if it is
known or contemplated that the elevations, or the flow of surface water from
the subdivided land will be changed as a result of developing and improving
any portion of the proposed subdivision, then the studies shall also show the
proposed changes in the elevations and flow of surface water from the
subdivided land. Topographic data shall refer to USGS North America Datum
Mean Sea Level Elevation;



      (8)   Other conditions on the tract. Watercourses, marshes,
rock outcrop, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot or more in
caliper at one foot above ground level, houses, barns, shacks and other
significant features;



      (9)   Reference to monuments. Locations of or reference to
location of existing monuments or survey markers used in preparation of
survey, and grade elevation of each monument and marker;



      (10)   Proposed public improvements. Highway or other major
improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near
the tract;



      (11)   Easements. Location, width and purpose;



      (12)   Other conditions on adjacent land. Approximate
direction and gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or
retaining walls, character and location of buildings, railroads, power lines,
towers and other nearby non-residential land uses or adverse influences; and
owner of adjacent unplatted land. For adjacent platted land, refer to
subdivision plat by name, recording date and number, and show approximate
percent built-up, typical lot size and dwelling type; and



      (13)   Location of other property. Location of all land owned
or under option by the subdivider as shown on the preliminary plan.



   (C)   Design features. Subdivision design features shall be as
follows:



      (1)   Accord with Comprehensive Plan. The preliminary plan
shall be in substantial accord with the Comprehensive Plan as amended from
time to time;



      (2)   Proposed zoning changes. The village zoning districts
proposed for the subdivision shall be shown;



      (3)   Layout of streets. Right-of-way widths, street names
(not duplicating the name of any street heretofore used in the village or its
environs unless such street is an extension of or in line with an already
named street, in which event, that name shall be used), and proposed through
streets extended to the boundaries of the subdivision and approximate grades
and gradients;



      (4)   Other rights-of-way. Location and widths of alleys,
pedestrian ways and utility easements;



      (5)   Location of utilities. Including water distribution
systems, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, broadband telecommunications, electric
and gas, if not shown on other exhibits;



      (6)   Lots. Layout, total number of lots and dimensions on the
lot containing the minimum width and depth, and on the lot containing the
maximum width and depth; lot numbers and block numbers;



      (7)   Sites to be reserved or dedicated. Sites, if any, to be
reserved or dedicated for schools, parks, playgrounds or other public uses,
with the approximate acreage in each indicated. Such sites shall be
designated by letter or number;



      (8)   Setback lines. Minimum front and side street building
setback lines, indicating dimensions;



      (9)   Sewers and drainage. Proposed location of sewer lines
and storm water drains and proposed methods of sewage and waste disposal
including sufficient information to show the improvements necessary for
surface water drainage, retention and detention; provided, however, that, the
Village Board by resolution may waive in whole or in part the requirement of
information regarding improvements for surface water drainage, retention and
detention for industrial and commercial subdivision only in those exceptional
cases where the Village Board shall determine that it is impracticable to
require this information. Such information together with the required bond or
other guarantee provided for in § 7-2-8 must be furnished before building,
earthwork or excavation permits are issued;



      (10)   Grading. When recommended by the Village Engineer and
required by the Plan Commission, the subdivider shall submit proposed
detailed grading plans of blocks and lots. No land will be approved for
subdivision which is subject to periodic flooding or which contains
inadequate drainage facilities or other topographic conditions which may
increase danger to health, life or property, or aggravate erosion or flood
hazard unless the subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in the
opinion of the Village Engineer and Plan Commission, make such land safe for
development and occupancy; and



      (11)   Land use intent. Sites, if any, for multi-family
dwellings, shopping centers, churches, industry or other non-public uses,
exclusive of single-family dwellings, with the approximate acreage in each
indicated.



   (D)   Documentation. Accompanying documentation shall be as follows:



      (1)   A statement that the proposed subdivision (where
contiguous) is or is not to be annexed to the village;



      (2)   Either a preliminary plan for sanitary sewer, water and
storm sewers or a written statement setting forth general plans for such
improvements and indicating the method to be employed to overcome particular
problems that may be encountered with the development of the proposed
subdivision;



      (3)   Draft of protective covenants, whereby the subdivider
proposes to regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the
proposed development;



      (4)   For all proposed subdivisions larger than five acres in
gross area, and for all planned unit developments, ten copies of a written
text, which describes the different types of land use proposed to be
developed on the subject property. If residential dwelling units are
proposed, the total number of dwelling units, the distribution of these
dwelling units, the number of dwelling units by building type distributed by
bedroom count shall be quantified, as well as the projected number of people
and the estimated number of students to reside within the dwelling units;



      (5)   All proposed developments desiring new access onto
DuPage County or IDOT highways shall concurrently submit such preliminary
plan to the affected agency to coordinate access location and design. A
commitment of the agency toward the viability of the proposed access shall be
required as a condition of approval of the preliminary plat; and



      (6)   The owner shall provide documentation that the site has
been inspected by one qualified to determine whether or not a wetland is
present on the site. If a wetland is present, then documentation shall be
provided indicating that coordination with the United States Army Corps of
Engineers and any other involved federal or state agency has been initiated.



(Ord. 2008-10-49, passed 10-6-2008)



§ 7-2-5  PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS AND REVIEW FEES FOR LAND IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   The engineering fee for the review of plans by the Village
Engineer, or his or her designee, shall be as given in § 6-13-9(A).



   (B)   The costs of storm water management engineering plan review
and inspections required performed by means of outside consultant services
shall be paid as specified in § 6-13-9(C).



   (C)   The plan approval by the Village Engineer, or his or her
designee, for both subdivision and storm water management plans shall be
valid for a period of one year from the date of approval. The Village
Engineer is authorized to grant, upon request, one or more extensions of
time, for a period of one year each. A request for extension must be made in
writing and justifiable cause for the extension must be demonstrated.



   (D)   The engineering fee for inspections performed during the
course of construction by the Village Engineer, or his or her designee, shall
be as given in § 6-13-9(B).



(Ord. 92-02-20, passed 2-11-1992; Ord. 2005-02-04, passed 2-6-2006; Ord.
2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010)



§ 7-2-6  PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT.



   (A)   Application for approval of the final plat, after the filing
of the engineering drawings as specified in § 7-2-5 and after fulfilling the
requirements of § 7-2-8, shall be submitted in writing to the Village
Manager. The application shall be submitted at least ten days prior to the
regular meeting of the Plan Commission for its approval or disapproval.



   (B)   The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary
plan as approved and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only
that portion of the approved preliminary plan which he or she proposes to
record and develop at the time; provided, however, that, such portion
conforms to all requirements of these regulations.



   (C)   Within two months after its meeting at which the application
for approval of the final plat is received, the Plan Commission shall approve
or dis-approve it. If the Plan Commission approves, it shall affix upon the
plat the certifying signature of its Chairperson. If it disapproves, it shall
set forth its reasons in its own records and shall forward a copy to the
Board of Trustees and to the applicant.



   (D)   Filing.



      (1)   After a decision on the final plat by the Plan
Commission and the fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations,
action must be taken by the Village Board of Trustees within two months after
the meeting at which the final plat and all drawings, maps and other
documents required have been submitted for its approval. The applicant and
the Village Board of Trustees may mutually agree to extend the two-month
period.



      (2)   Upon approval by the Village Board of Trustees, the
Village Manager shall collect the necessary signatures and shall record the
plat with the County Recorder. The applicant shall pay the recording fee.



      (3)   Upon approval by the Board of Trustees, the village
shall receive from the subdivider one cloth or Mylar reproducible print and
three contact prints of the approved final plat, and three copies of the
approved supporting documents. The cost of such prints and copies of
documents shall be paid by the subdivider.



         (a)   One contact print of the final plat, when
applicable, one copy of the accompanying protective covenants and one copy of
the supporting documents shall be delivered to the Plan Commission.



         (b)   One contact print and all specifications, drawings
and estimates shall be delivered to the Village Engineer.



         (c)   One transparency print and one contact print and
all other supporting documents shall be retained by the village.



§ 7-2-7  DRAWINGS AND DATA FOR FINAL APPROVAL.



   The final plat shall be accurately drawn in ink on tracing cloth or
Mylar drafting film, in a manner that clear and legible transparent or
contact prints or photostatic copies can be made. The final plat shall be at
a scale of one inch equals 100 feet on sheets not to exceed 30 inches by 36
inches. Where necessary, the plat may be drawn on several sheets accompanied
by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. For large subdivisions, the
final plat may be submitted for approval progressively in contiguous sections
satisfactory to the Plan Commission. The final plat shall show the following:



   (A)   General information shall be as follows:



      (1)   Boundary lines. In accordance with § 7-2-4(A)(3);



      (2)   Layout of streets. Showing right-of-way widths and
street names (not duplicating the name of any street heretofore used in the
village or its environs unless such street is an extension of, or in line
with, an already named street, in which event that name shall be used) and
showing proposed through streets extended to the boundaries of the
subdivision;



      (3)   Other rights-of-way. Location and width of alleys,
pedestrian ways and utility easements;



      (4)   Sites to be reserved or dedicated. Sites, if any, to be
reserved or dedicated for schools, parks, playgrounds or other public uses,
or for the exclusive use of property owners within the subdivision. Such
areas shall be designated by letter or number and by legal description;



      (5)   Accurate dimensions. Accurate angular and lineal
dimensions for all lines, angles, radii, and arcs used to describe all
boundaries including perimeter survey of tract, streets, alleys, easements,
areas to be reserved or dedicated for public use and other important
features. Error of closure of boundary line surveys shall not exceed one foot
for each 10,000 feet of perimeter survey. Angular error shall not exceed plus
or minus 20 seconds. Lot lines to show dimensions in feet and hundredths, and
when angle occurs in any lot line between lot corner, the measurement of the
angle shall be shown in degrees, minutes and seconds. The final plat shall
show accurately the location of all permanent lot markers as actually
installed;



      (6)   Control points. True angles and distances to the nearest
established street lines and official monuments (not less than three) which
shall be accurately described in the plat by location, size and elevation, to
which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be
referred;



      (7)   Identification system. An identification system for all
blocks and lots using consecutive numbers for lots within a block;



      (8)   Correlation with existing boundaries. Municipal,
township or section lines accurately correlated to the lines of the
subdivision by distances and angles;



      (9)   Location of monuments. Accurate location of all
monuments which shall be placed at all block corners, angle points and at
intermediate points as shall be required by the Village Engineer, and
installed in such a manner that they may be located by a licensed surveyor.
All USGS, state, county, village or other official bench marks, monuments or
triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in
precise position;



      (10)   Covenants. Protective covenants, or filed as an
accompanying document in form for recording;



      (11)   Setback lines. Proposed building setback lines on all
lots and other sites;



      (12)   Name of subdivision;



      (13)   Location. By section, township and range;



      (14)   Title, scale, north arrow, date;



      (15)   Flood information. The plat shall identify the
community and community panel numbers of the Flood Insurance Rate Maps
referenced to confirm whether or not any portion of the site contains
identified floodway or is shown to be within a Flood Hazard Area;



      (16)   Utility easement provisions. The following provision
shall appear on every plat of subdivision prior to village approval and
recording of the plat:



   UTILITY EASEMENT GRANT IN PLAT



   A permanent non-exclusive easement is hereby reserved for and granted
to the Village of Carol Stream, DuPage County, Illinois, and to those utility
and other entities operating now, or in the future, under franchise from the
Village of Carol Stream, including, but not limited to Illinois Bell
Telephone Company, Northern Illinois Gas Company, Commonwealth Edison
Company, and to their successors and assigns, in, on, upon, across, over,
under and through the areas shown by dashed lines and labeled “utility
easement” on this plat of subdivision, such easements granting and
reserving for the village utilities and other entities the perpetual right,
privilege and authority to install, construct, reconstruct, inspect, operate,
replace, renew, alter, enlarge, remove, repair, clean and maintain various
utility and similar transmission, receiving and distribution systems,
including, but not limited to cables, lines, transformers, computer devices,
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains, and any and all necessary
manholes, hydrants, pipes, connections, catch basins, buffalo boxes, and
without limitation, such other installation as may be required to furnish
utility and similar service to the attached area, and such appurtenances and
additions thereto as the village, utilities and similar entities may deem
necessary, useful or convenient, together with a permanent right of access
across the lots and real estate shown on this plat of subdivision for the
necessary persons and equipment to do any or all of the above work. The right
is also hereby granted to the village, utilities and similar entities to cut
down, trim or remove any trees, shrubs, or other plants that interfere with
the operation of or access to such installations, in, on, upon, across, over,
under or through such easements. No permanent buildings or trees shall be
placed on such easements, but same may be used for gardens, shrubs,
landscaping and other purposes that do not then or later interfere with the
aforesaid uses and rights. Where an easement is used for municipal-owned
utilities, other installation of utilities and other entities shall be
subject to the prior approval, as to location and design, of the village so
as not to interfere with the municipal utilities.



      (17)   Certifications. The certificates required under
division (B) of this section shall appear on the final plat of subdivision.
These certificates shall include certification by a registered land surveyor,
certifying to the accuracy of the survey and plat.



   (B)   Certificates. The following certificates shall appear on the
final plat:



      (1)   Village certificates.



         (a)   Plan Commission certification.



 

STATE OF ILLINOIS )

COUNTY OF DUPAGE  ) ss.

 

Approved this           day of                       , 20 
    .

 

 

   VILLAGE OF CAROL STREAM PLAN COMMISSION

 

                                                  
             

   Chairperson

 



 



         (b)   Village Engineer.



 

STATE OF ILLINOIS )

COUNTY OF DUPAGE  ) ss.

 

I,                                               ,
Village Engineer of the Village of Carol Stream, Illinois, hereby certify
that the land improvements described in the annexed plat and the plans and
specifications thereof meet the minimum requirements of the village and have
been approved by all public authorities having jurisdiction thereof.

 

I do further certify that there has been filed with me and I have reviewed
topographical and profile studies filed with this subdivision plat.

 

Dated at Carol Stream, DuPage County, Illinois this           day of  
                    , 20      .

 

                                              
           

                     Village Engineer



 



         (c)   Village Treasurer.



 

STATE OF ILLINOIS )

COUNTY OF DUPAGE  ) ss.

 

I,                                               ,
Village Treasurer of Carol Stream, do hereby certify that there are no
delinquent or unpaid current or forfeited special assessments or any deferred
installments thereof that have been apportioned against the tract of land
included in the plat.

 

Dated at Carol Stream, DuPage County, Illinois this           day of  
                    , 20      .

 

                                              
           

                     Village Treasurer



 



         (d)   Village Clerk.



 

I, have hereunto set my hand and seal of the Village of Carol Stream,
Illinois this                       day of                
                          , 20      .

 

STATE OF ILLINOIS )

COUNTY OF DUPAGE  ) ss.

 

I,                                                  
  , Village Clerk of the Village of Carol Stream, Illinois, hereby certify
that the annexed plat was presented to and by resolution duly approved by the
Board of Trustees of the Village at its meeting held on             
                                  ,


    20      , and that the required bond or other guarantee has either
been posted or adequate provision has been made for such bond to be posted,
for the completion of the improvements required by the regulations of the
village.

 

 

In witness whereof

                                              
           

                     Village Clerk



 



         (e)   DuPage County Highway Department. (Only for
developments with access onto county highways.)



 

CERTIFICATE OF COUNTY HIGHWAY DEPARTMENT

STATE OF ILLINOIS )

 

COUNTY OF DUPAGE  ) ss.

 

Approved this           day of                       , 20 
    as to roadway access to County Highway                   ,
also known as                                          
              .

 

                                               
             

               Superintendent of Highways



 



         (f)   Illinois Department of Transportation. (Only for
developments adjacent to or having access onto state highways.)



 

STATE OF ILLINOIS )

COUNTY OF DUPAGE  ) ss.

 

Approved this           day of                       , 20 
    as to highway access to State Highway                   , also
known as                                              
          .

 

                                               
             

                    District Engineer

              Illinois Department of Transportation



 



      (2)   County certificates and plats. For areas within one and
one-half miles of the village:



 

All final plats shall comply with all certification requirements of the
office of the County Clerk of DuPage County, Illinois, which requirements are
authorized by statute or valid county ordinances.

 

In addition, and except as otherwise required by statute, certification on
final plats of subdivision located in the unincorporated areas within one and
one-half miles beyond the village limits shall be those required by the
Village of Carol Stream Subdivision Regulations.



 



      (3)   Other certificates.



         (a)   Owner’s certificate. (Corporate owner’s
certificate should be accompanied by a corporate form of acknowledgment.)



 

STATE OF ILLINOIS )

COUNTY OF DUPAGE  ) ss.

 

This is to certify that the undersigned is/are the owner/owners of the land
described in the annexed plat, and has/have caused the same to be surveyed
and subdivided, as indicated thereon, for the uses and purposes therein set
forth, and does/do hereby acknowledge and adopt the same under the style and
title thereon indicated. The undersigned hereby dedicates/dedicate for public
use the land shown on this plat for thoroughfares, streets, alleys,
easements, drainage and public services; and hereby also reserves/reserve and
grants/grant to the Village of Carol Stream, and to the utility companies
operating now or in the future under a franchise from the village, the
utility easements which are shown on the plat or stated on their standard
form which is attached hereto.

 

                                              

   Title

                                              

   Address

 

   Dated this           day of                   , 20   
  .



 



         (b)   Notary certificate.



 

STATE OF ILLINOIS )

COUNTY OF DUPAGE  ) ss.

 

I,                                                  
, as Notary Public in and for the County, in the State aforesaid, do hereby
certify that                                       ,
personally known to me to be the same person/persons whose name/names is/are
subscribed to the foregoing instrument as such owner/owners, appeared before
me this day in person and acknowledged that she/he/they signed the annexed
plat as her/his/their own free and voluntary act for the uses and purpose
therein set forth.

 

Given under by hand and Notarial Seal this                 day of  
                    , 20      .

 

                                              
           

                     Notary Public



 



         (c)   Surveyor’s certificate.



 

STATE OF ILLINOIS )

COUNTY OF DUPAGE  ) ss.

 

This is to certify that I,                                  
      , Registered Illinois Land Surveyor No.              , have
surveyed and subdivided the following described property; as shown by the
annexed plat which is a correct representation of such survey and
subdivision. All distances are shown in feet and decimals thereof. I further
certify that all regulations enacted by the Board of Trustees relative to
plats and subdivisions have been complied with in the preparation of this
plat.

 

I also certify that the foregoing property falls within the corporate limits
of the Village of Carol Stream and that no part of the property covered by
this subdivision is located within a special flood hazard area as identified
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

 

Given under by hand and seal at                              
      , this                 day of                    
  , 20      .

 

                                              
           

                     Land Surveyor

 

Surveyor’s Name (printed or lettered):                        
                                                   
                                         

 

Address and telephone number:                                
                                                   
                                           

 

Surveyor’s File No. of Survey for Identification Purposes:          
                                                   
                           



 



         (d)   Certification concerning drainage.



 

STATE OF ILLINOIS )

COUNTY OF DUPAGE  ) ss.

 

The undersigned hereby certify that, to the best of our knowledge and belief,
the drainage of surface waters will not be changed by the construction of
such subdivision or any part thereof, or that such surface water drainage
will not be changed without adequate provision being made for the collection
and diversion of such surface waters into public areas or drains which the
subdivider has a right to use, and that such surface waters will not be
deposited on the property of adjoining land owners in such concentrations as
may cause damage to the adjoining property because of the construction of the
subdivision. The undersigned owner or duly authorized agent further
acknowledges the existence of the ordinances of the Village of Carol Stream
and restricts the future use of the land herein subdivided in that no
building permits shall be sought by the undersigned owner or agent or their
successors in interest or issued by the village for construction of such land
until and unless the construction and the changes in the land brought about
by such construction and topographical change comply with the ordinances of
the village relating to surface waters, drainage, water retention and
detention, including those ordinances assuring the construction of such
improvements through the posting of security.

 

Dated this                 day of                       ,
20      .

 

                                              

   Registered Professional Engineer

 

                                              

   Owner or Attorney



 



§ 7-2-8  SECURITY FOR SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   (1)   The Plan Commission shall submit the final plat along
with its recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees, and the Village
Board of Trustees shall approve such final plat before recording, and such
approval shall not be given until the subdivider has complied with the
requirements of this section. No building permit shall be issued for
construction on such land until the final plat has been recorded and until
and unless the Village Engineer determines that all the land shown on the
final plat is in compliance with the ordinances of the village relating to
surface water, drainage, water retention, detention, land movements not
previously approved and security to assure the completion of the improvements
has been posted as hereinafter provided.



      (2)   The applicant shall provide cash, an irrevocable letter
of credit or a surety bond with sureties acceptable to the Village Manager or
Board of Trustees in an amount equal to not less than 115% of the full cost
of the improvements as estimated by the Village Engineer and conditioned on
the completion and acceptance by the Village Engineer of all improvements.
The applicant may be required to provide a security of a larger amount in
times of high cost inflation or, if such similar conditions exist. Such
amount shall not exceed 125% of the full cost of the improvements. The
security shall be given in a form such that after reasonable notice to the
owner or developer that the required work has not been completed, the village
may compel the completion by the guarantor or withdraw sufficient funds up to
all amounts not previously released to complete the required improvements.
Where an irrevocable credit or surety bond is posted, such document shall
provide that it shall not lapse or be canceled without 90 days prior written
notice to the village. Such improvements shall include, but not be limited
to, streets, street lights and signals, sidewalks, landscaping of public and
common lands, water facilities, storm and sanitary sewers and facilities,
retention and detention basins and structures, erosion, sediment control and
land movement measures, and where an essential part of the development,
common recreational facilities. The documents establishing this security
arrangement shall be approved by the Village Attorney. The Village Attorney
shall be compensated for his or her services in this regard in accordance
with the provisions of § 7-2-3(C). Upon acceptance of such bond, approval of
plans and specifications for all improvements by the Village Engineer, and
approval by the Plan Commission and Village Board of Trustees of the final
plat, such plat may then be recorded; provided, however, that, the portion of
the required bond or other guarantee necessary for improvements relating to
surface waters, drainage and water retention and detention may be waived, in
whole or in part, by resolution of the Village Board for industrial and
commercial subdivisions only in those exceptional cases where the Village
Board shall determine that it is impracticable to require such development to
comply with village requirements regarding surface waters, drainage and water
retention and detention at the time of approval of the final plat. The
required bond or other guarantee must, however, be posted before building, or
land movement permits are issued.



   (B)   The Village Clerk shall not certify the approval of the Board
of Trustees on the final plat until the required bond, or deposit of cash or
other security or other guarantee either has been filed in its entirety or
has been filed for all improvements except for waiver of that portion of such
required bond or other guarantee for drainage improvements, all as provided
in division (A) of this section.



   (C)   Letters of credit and other forms of security posted with the
village may, upon completion of specific public improvements but prior to
final acceptance of all public improvements, be reduced, from time to time,
by an amount equal to 100% of the cost of such total public improvements.
Such reductions shall be approved by the Board of Trustees. Upon final
acceptance of such improvements and posting of a maintenance security for the
completed and accepted public improvements, such completion security shall be
fully released.



   (D)   In the event that any time prior to the final acceptance of
the subdivision improvements, the amount of the security remaining unused by
the village as cash or not drawn down under the irrevocable letter of credit,
or no longer available through the surety, should not be adequate to cause
the completion of the uncompleted improvements, the village may upon seven
days’ written notice require the applicant, the subdivider or the owner of
the property which benefits from the improvements to post additional security
in an amount sufficient to cause the completion of the subdivision
improvements. The village may take this action on more than one occasion if
the amount of the security at any time should be inadequate to permit the
completion of subdivision improvements. In the event that there is inadequate
security to complete subdivision improvements, the village shall not issue
any building or occupancy permits. If the maintenance security previously
posted shall be inadequate to cause the repair of the subdivision
improvements during the maintenance period, the applicant, the subdivider or
the owner of the property which benefits from the improvements shall be
required to post a replacement maintenance security which, along with the
amount of the security previously utilized, shall be at least equal the
security which was required to be posted at the time that the subdivision
improvements were accepted.



   (E)   Where the village has caused the completion of subdivision
improvements which have not been adequately completed by the applicant, the
subdivider or the owner of the property which benefits from the improvements,
or where the village accepts maintenance responsibilities for improvements
which have not been completed or where bills of sale or other documentation
has not been furnished to the village for personal property associated with
the subdivision, which will be owned by the village, the applicant, the
subdivider or the owner of the property which benefits from the acceptance of
maintenance of the improvements by the village shall remain responsible for
the full obligations contained within the village ordinances associated with
the dedication and improvement of property until such time as all provisions
of this code associated with the transfer of ownership and maintenance
responsibility to the village have been complied with.



   (F)   The Village Manager is authorized to waive the surety
requirements of this section for the installation of any improvements by a
governmental agency, provided that the installation of the improvements is
for a governmental purpose. For the purpose of this section, the term
GOVERNMENTAL AGENCY shall refer to a unit of local government, public taxing
body or extension thereof. The Village Manager may require the governmental
agency to execute an agreement binding the governmental agency to construct
and install the improvements in full accordance with the Carol Stream Code of
Ordinances and all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations and to
correct any deficiencies in such improvements, as determined by the village.



(Ord. 94-07-57, passed 7-18-1994; Ord. 2011-11-36, passed 11-7-2011)



ARTICLE 3:  DESIGN STANDARDS



Section



   7-3-1   Design standards generally



   7-3-2   Street standards



   7-3-3   Alleys



   7-3-4   Easements



   7-3-5   Blocks



   7-3-6   Lots



   7-3-7   Conformity with all village ordinances



   7-3-8   Parks, schools and public areas



   7-3-9   Required land improvements generally



   7-3-10   Utilities; sanitary, storm and water



   7-3-11   Street improvements



   7-3-12   Sidewalks



   7-3-13   Lighting; streets and off-street parking areas



   7-3-14   Landscaping



   7-3-15   Additional trees



   7-3-16   Utilities; broadband telecommunications, electric and gas



   7-3-17   Monuments and markers



   7-3-18   Soil investigations



   7-3-19   Blasting



   7-3-20   Inspection at subdivider’s expense



§ 7-3-1  DESIGN STANDARDS GENERALLY.



   The subdivision of land, including the arrangements, character, extent,
width, grade and location of all streets, alleys, crosswalks, easements,
sites for parks, playgrounds and schools or other land to be dedicated for
public use shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan and official map of the
village, and approval of design standards shall be considered on the basis of
their relation to existing and platted streets, reasonable circulation of
traffic within the subdivision and adjacent land, topographic conditions,
runoff of storm water, public convenience and safety, and appropriate
relation to the proposed land uses of the area to be served.



§ 7-3-2  STREET STANDARDS.



   (A)   Where such is not shown on the Comprehensive Plan, the
arrangements of streets within a subdivision shall either:



      (1)   Provide for the continuation or projection of existing
principal streets in adjacent areas; or



      (2)   Conform to a plan for the area or neighborhood approved
or adopted by the Plan Commission to meet a particular situation where
topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing
streets impracticable.



   (B)   All required street right-of-way widths, and pavement widths,
curves, gradients and site distances shall be as shown in “Table 1: Minimum
Standards for Street Design”, which is set forth at the end of Ch. 7, Art.
4.



   (C)   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet
shall be avoided.



   (D)   It must be evidenced that all street inter-sections and
confluences encourage safe and efficient traffic flow and, in general, be at
or near right angles and in no case shall a street intersect any other street
at less than 60 degrees. An intersection of more than two streets shall not
be permitted.



   (E)   Alleys are not permitted in residential subdivisions unless
deemed necessary by the Plan Commission and required by the Board of
Trustees. Alleys may be provided in business or manufacturing subdivisions.



   (F)   A cul-de-sac street in residential districts shall be not more
than 600 feet in length, measured along its centerline from the street
centerline to the center of the turnaround. Each cul-de-sac street shall have
a terminus of nearly circular shape with a mini-mum right-of-way diameter of
120 feet and a turn-around diameter of 88 feet measured from outer curb to
outer curb.



   (G)   Half-streets shall be prohibited, except when recommended by
the Plan Commission and approved by the Board of Trustees, and where the
Board of Trustees finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of
the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever an
existing dedicated half-street abuts a tract to be subdivided, the other half
of the street shall be platted within such subdivision. A half-street shall
be graded in accordance with cross-section design standards and profile
grades applicable to the entire street width, as established by the Village
Engineer and approved by the Board of Trustees. When the outer half of an
existing half-street is developed, it shall conform with such established
cross-section design and profile grades of the entire street width. The width
of a half-street shall be not less than one-half the required right-of-way
width of the street. A roadway pavement not less than 20 feet in width and,
if recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the Board of Trustees,
a curb along both edges of the pavement, shall be installed in accordance
with standards herein set forth.



   (H)   (1)   Provisions shall be made for vehicular access to
residential property abutting a major street either:



         (a)   By providing a marginal access road; or



         (b)   By backing lots to the thoroughfare with a
planting strip at least ten feet wide along the line adjacent and parallel to
the major street.



      (2)   These standards are established for the purpose of
providing protection for the residential properties and to provide for
traffic safety and the efficient use of the major street for its intended
function of accommodating through traffic.



   (I)   The Plan Commission or the Village Board may require a
marginal access road along a major street in commercial or industrial zones.



   (J)   Reserve strips controlling access to public utilities, streets
or alleys shall be prohibited.



   (K)   Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through
traffic will be discouraged.



   (L)   Street grades shall provide proper relation between the street
and the first floor elevation of the houses or buildings and permit
convenient and economical access to and drainage of the lots.



§ 7-3-3  ALLEYS.



   (A)   In commercial, business and industrial districts, definite and
assured provisions shall be made for service access such as off-street
loading, unloading and parking consistent and adequate for the uses proposed.
If, in the opinion of the Plan Commission, such facilities are not adequate,
the Plan Commission may permit or require the dedication and improvement of a
public alley.



   (B)   Alleys in residential areas shall not be permitted, except
where deemed necessary and on the recommendation of the Plan Commission.



   (C)   The width of an alley where permitted or required shall have a
minimum width of 24 feet in all zoning districts.



   (D)   Alley intersections and sharp changes in alley alignment shall
be avoided.



   (E)   Dead end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if
unavoidable, they shall be provided with adequate turn around facilities at
the dead end, as determined by the Plan Commission.



§ 7-3-4  EASEMENTS.



   (A)   Utility distribution or transmission installations serving the
subdivision and, when required, storm water drainage ways shall be located in
easements as designated on the subdivision plat of record. Such easements
shall be located along the rear lot lines or side lot lines at locations of
extensions of utility installation between blocks, or continuity of drainage
way. They shall occupy not less than the rear ten feet or lot depth of ten
feet of lot width adjoining the applicable side lot line, or may be of a
greater width if recommended by the Village Engineer and approved by the
Board of Trustees. Additional easements at other locations may be recommended
for specific conditions by the Village Engineer and required by the Board of
Trustees.



   (B)   Easements shall be designed to provide continuity from block
to block.



   (C)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a natural drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement, conforming
substantially with the areas bordering such watercourse that are subject to
flooding. The boundaries of such areas subject to flooding shall be as
designated in Ch. 7, Art. 1, of this Subdivision Code.



§ 7-3-5  BLOCKS.



   (A)   The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined
with due regard to:



      (1)   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the
special needs of the types of use contemplated;



      (2)   Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions
within the corporate limits of the village; and



      (3)   Needs of convenient access, circulation, control and
safety of street traffic.



   (B)   In residential subdivisions, the maximum length of blocks
shall be 1,800 lineal feet. No blocks shall be less than 600 lineal feet in
length, unless recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the Board
of Trustees.



   (C)   In manufacturing and business subdivisions, maximum length of
blocks shall be as recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the
Board of Trustees.



   (D)   The shape of blocks shall be determined by topographical
features, the basic street system and traffic pattern, lot depths and areas
designated for public and other non-residential land uses.



   (E)   Blocks, or portions thereof, intended for commercial or
industrial use shall be designated as such, and the plan shall show adequate
off-street areas to provide for parking, loading docks and other facilities.



   (F)   Pedestrian crosswalks not less than ten feet wide shall be
required where deemed necessary by the Plan Commission and required by the
Board of Trustees, to provide for pedestrian circulation or access to
schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community
facilities.



§ 7-3-6  LOTS.



   (A)   The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation shall be
appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of
development and use contemplated.



   (B)   Width and area of lots shall conform with lot width and area
requirements set forth in the Zoning Code of the village or that of DuPage
County in the unincorporated areas beyond the village limits.



   (C)   Depth of lots shall be not less than 100 feet in any
residential district; except that, where residential lots abut arterial
streets, the lot depth shall be a minimum of 135 feet.



   (D)   All residential lots shall abut on a publicly dedicated street
or as required in Ch. 16, Art. 16 (the Planned Unit Development article of
the Zoning Code) of this code.



   (E)   Width, area and depth of lots in a manufacturing or business
subdivision shall be as recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by
the Board of Trustees.



   (F)   Side lot lines of lots shall be at right angles or radial to
the street line, or substantially so.



   (G)   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided,
except where essential to provide separation of residential development from
major streets or highways or to overcome specific dis-advantages of
topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten feet,
and across which there shall be no right of vehicular access, shall be
provided along the rear lot lines of lots abutting such highways and major
thoroughfares.



   (H)   Lots abutting upon a watercourse, drainage way, channel or
stream shall have an additional depth or width as recommended by the Plan
Commission and approved by the Board of Trustees in order to provide
acceptable building sites.



   (I)   In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be given to
the preservation of natural features, such as trees, watercourses, historical
land marks and similar community assets, which, if preserved, would add to
the attractiveness and value of the subdivision, neighborhood or the
community as a whole. The Plan Commission shall include in its report its
conclusions as to compliance herewith.



§ 7-3-7  CONFORMITY WITH ALL VILLAGE ORDINANCES.



   All plats of subdivision submitted to the Village Board for its
approval shall not only conform with all provisions of the Subdivision Code,
but shall also conform to all applicable provisions contained within the code
of ordinances of the village, including, but not limited to, the Zoning Code
or other ordinances of the village.



§ 7-3-8  PARKS, SCHOOLS AND PUBLIC AREAS.



   Whenever the reasonable requirement provided by the Comprehensive Plan
of the village indicates the necessity for providing for a school site, park
site or other public lands within any proposed subdivision for which approval
has been requested, and no such provision has been made therefor, the
governing authorities may require that land be designated for such public
purpose before approving such plan. Whenever a final plat of subdivision, or
part thereof, has been approved by the governing authorities as complying
with the Comprehensive Plan and there is designated therein a school site,
park site or other public land, the governing authorities having jurisdiction
of such use, be it a school board, park board or other authority, shall
acquire the land so designated by purchase or commence proceedings to acquire
such land by condemnation within one year from the date of approval of such
plan; and if it does not do so within such period of one year, the land so
designated may then be used by the owners thereof in any other manner
consistent with this chapter, including the Zoning Code of the village.



§ 7-3-9  REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS GENERALLY.



   No subdivision of land shall be approved by the Plan Commission without
the subdivider submitting a statement signed by the Village Engineer
certifying that the improvements described in the subdivider’s plans and
specifications, together with agreements, meet the minimum requirements of
all ordinances of the village and that they comply with the engineering
specifications of this chapter.



§ 7-3-10  UTILITIES; SANITARY, STORM AND WATER.



   (A)   Sanitary sewers.



      (1)   Public or community sanitary sewer systems, including
sewer stub terminals at the outside of curb line or edge of pavement for each
lot, shall be installed to serve all lots in a subdivision or lot division.
Subdivisions or lot divisions containing no lots less than one acre or more
in area and located in the unincorporated areas within one and one-half miles
of the corporate limits of the village, or subdivisions or lot divisions
containing no lots less than one acre in area which are annexed to the
village after the effective date of this code may be served with individual
sewage disposal systems; provided, in either case, there is conformance with
standards approved by the DuPage County Health Department and other
applicable governmental authorities, except that individual sewage disposal
systems shall be permitted in such subdivisions annexed to the village after
the effective date of this code only after there is an agreement between the
petitioner and the village and a guarantee by the petitioner that all lots in
the subdivision will be served with a public or community sewage system
within a specified period of time.



      (2)   Sewers may be placed only in public rights-of-way or in
easements, including easements in private streets.



      (3)   The construction of the sewer system shall be in
accordance with Ch. 7, Art. 4, of this Subdivision Code.



   (B)   Storm sewers.



      (1)   An adequate system of storm water drainage shall be
constructed and installed, consisting of natural watercourses, storm sewers
and other necessary facilities which will drain the subdivision and protect
roadway pavements. Open ditches shall be prohibited, except where they may be
required in state or county rights-of-way.



      (2)   In subdivisions containing lots less than 20,000 square
feet in area, and in business and industrial districts, underground storm
sewer systems shall be constructed in accordance with Ch. 7, Art. 4, of this
Subdivision Code to carry off storm water from all inlets and catch basins
and be connected to an approved outfall.



      (3)   Where a drainage course traverses private property
through the subdivision, an easement for the same shall be recorded on the
final plat.



      (4)   Retention basins, or equivalent, of adequate size shall
be provided by the subdivider and/or developer as is deemed necessary by the
Village Engineer, in accordance with the engineering standards for storm
water retention reservoirs as approved by the Village Engineer.



   (C)   Water supply.



      (1)   Public or community water supply and distribution
systems, including water stub terminals to each lot shall be installed to
serve each lot in a subdivision or lot division. Subdivisions containing no
lots less than one acre or more in area and located in the unincorporated
areas within one and one-half miles of the corporate limits of the village,
or subdivisions containing no lots less than one acre in area and which are
annexed to the village after the effective date of this code, may be served
with water supply from individual wells conforming with standards approved by
DuPage County Health Department and other applicable governmental
authorities, except individual wells shall be permitted in such subdivisions
located within the village only after there is an agreement between the
petitioner and the village and a guarantee by the petitioner that all lots in
the subdivision will be served with a public or community water system within
a specified period of time.



      (2)   The construction of the water supply system shall be in
accordance with Ch. 7, Art. 4, of this Subdivision Code.



      (3)   Fire hydrants shall be installed at all street
intersections, at the termination points of all cul-de-sacs, and at the end
of all mains before the water line is put into service. Intermediate hydrants
shall be installed so that the spacing between hydrants shall not exceed 300
feet. The Plan Commission may recommend and the Village Board may require
spacing of intermediate hydrants at closer intervals.



§ 7-3-11  STREET IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   The design of the street system of the subdivision shall be in
accordance with “Table 1: Minimum Standards for Street Design” set forth
at the end of Ch. 7, Art. 4.



   (B)   The construction of the street system of the subdivision shall
be in accordance with the engineering specifications of this code.



§ 7-3-12  SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   Concrete sidewalks shall be provided throughout the
subdivision to serve the anticipated needs of its residents. Such walks shall
be located in accordance with proper land planning procedures and with due
regard for public safety and anticipated concentration of pedestrian traffic.



   (B)   Sidewalks located along minor, cul-de-sac, loop, marginal
access streets or private access streets shall have sidewalks not less than
four and one-half feet wide. Sidewalks along expressways, major or collector
streets shall have sidewalks not less than five feet wide. All sidewalks
shall be located so that a side strip separates the curb from the sidewalks.
They shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of this code.



   (C)   At each crosswalk a ramp with a non-slip surface shall be
built into the curb so that the sidewalk and street blend to a common level.
Such ramp shall contain a slope with as shallow a rise as possible under the
circumstances, and is subject to the approval of the Village Engineer.



§ 7-3-13  LIGHTING; STREETS AND OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS.



   (A)   Street lighting.



      (1)   Street lighting required. All developments, regardless
of size, within the corporate limits or planning jurisdiction of the village
shall be required to install street lighting facilities for the illumination
of all roadways within dedicated rights-of-way or along private roadways
required to serve the development. The street light system consists of the
poles, mast arms, luminaires, wires and all other materials and work
necessary to complete the street lighting installation.



      (2)   Design standards and specifications. All required street
lighting and appurtenances shall be designed, installed and located in
accordance with the requirements and specifications of this code, and the
following:



         (a)   The American Standard Practice for Roadway
Lighting, current edition;



         (b)   The National Electric Code, current edition; and



         (c)   Three copies of these two codes, incorporated
herein by reference, have been and are kept on file on the office of the
Village Clerk as required by state law.



      (3)   Submission of design drawings and specifications. The
complete lighting system shall be designed by an Illinois registered
professional engineer, and design plans and specifications shall be submitted
to the Village Engineer for approval. In special cases, the Village Engineer
may designate larger lamps, higher poles or vary the spacing as required by
this code, if he or she deems it necessary to meet special conditions.



      (4)   Submission of as-built drawings. Upon completion of the
street lighting installation by the contractor, the contractor must present
two marked sets of as-built drawings to the Village Engineer. The drawings
must show the exact location(s) of the luminaire(s), wattage and voltage,
type of luminaire (mercury vapor-incandescent, high pressure sodium and
others), and the street lighting cable connection route to the Commonwealth
Edison source (trans-former, pedestal pole), with all the specifications as
required under this code. The drawings shall also show lot numbers and legal
house address numbers if known.



         (a)   After the Village Engineer has revised these
drawings, has tested the street lighting system, and has found it to meet the
requirements of this code, and to be built in accordance with the approved
engineering plans and specifications, he or she shall submit one approved set
of the as-built drawings to the Commonwealth Edison Company. This
correspondence shall be a formal approval authorization for the Commonwealth
Edison Company to connect the installation.



         (b)   The village will not accept the street lighting
system until all the public improvements have been completed in accordance
with the approved engineering plans and specifications, as provided by this
code.



      (5)   Warranty. The provider of the subdivision bond shall
guarantee and warrant that the equipment, material and workmanship,
regardless of the manufacturer, will, for a period of one year from the date
of final acceptance, satisfactorily serve the purpose for which they were
installed. Any defective material or workmanship shall be repaired or
replaced to the satisfaction of the village without cost to the village.



   (B)   Lighting of off-street parking areas.



      (1)   Nuisance prohibited. All lighting used to illuminate
off-street parking areas shall be so designed, shielded, located or otherwise
optically controlled so as to provide glareless illumination in such a manner
as not to create a nuisance on adjacent property.



      (2)   Design standards. All off-street parking areas with
lighting shall comply with the requirements and specifications of this code.



§ 7-3-14  LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   All unpaved areas within the street rights-of-way shall be
seeded or sodded. Before the release of the 12-month maintenance bond can be
recommended by the Village Engineer, all unpaved areas between the edge of
the road pavement and the right-of-way line must support an adequate mat of
grass. Provisions shall be made to assure the growth of all landscaping.



   (B)   It shall be the obligation of all parties subdividing property
within the village or constructing residential units on subdivided lots to
plant trees within the parkway adjacent to such lots. No certificate of
occupancy shall be issued to a structure where parkway trees have not been
installed or, at the discretion of the village, a bond has not been posted to
guarantee the payment of the cost of the installation of such trees. Parkway
trees shall be planted on each lot in a subdivision except where there are
existing trees present and preserved as determined by the Village Engineer.
Parkway trees newly planted shall be provided at a minimum of one tree per
inside lot if the lot frontage is 50 feet or less, and a minimum of two trees
per inside lot if the frontage is more than 50 feet, and three trees per
corner lot. Trees shall be planted a minimum of 20 feet apart depending upon
species. Trees shall be planted in the parkway where the parkway in question
is of a kind which will permit the installation of such trees utilizing the
standards set forth in Ch. 12, Art. 3, of this code. In the event that the
Village Engineer should find that the parkway in question is not of a kind to
permit in whole or in part the installation of parkway trees, then all
required trees which may not be planted within the parkway shall be installed
within the front yard of the lot at a point two and one-half feet from the
front property line and be in accordance with the standards set forth in Ch.
12, Art. 3, of this code. However, those required trees that cannot be placed
within the parkway or two and one-half feet from the front property line and
be in accordance with the standards set forth in Ch. 12, Art. 3, of this code
shall be planted elsewhere within the front yard and in accordance with the
standards set forth in Ch. 12, Art. 3, of this code. In accordance with the
standards set forth herein, the requisite number of trees required under this
section must either be planted within the parkway or within the front lot.



   (C)   Newly planted street trees shall be at least two inches in
caliper, measured one foot from the ground.



   (D)   The developer of the subdivision shall be prohibited from
planting the following varieties of trees:



 



Ash ( Fraxinus)
 
All varieties


Birch (Betula Sp)
 
All varieties


Black Cherry
 
All varieties


Black Locust varieties (Robina Pseudoacacia)
 
All


Black Walnut varieties (Juglons Nigia and Jhindsi)
 
All


Box Elder (Acer Negundo)
 
All varieties


Catalpa (Catalpa)
 
All varieties


Elm (Ulmus)
 
All varieties


Mountain Ash (Sorbus)
 
All varieties


Mulberry (Morus Alba)
 
In variety


Poplar (Populus)
 
All varieties


Russian Olive varieties (Elaeagnus Angustifolia)
 
All


Soft maple (Acer saccharinum)
 
In variety


Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus)
 
All varieties


Willow (Salix)
 
All varieties




 



   (E)   Protective screen planting may be required to secure a
reasonably effective physical barrier between residential properties and
adjoining uses to minimize adverse conditions of sight and sound. The screen
planting plan shall be prepared by a landscape architect and shall meet the
approval of the Plan Commission.



(Ord. 92-06-72, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 2006-09-56, passed 9-18-2006)



§ 7-3-15  ADDITIONAL TREES.



   If the required street trees have been planted, then additional trees
may be placed in a front yard or side yard adjoining a street; provided that,
such trees may not be planted closer than two feet to the property line, on
private property. A list of recommended trees shall be maintained by the
village and such list shall provide choices with due consideration given to
the shape, height and spread of the trees in relationship to the locations
proposed. The restrictions contained within this section shall only apply to
trees planted within a front yard or side yard adjoining a street.



§ 7-3-16  UTILITIES; BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATIONS, ELECTRIC AND GAS.



   (A)   All utility distribution lines for broadband
telecommunications, electric and gas service in the subdivision shall be
placed underground entirely throughout a subdivided area. Subject to the
foregoing requirement to place utility distribution line underground,
installation of such facilities shall be made in compliance with the
applicable orders, rules and regulations of the State Commerce Commission now
or hereafter effective, and the subdivider shall be responsible for
compliance with rules and regulations now and hereafter effective and filed
with the Commission pursuant to the State Public Utilities Act, being 220
ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., or any public utility whose service will be required
for the subdivision with respect to the provision of such facilities.



   (B)   Underground broadband telecommun- ications, electric and gas
service facilities shall be placed within rights-of-way or easements in a
manner which will not conflict with other existing or future underground
services. Further, all above-ground service facilities shall be located to
minimize the adverse aesthetic impact on the environment and create no hazard
to the public. The utility lines shall be parallel to and not less than 12
inches from the property lines. Corner markers disturbed by the installation
of utility lines shall be reset by a licensed land surveyor. See § 16-5-7 of
the Village Zoning Code for further regulations regarding the permitted
location of above-ground utility facilities.



(Ord. 2008-10-49, passed 10-6-2008)



§ 7-3-17  MONUMENTS AND MARKERS.



   Monuments shall be placed at all corners and angle points of the
outside boundary, but no further than one-fourth mile apart. The monuments
shall be of concrete, not less than six inches in diameter and 36 inches
deep, with a center copper dowel three inches long cast in place. Iron pipe
or steel bars not less than one-half inch in diameter and 24 inches long
shall be set at the intersection of street centerlines and at all corners of
lots not marked by monuments. The monuments and markers shall be set level
with the finished grade. The subdivider shall replace all or verify the
existence of the iron pipes at all lot corners and all bends in property
lines after the completion of all construction and before final acceptance of
the subdivision by the Village Board.



§ 7-3-18  SOIL INVESTIGATIONS.



   (A)   If the subdivision contains soils with limitations for urban
development and, in the opinion of the Plan Commission or the Village
Engineer, soil investigations, borings or other soil tests are necessary to
determine the nature and extent of such questionable material, the owner or
developer shall retain or cause to be retained the services of a competent
testing laboratory to perform the needed investigations.



   (B)   Copies of the completed reports prepared by the testing
laboratory shall be filed with the Village Engineer.



   (C)   The Village Engineer shall have no liability for costs
connected with the tests, borings or interpretations of results of such work.



§ 7-3-19  BLASTING.



   No blasting shall take place in connection with any work in a
subdivision until appropriate village authorities have been notified and the
applicable village ordinance complied with.



§ 7-3-20  INSPECTION AT SUBDIVIDER’S EXPENSE.



   (A)   All public improvements proposed to be made under the
provisions of this code shall be inspected during the course of construction
by the Village Engineer or a duly designated deputy.



   (B)   During the course of construction of the improvements, the
subdivider shall be required to notify the Village Engineer 48 hours before
the inspection of all utilities.



   (C)   The subdivider shall pay the cost of all inspection services
to the village. The fee shall be established by the village, based on the
current rates and standard engineering practice.



ARTICLE 4:  ENGINEERING



Section



   7-4-1   Engineering specifications generally



   7-4-2   Sanitary sewers



   7-4-3   Storm sewers



   7-4-4   Installation, backfilling sanitary sewer



   7-4-5   Sanitary sewer pipe materials



   7-4-6   Joints in sanitary sewer



   7-4-7   Pipe bedding for sanitary sewers



   7-4-8   Manholes and drainage appurtenances



   7-4-9   Storm sewer construction



   7-4-10   Storm sewer installation and backfill



   7-4-11   Water supply



   7-4-12   House services



   7-4-13   Street improvements; grading and trenching



   7-4-14   Street improvements; roadway construction



   7-4-15   Street improvements; roadway width



   7-4-16   Street improvements; curbs and gutters



   7-4-17   Street improvements; private access streets



   7-4-18   Street improvements; access driveways; depressed curbs



   7-4-19   Street improvements; alley pavement



   7-4-20   Street improvements; side strips, parkways, median strips



   7-4-21   Parking lot improvements



   7-4-22   Sidewalks and cross walkways



   7-4-23   Lighting improvements; streets



   7-4-24   Lighting of off-street parking areas



   7-4-25   Street signs and traffic control devices



   Table 1:   Minimum StandardS For Street Design



   Table 2:   Street Lighting Standards



   Table 3:   Street Lighting Design



   Table 4:   Electrical Hand Hole



§ 7-4-1  ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS GENERALLY.



   (A)   The owner or subdivider shall install storm and sanitary
sewers, water supply system, street grading and pavement, alleys, cross
walkways, public utilities, street lighting and street signs in accordance
with applicable ordinances and standards of construction of the village.



   (B)   No subdivision of land shall be approved without receiving a
statement signed by the Village Engineer, certifying that the improvements
described in the subdivider’s plans and specifications, together with
agreements, meet the minimum requirements of all ordinances of the village.
In establishing the required minimum engineering specifications for the
subdivision, the Village Engineer shall consider the current and future needs
of the subdivision and any potential subdivisions which could reasonably be
expected to utilize the improvements. In no case shall the specifications
required be less than those provided for in this code.



§ 7-4-2  SANITARY SEWERS.



   (A)   General. Public sanitary sewers shall have a minimum internal
diameter of eight inches. Sanitary sewer services shall have a minimum
internal diameter of six inches. Sanitary sewers with internal diameter
between eight inches and 21 inches, and sanitary sewer services, shall be
constructed of extra strength vitrified clay pipe in conformance with the
specifications of the American Society for Testing Materials, Designation
C-200. Sanitary sewers with internal diameter 24 inches and over shall be
constructed of either reinforced concrete pipe conforming to the American
Society for Testing Materials, Designation C-76, wall thickness B, or
asbestos cement pipe conforming to the American Society for Testing
Materials, Designation C-296. Other materials with the same performance
capabilities of these materials as recommended by the Village Engineer and
approved by the Village Board of Trustees may be used.



   (B)   Compression; fillers.



      (1)   Joints for vitrified clay pipe sanitary sewers and
sanitary sewer services shall be the compression type in conformance with the
specifications of the American Society for Testing Materials, Designation
C-425-60T. Joints for reinforced concrete sewers shall be either rubber
gaskets conforming to American Society for Testing Materials, Designation
C-443, or shall be of a mastic type. Bituminous jointing compound, made from
asphalt, liquefiers, mineral fillers and fibers, shall be free from moisture.
The filler shall be such that it shall have positive adhesion to pipe
surfaces, and shall be water, acid and alkali resistant. It shall be plastic
and workable with a trowel and of a composition which will not result in a
plastic flow of the material at temperatures up to 80°F.



      (2)   Joints for asbestos cement pipe shall consist of an
asbestos cement sleeve, made from material similar to the pipe, and two
rubber ring gaskets, all designed and suitable for connecting the lengths of
pipe together. Rubber gaskets shall be of uniform thickness throughout,
smooth, free from pitting, blisters, air checks and other imperfections.



   (C)   Minimum diameters. Public sanitary sewers shall have a minimum
internal diameter of eight inches and shall consist of the following types:



 

Asbestos cement pipe
 
ASTM C-428


Extra strength clay pipe
 
ASTM C-700


Polyvinyl chloride pipe
 
ASTM D-3034


Reinforced concrete pipe
 
ASTM C-76



 



      (1)   Extra strength clay pipe. The pipe shall conform to ASTM
C-700, the joints to ASTM C-425, and a polyvinyl chloride collar to ASTM
D-1784. The pipe shall be permitted in eight-inch, ten-inch, 12-inch,
15-inch, 18-inch, 21-inch and 24-inch diameters. Installation shall be in
conformance to ASTM C-12. Infiltration or exfiltration shall not exceed 200
gallons per inch diameter per mile of length per day.



      (2)   Polyvinyl chloride pipe. PVC pipe shall only be allowed
upon the approval of the Village Engineer. The pipe shall conform to ASTM
D-3034, SDR 35 with elastomeric joints. The pipe may be allowed in
eight-inch, ten-inch and 12-inch diameters for public sewers. Infiltration or
exfiltration shall not exceed 200 gallons per inch diameter per mile of
length per day.



      (3)   Reinforced concrete pipe. The pipe shall conform to ASTM
C-76 with joints conforming to ASTM C-361. The pipe shall be permitted in
15-inch diameter and over. Infiltration or exfiltration test shall not exceed
100 gallons per inch diameter per mile of length per day.



      (4)   Asbestos cement sewer pipe. The pipe shall conform to
ASTM C-428 with couplings using rubber rings conforming to ASTM D-1869. The
pipe shall be permitted in diameters of 15 inches and over. Infiltration or
exfiltration shall not exceed a rate of 100 gallons per inch diameter per
mile of length per day.



   (D)   Design of system. The design engineer shall submit to the
village all design calculations for each type of pipe chosen. The design
shall be based on the worst type of condition that the pipe will be subjected
to with the factor of safety to be not less than 1.25. The design and
installation will utilize a type B bedding condition. A type B bedding
condition shall consist of an angular bedding material meeting the approval
of the Village Engineer placed on a flat trench bottom with a minimum
thickness beneath the pipe of one-eighth the outside diameter of the pipe,
but not less than four inches and spaded under the haunches of the pipe to a
depth of one-half of the outside diameter of the pipe. The remaining backfill
material shall be placed by hand to a level of 12 inches over the top of the
pipe and shall consist of finely divided material free from debris and large
stones or rocks.



   (E)   Infiltration test. Infiltration tests shall be conducted only
when a head of water exceeding a three foot average over the top of the pipe
may be maintained at the midpoint of the section. To check the water level, a
hole shall be drilled through the side of the manhole into which a pipe shall
be installed to a point outside the manhole. A clear plastic pipe shall be
connected to the pipe that would indicate the water level outside the
manhole,  The rate of infiltration shall be measured through a one-half-inch
pipe not more than six inches long extending through a solid plug installed
in the lower manhole of the pipe section to be tested. A stopwatch shall be
used to measure the length of time to fill a known quantity of water. Weirs
shall not be used. Rates shall not exceed those specified for the pipe
material used.



   (F)   Exfiltration tests. The lower end of the section of sewer to
be tested shall be plugged and the system filled with water to a point three
feet above the pipe at midpoint of the section. The duration of the test
shall be one hour beginning after the test section has been filled. After the
elapsed time, the volume exfiltrated shall be calculated or a measured amount
of water shall be used to raise the water to its original level. The rates of
exfiltration shall not exceed those specified for the pipe material used.



   (G)   Type of test. The Village Engineer shall determine the type of
test that will be conducted on the sewer system. His or her decision will be
based on weather and ground conditions at the time of the test.



   (H)   Television inspection. All sanitary sewers shall be televised
at the subdivider’s expense. The televising shall be videotaped. A report
and the video tape shall become the property of the village.



§ 7-4-3  STORM SEWERS.



   (A)   Storm draining inlets shall be placed in street gutters at
intersections and elsewhere as required by the terrain, but shall not be
spaced more than 400 feet along the gutter.



   (B)   Any outfall storm sewer that drains into an existing open
ditch or natural watercourse shall have a reinforced concrete headwall. Under
special circumstances, precast concrete headwalls with a concrete footing may
be permitted when approved by the Village Engineer.



   (C)   Storm water shall not be directed into the sanitary sewer
system and no connections between the storm and sanitary sewer system will be
permitted at any time before, during or after construction.



   (D)   Storm sewer capacities shall be determined with the use of the
rational formula. The intensity (I factor) used shall be a return frequency
of not less than five years. The runoff coefficient (C factor) shall be
determined by the character of the land to be drained and shall conform to
accepted standard engineering practices. Street grades and lot and block
drainage shall be established so as to permit positive drainage.



   (E)   Intercepting storm water structures shall be provided at
intervals not in excess of 400 feet, as measured along the gutter line. Storm
sewers shall be constructed of non-reinforced or reinforced concrete pipe
conforming to the American Society for Testing Materials, Designations C-14,
C-76, C-506 and C-507. Other materials of storm sewer construction may be
used upon recommendation of the Village Engineer and the approval of the
Village Board. Existing drain tiles shall be connected to storm sewers or
shall be restored to operating condition. Joints for concrete storm sewers
shall be sealed with a mastic sealer or preformed flexible gaskets conforming
to C-443 when required because infiltration-exfiltration causes problems.



   (F)   Minimum size inlet and catch basin laterals shall be ten
inches in diameter. All other main line storm sewers shall be a minimum of 12
inches in diameter. All storm sewer laterals across streets shall have a
minimum cover of three feet from the top of pavement to the top of the storm
sewer.



   (G)   Storm water detention shall be provided in accordance with
this code.



   (H)   Design of system. The design engineer shall submit to the
village all design calculations for each type of pipe chosen. The design
shall be based on the worst type of condition that the pipe will be subjected
to with the factor of safety to be not less than 1.25. The design and
installation will utilize a type B bedding condition. A type B bedding
condition shall consist of an angular bedding material meeting the approval
of the Village Engineer placed on a flat trench bottom with a minimum
thickness beneath the pipe of one-eighth the outside diameter of the pipe,
but not less than four inches and spaded under the haunches of the pipe to a
depth of one-half of the outside diameter of the pipe. The remaining backfill
material shall be placed by hand to a level of 12 inches over the top of the
pipe and shall consist of finely divided material free from debris and large
stones or rocks. Installation shall be in accordance with the standard
specifications for road and bridge construction in the state as prepared by
the Department of Transportation.



   (I)   Sufficient areas for storm water retention and/or detention as
required by this code shall be furnished upon each parcel of property prior
to the issuance of building permits. Where such detention and/or retention
area is to be part of a continuous drainage system, sufficient easements to
allow the village to maintain that system at its option and in default of
private maintenance shall be established before building permits are issued.
In certain instances, the creation of common detention or retention areas
serving multiple parcels under different ownership may best serve the private
utilization of property and the public’s interest, achieving economies of
scale in the construction and maintenance of such storm water facilities. In
such circumstances, the village may, in lieu of on-site retention and/or
detention facilities, accept the furnishing of off-site facilities or
sufficient money to purchase facilities which, when added to such detention
and/or retention facilities as are furnished on site, are sufficient to
provide the water retention required by this code; provided, however, that,
until such time as the permanent off-site water retention and/or detention
facilities are available, the property owner shall provide temporary on-site
retention.



§ 7-4-4  INSTALLATION, BACKFILLING SANITARY SEWER.



   Sanitary sewer pipe installation shall be in accordance with the latest
ASTM specifications (C12-64). Method of backfilling for roadway crossings
shall be subject to the approval of the Village Engineer.



§ 7-4-5  SANITARY SEWER PIPE MATERIALS.



   Sanitary sewers shall be constructed of vitrified clay sewer pipe and
fittings in sizes four inches through 12 inches meeting the latest ASTM
specifications for extra strength clay sewer pipe (ASTM C-200), in sizes 15
inches through 30 inches meeting the latest ASTM specifications for standard
strength clay sewer pipe (ASTM C-13) or extra strength clay sewer pipe (ASTM
C-200) in accordance with the Village Engineer’s specifications. Other
materials may be specifically approved by the Village Engineer which will
meet the latest ASTM specifications.



§ 7-4-6  JOINTS IN SANITARY SEWER.



   All vitrified clay sanitary sewer pipe or extra strength clay sanitary
sewer pipe shall have joints meeting the ASTM specifications for vitrified
clay pipe joints C-425 (compression type joints).



§ 7-4-7  PIPE BEDDING FOR SANITARY SEWERS.



   Pipe bedding shall be required for all sanitary sewers and shall be
compacted to maximum density. The pipe bedding shall be a minimum of four
inches below the pipe and shall be placed to a minimum height of one-half the
pipe diameter. Bedding materials shall be subject to the approval of the
Village Engineer. Limestone screenings will be an example of the type of
material that will be satisfactory for bedding.



§ 7-4-8  MANHOLES AND DRAINAGE APPURTENANCES.



   (A)   Manholes and drainage structures shall conform to ASTM C-478.
Manholes for sewers 36 inches and smaller shall have an inside diameter of 48
inches, and a six-inch thick precast concrete base, in one piece, bedded in
at least two inches of gravel or crushed stone. The sidewalls shall be of
precast concrete ring construction which shall have a five-inch minimum
thickness. Manhole bases for sewers with an internal diameter 42 inches and
larger shall be constructed of reinforced concrete.



   (B)   Catch basin sidewall and base construction shall conform to
manhole requirements for sewers 36 inches and smaller; except that, a sump
two and one-half feet in depth shall be provided below the discharge pipe.
Inlets shall have an internal diameter of two feet and a minimum depth of
three feet. Sidewalls shall be precast concrete having a thickness of four
inches, bedded in a minimum of two inches of gravel or crushed stone.



   (C)   Frames and grates for manholes and valve vaults shall be
similar to Neenah manufacture No. R-1015, with a combined weight of 540
pounds for Type B closed lid. Lids shall be appropriately imprinted with the
designation “Carol Stream - Water, Storm or Sanitary”. Castings shall be
similar to Neenah manufacture No. R-3502-A. Other frames and grates for
special cases in curbs may be used upon approval of the Village Engineer. The
frames shall be set in a full mortar joint on each structure.



§ 7-4-9  STORM SEWER CONSTRUCTION.



   Storm sewers shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements
of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction adopted
8-1-1968 of the State of Illinois, and its latest revisions.



§ 7-4-10  STORM SEWER INSTALLATION AND BACKFILL.



   Storm sewer pipe installation shall be in accordance with applicable
portions of § 603 of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction of the State of Illinois adopted 8-1-1968; except that,
backfilling under proposed roadways shall be accomplished with trench
backfill materials as specified in Art. 603.08 to within six inches of the
subgrade in four-inch layers, with mechanical tools approved by the Village
Engineer.



§ 7-4-11  WATER SUPPLY.



   (A)   Anti-siphoning and/or check valves shall be installed between
commercial and industrial tracts for the purposes of conservation and relief
of demands on existing residential supply.



   (B)   The Village Engineer may require water reclamation and reuse
in commercial and industrial tracts for the purposes of conservation and
relief of demands on existing residential supply.



   (C)   Evidence shall be presented by the subdivider that an adequate
water supply is available or will be in advance of occupancy for development
of individual lots and that the local utilities can satisfactorily serve the
area by the utility easements shown.



   (D)   Water transmission mains shall include installation of shutoff
valves and fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed at maximum
intervals of 300 feet in a direct line in the parkway. Commercial and
industrial spacing will be reviewed on an individual basis. All fire hydrants
shall be connected to a minimum eight-inch diameter water main. Fire hydrants
will be located at all terminating points in the system.



   (E)   (1)   Water mains shall be a minimum of six inches in
diameter. Pipe materials shall be ductile iron. Other material may be used
for 14-inch diameter and larger if recommended by the Village Engineer and
approved by the Board of Trustees. Ductile iron pipe shall conform to
ASA-A21.51 and fittings to ASA-A21.10. Cement mortar lining shall be required
for ductile iron pipe and shall conform to ASA-A21.4. Rubber gasket joints
shall comply with ASA-A21.11.



      (2)   All water mains shall be subject to a pressure test of
150 pounds for a two-hour period. After completion of the pressure test, a
leakage test shall be conducted. The allowable leakage shall not exceed 35
gallons per inch diameter per mile of length per day.



      (3)   After satisfactorily passing the leakage test and prior
to placing the system into operation, disinfection of the system is
necessary. The procedure will be in accordance with AWWA 6601-54. Upon
completion of the chlorination, water samples will be taken from every 1,000
feet of pipe for two successive days. The samples will be tested for
potability in a laboratory approved by the state. A report will be furnished
to the village indicating negative bacteriological samples. The samples shall
be taken at approximate 24-hour intervals.



   (F)   (1)   Valves shall be non-rising stem gate valves with
operating nut, designed to take full pressure on either face, furnished in
full compliance with AWWA C-500. All valves shall open by turning to the
left. Valves shall operate at working pressure of 150 pounds per square inch
and a test pressure of 300 pounds per square inch. Valves eight inches and
smaller shall be housed in valve vaults with an internal diameter of 48
inches; valves over eight inches shall be housed in vaults with an internal
diameter of 60 inches. Valve vaults, sidewall and base construction shall
conform to that required for catch basins.



      (2)   Valves shall be placed to provide a minimum of
inconvenience to the users in the event it becomes necessary to close off
sections of the water system because of emergencies. A general rule will be
to use two valves at all tee intersections and three valves at crosses.
Additional valves may be required if deemed warranted by the Village Engineer.



   (G)   (1)   Hydrants shall be of the compression or gate type
conforming to AWWA C-502 and shall be of a make that has been adopted by the
village as standard. Hydrants shall be designed for a 300 pound test pressure
and a 150-pound working pressure.



      (2)   Hydrants shall be furnished with 2 two and one-half-inch
hose nozzles and one four and one-half inch steamer nozzle. Threads on
nozzles, caps and operating nuts, shall be national standard threads.
Hydrants shall open by turning to the left and shall be so marked.



      (3)   Hydrants shall have a six-inch pipe connection, a six
inch valve opening and shall be equipped with auxiliary valves. Auxiliary
valves shall be attached to the hydrant with 125-pound standard flanges.
Joint for joining the auxiliary valve shall be of the same type as specified
for the piping system.



§ 7-4-12  HOUSE SERVICES.



   House services for sewer and water shall be constructed to connect each
lot or building site with the utility service mains for each utility required
in the provisions of this code as follows.



   (A)   Such house services shall extend from the main to the property
line and from the property line to the house where a house is to be
constructed upon the property as part of the development of which this
construction is a part. The village shall be responsible for the repair and
replacement of that portion of the house service line between the main and
the property line when the repair and replacement shall require the
excavation of such line crossing village property.



   (B)   House water service for each single-family residence shall be
minimum three-fourths inch, type K copper or approved equal. It shall be
terminated at a shutoff valve and service box. In no case shall the service
box be located in the sidewalk, driveway or buried underground. The curb stop
shall be a Mueller H15-154 ORASEAL or equal. The curb box shall be a Mueller
H10-300 or equal with a one and three-fourths inch line and a Mueller H10-334
or equal for a two-inch line.



   (C)   Water services two inches and under shall be type K copper.
Water services over two inches shall be either type K copper or ductile iron.
Water taps two inches or larger shall require the use of tapped saddles or
mains eight inches in diameter and over. All water services shall be provided
with a shutoff valve accessible through a service box. For service valves
over two inches in diameter, the service box shall be Clow F-4700 series or
equal. Any valve two and one-half inches in diameter or larger shall be
encased in a precast valve vault of not less than 48 inches in diameter.



   (D)   Sanitary services of non-pressure type pipe shall consist of
six-inch clay pipe conforming to ASTM C-200 with polyvinyl chloride collars
and ASTM C-424 joints, or six inch PVC pipe conforming to ASTM D-3034. The
use of pressure type pipes such as cast or ductile iron shall have a minimum
internal diameter of four inches. The cast iron pipe shall conform to
ASA-A21.51.



   (E)   All sewer and water lines from the main to the building or
structure which such lines serve shall not, without the written approval of
the Village Engineer, be constructed under driveways, walkways or other
obstructing facilities; except that, such lines may pass under public
pavement or sidewalk in accordance with approved plans.



   (F)   All water services shall be subject to inspection by the
village prior to any backfilling at the connection to the main. All sanitary
services shall be subject to the infiltration tests as detailed in the
sanitary sewer section. All sanitary service connections to the receiving
sewer shall be through the use of proper fittings. Breaking of sewers for
connections will not be permitted. Connections to sewers shall only be made
in the manner required in this code. All sanitary service connections will be
inspected by the village prior to any backfilling of the excavation.



§ 7-4-13  STREET IMPROVEMENTS; GRADING AND TRENCHING.



   The grading and trench backfill operations shall be as follows.



   (A)   The subdivider shall furnish drawings which indicate the
existing and proposed grades of streets shown on the engineering drawings
approved for the final plat. After completion of engineering work on the
streets by the design engineer and approval of street grades by the Village
Engineer and the Plan Commission, the subdivider shall grade or cause to be
graded the full width of the right-of-way of the streets proposed. The bed
for the roadways in the street right-of-way shall be graded to subgrade.



      (1)   All stumps, trees that cannot be saved, boulders and
similar items shall be removed.



      (2)   All unsuitable sub-base material shall be removed and
shall be replaced with stable, compacted material in conformance with
generally accepted engineering practices.



   (B)   All trenches caused by the construction of sewers, water
mains, water service pipes and in excavation around catch basins, manholes,
inlets and other appurtenances which occur within the limits of existing or
proposed pavements, sidewalks and curb and gutters shall be backfilled with
trench backfill in accordance with the following.



      (1)   Trenches and excavations near or adjacent to proposed or
existing pavements, sidewalks and curb and gutters shall be backfilled with
trench backfill, as specified in § 20.00 of the state’s Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, to an elevation equal to the
intersection of a one to one slope line from the top of the pavement,
sidewalks or curb edge, with the vertical line through the nearest edge of
the trench or excavation.



      (2)   Suitable material shall be used for trench backfill as
recommended by the Village Engineer and approved by the Village Board. In no
case shall backrun gravel be permitted.



      (3)   When considered necessary by the Village Engineer,
settlement of all trench backfill shall be accelerated by means of water
introduced through holes jetted into backfilled trenches to a point
approximately two feet above the top of the sewer pipe. The holes shall be
jetted not greater than six feet apart unless otherwise directed by the
Village Engineer. The jetting process shall conform to the standards set
forth in the state’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, § 66.7.



      (4)   Any depressions which develop within the street
right-of-way due to settlement of backfilling material shall be refilled and
repaved at the subdivider’s expense or, where the subdivider is not
involved, by the company responsible for the trenching, in a manner
acceptable to the Village Engineer.



   (C)   Before any base course of the roadway pavement or any sidewalk
is laid, all grading of streets shall be completed and approved; all of the
underground work, such as water, sewer and gas mains, house service
connections therewith, and all underground conduits for electric, television
and telephone lines, shall be completely installed in place and approved; and
all backfilling of trenches dug across the roadway or sidewalk way shall have
completely settled to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer.



§ 7-4-14  STREET IMPROVEMENTS; ROADWAY CONSTRUCTION.



   The construction of all roadways shall be as follows.



   (A)   All dedicated streets, streets to be dedicated, or streets
available for the use of the general public shall be constructed of the
following materials:



      (1)   Portland cement concrete;



      (2)   Bituminous stabilized base - bituminous concrete surface
course. Base material shall have a minimum marshall stability of 1,500
pounds; and



      (3)   Aggregate base course with bituminous concrete surface
course.



   (B)   The thickness of all roadways shall be as follows:



      (1)   Minor streets in single-family residential zones:



         (a)   Portland cement concrete pavement: not less than
six inches thick;



         (b)   Bituminous stabilized base: not less than six
inches of base, with one and one-half inches of surface course; and



         (c)   Aggregate base course: not less than nine inches
with three and one-half inches of bituminous concrete surface consisting of a
two-inch binder course and a one and one-half inch surface course.



      (2)   Minor streets in multiple-family residential zones:



         (a)   Portland cement concrete pavement: not less than
seven inches of standard reinforced or contraction joints sawed at 20-foot
intervals;



         (b)   Bituminous stabilized base: not less than six
inches with three inches of bituminous concrete of surface course consisting
of one and one-half inches of binder course and one and one-half inches of
surface course; and



         (c)   Aggregate base course: not less than 12 inches of
aggregate base course with three and one-half inches of bituminous concrete
consisting of two inches of binder course and one and one-half inches of
surface course.



      (3)   Minor streets in industrial-commercial zones:



         (a)   Portland cement concrete pavement: not less than
eight inches of standard reinforced with four inches of C.A. six sub-base; and



         (b)   Bituminous stabilized base: not less than eight
inches of base with three inches of surface course.



      (4)   Collector and major streets in residential zones:



         (a)   Portland cement concrete pavement: not less than
seven inches of standard reinforced; and



         (b)   Bituminous stabilized base: not less than six
inches of base with three inches of surface course.



      (5)   Collector and major streets in industrial and commercial
zones:



         (a)   Portland cement concrete pavement: not less than
ten inches of standard reinforced with four inches of C.A. six sub-base.
Concrete for such pavement shall have a minimum 14 day compressive strength
of 3,500 pounds per square inch, shall contain not less than six bags of
cement per cubic yard of concrete, and shall contain not less than 4%, nor
more than 7%, entrained air. Slump shall be not less than two inches nor more
than four inches;



         (b)   Bituminous stabilized base: not less than eight
inches with four inches of sub-base of C.A. six and four inches of surface
course;



         (c)   Soil borings shall indicate a minimum I.B.R. value
of three or shall be corrected to have this value;



         (d)   Design shall be in compliance with either the
Manual of Instructions for the Structural Design of Bituminous Pavements or
the Manual for the Structural Design of Portland Cement Concrete Pavement, as
applicable, and all subsequent revisions thereto, as published by the State
Department of Transportation, including such specifications as are
promulgated by the Bureau of Local Roads;



         (e)   The construction of roadways shall be in
conformance with Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and
all subsequent revisions thereto, as published by the state Department of
Transportation, including such specifications as are promulgated by the
Bureau of Local Roads;



         (f)   In no case shall the surface course of the
pavement be constructed until the base and binder course have been in place
for a period of one year. After repair of any base failures in the roadway,
upon approval of same by the Village Engineer, the surface course may be
constructed; and



         (g)   Bituminous concrete surface course shall be in
accordance with the following criteria: Bituminous Plant Mix Seal Coat. This
work shall be performed in accordance with § 405 of the Standard
Specifications adopted 7-2-1973, and subsequent revisions thereto with the
following exceptions and revisions.



            1.   Core samples shall be taken by the contractor
as specified in the last paragraph of Art. 504.15 of the standard
specifications.



            2.   The aggregate for the bituminous mixture
shall meet the requirements of Art. 704.01 and 704.03 of the standard
specifications; except that, the gradation used shall be as follows:



 

Passing 1/2-inch sieve
 
100%


Passing #4 sieve
 
65 to 85%


Passing #10 sieve
 
50 to 65%


Passing #40 sieve
 
10 to 27%


Passing #200 sieve
 
5 to  7%



 



            3.   For prime use of asphalt RC-70 and for
bituminous plant mix seal coat, use asphalt cement AC-85-100.



§ 7-4-15  STREET IMPROVEMENTS; ROADWAY WIDTH.



   Roadway width shall be as follows: roadway pavements shall have an
overall width, exclusive of any median or parkway, in accordance with the
minimum dimensions listed in “Table 1: Minimum Standards for Street
Design”, set forth at the end of this Ch. 7, Art. 4.



§ 7-4-16  STREET IMPROVEMENTS; CURBS AND GUTTERS.



   Curbs and gutters shall be as follows.



   (A)   Curbs and gutters shall be constructed on all streets and
shall be combination (integral) concrete of the barrier type not less than 18
inches in overall width. Curbs may be constructed integrally with portland
cement concrete pavement. Concrete for curb and gutter shall conform to that
hereinafter required for concrete sidewalk. Half-streets of a permanent
nature shall be constructed with a concrete retainer curb at the centerline,
except for concrete base construction. Three five-eighths inch reinforcing
bars ten feet long shall be installed in all curb and gutter, centered over
each sewer and water trench crossed by the curb and gutter.



      (1)   Residential streets. The dimensions of curb and gutter
on residential streets shall normally be six inches in height above the
gutter line. The dimensions of curb and gutter on residential streets having
driveways which extend across 50% or more of the curb and gutter along that
street shall be three inches in height above the gutter line. The width of
the combined curb and gutter shall be 18 inches; the width of curb from
gutter line to back of curb shall be six inches. The gutter shall be
three-fourths inch below the edge of the gutter flag. The thickness of the
gutter flag shall be equal to the thickness of the adjacent street pavement.



      (2)   Commercial and industrial streets. The dimensions of
curb and gutter on commercial or industrial streets shall be as follows: the
curb shall be vertical face type six inches in height above the gutter line.
The width of the combined curb and gutter shall be 18 inches. The width of
curb from gutter line to back of curb shall be six inches. The gutter shall
be one-half inch below the edge of the gutter flag. The thickness of the
gutter flag shall be equal to the thickness of the adjacent street pavement.



   (B)   All curb returns at street intersections shall have a radius
of not less than 25 feet. In industrial and commercial areas, the radius of
curb returns shall be not less than 25 feet and shall be increased to 50 feet
at important intersections.



§ 7-4-17  STREET IMPROVEMENTS; PRIVATE ACCESS STREETS.



   (A)   The complete design for private access streets for public use,
including specifications and designation of trafficways, driving lanes,
paving widths, thickness, materials and other information shall be submitted
to the Plan Commission for review and approval prior to the issuance of
building permits or the sale or lease of buildings or land under all zoning
categories or districts, including planned unit developments as defined in
the Zoning Code of the village, whether or not such improvements are to be
dedicated to the village. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces
shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Zoning Code of the
village. Private access streets and parking areas shall be designed and built
in accordance with the requirements of this code. Where more than one owner
or lessee are to use the same private access street or parking lot, a trust
indenture shall be recorded before approval of the preliminary plan or final
plat is given.



   (B)   A minimum distance may be recommended by the Plan Commission
and required by the Village Board where deemed necessary between points of
ingress and egress where all property to be subdivided is under one ownership
on the effective date of this code. Where property has frontage on a state or
federal highway, the spacing and design of the points of ingress and egress
to the major highway shall be subject to approval of the State Division of
Highways.



§ 7-4-18  STREET IMPROVEMENTS; ACCESS DRIVEWAYS; DEPRESSED CURBS.



   (A)   Criteria for access driveways. A paved access from the
property line to the street shall be provided. In the case of property zoned
for single-family residential dwelling units, the driveway access shall be in
direct line with and of the same width as the driveway for the dwelling to be
served, and the location and width of such access driveways shall conform
with the requirements of the Village Zoning Code. In the case of property
zoned for other than single-family dwelling units, the requirements for
access driveways shall conform as closely as possible therewith. Pavement
shall conform to specifications of materials and standards of construction as
prescribed for marginal access streets.



   (B)   Construction of depressed curb. When a depressed curb for a
driveway is required to be placed within a curb which has previously been
poured, the construction of the depressed curb shall take place by either of
the following two methods.



      (1)   Removal and replacement of entire curb. The existing
curb and gutter shall be saw cut one foot longer on each side than the width
of the proposed driveway. The entire curb and gutter between these saw cuts
shall be removed. A felt expansion joint shall be placed at the location of
the saw cuts and a continuous concrete depressed curb shall be poured.



      (2)   Partial removal and replacement of curb. The existing
curb and gutter shall be removed by saw cutting with a horizontal diamond
blade. The equipment utilized must be capable of maintaining pitch control
throughout the depression when establishing the gutter flow line, tapers and
transitions. After removal of the excess curb, all rough edges and tapers
shall be ground to a smooth even-finished surface with a diamond-headed
grinder. All exposed surfaces shall receive a protective coat regardless of
the time of the year in accordance with applicable portions of §§ 408.23
and 503.12 of the State Department of Transportation State Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. The material that is to be
used before exposure to de-icing salts shall be equal to Tri-Par 66/114 as a
“post cure” sealer or Tri-Par 33 and 44 as a “cure and seal” as
manufactured by Darling and Company or an equivalent as approved by the
Village Engineer. Whatever product is used should meet the general
requirements and specifications of the manufacturer.



      (3)   Specifications for new depressed curb. In either method
chosen, the new depressed curb shall be tapered at either end and shall meet
the existing grade of the adjacent curbing. The curb shall be one and
one-half inches in height above the gutter line. The width of the combined
curb and gutter shall be 18 inches. The width of the curb from the gutter
line to the back of the curb shall be six inches. The gutters shall be
three-fourths inch below the edge of the gutter flag. The thickness of the
gutter flag shall be equal to the thickness of the adjacent street pavement.
In making such a depressed curb cut, any damage to the adjacent street or to
the driveway apron shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the Village
Engineer.



(Ord. 92-08-99, passed 8-25-1992; Ord. 2002-08-50, passed 8-19-2002; Ord.
2007-03-11, passed 3-19-2007)



§ 7-4-19  STREET IMPROVEMENTS; ALLEY PAVEMENT.



   Alley pavement shall conform to the specifications for marginal access
streets.



§ 7-4-20  STREET IMPROVEMENTS; SIDE STRIPS, PARKWAYS, MEDIAN STRIPS.



   Parkways, having a width in accordance with street cross-section design
shall be required on both sides of all streets. They shall be graded by the
subdivider with at least four inches of top soil. Median strips in streets
shall be considered as parkways unless paved, shall be uniform throughout the
course of the street, but shall not be subject to the ten-foot width
requirements. All median strips shall be bordered by a curb and gutter with
storm draining inlets where needed, as approved or unless otherwise directed
by the Village Engineer.



§ 7-4-21  PARKING LOT IMPROVEMENTS.



   Open and enclosed parking spaces: accessory parking spaces may be open
to the sky or enclosed in a building.



   (A)   All open or otherwise off-street parking spaces and
maneuvering lanes accessory to any structure shall be improved with an
all-weather material. The minimum requirements for passenger cars shall be as
follows:



      (1)   Single-family residential drives. Six inches of
aggregate base course and two inches of blacktop or four inches aggregate
base course with four inches of concrete if such concrete is reinforced with
six-inch by six-inch wire mesh;



      (2)   Parking lots for apartment complexes. Eight inches of
aggregate base course with two and one-half inches of bituminous concrete
surface course or six inches of concrete;



      (3)   Parking lots for commercial complexes. Nine inches of
aggregate base course with three inches of bituminous concrete surface course
or six inches of concrete with woven wire fabric; and



      (4)   Parking lots for industrial complexes. Nine inches of
aggregate base course with two and one-half inches of bituminous concrete
surface course or six inches of concrete.



   (B)   Entrance drives for commercial and industrial complexes for
passenger car use on public rights-of-way shall be a minimum ten inches of
aggregate base course with three inches of bituminous concrete surface
course. If entrance is on other than village maintained roadway, the
controlling public agency’s requirements shall govern unless such
requirements are less strict than the village requirements, in which case the
village requirements shall govern.



   (C)   Aggregate base course shall be either a crushed stone or
crushed gravel. Use of other materials such as bituminous aggregate base
course may be permitted if data supporting the proposed design is submitted
for review.



   (D)   Materials and construction methods shall be in accordance with
the latest revision of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction as set forth by the State Department of Transportation.



   (E)   Service drives for commercial and industrial truck use shall
be reviewed on an individual basis. Design thickness shall be dependent on
the specified use. However, the minimum requirement for a truck service drive
shall be ten inches of aggregate base course with three inches of bituminous
concrete surface course.



   (F)   The Plan Commission or the Village Board may grant approval
for the construction of a temporary parking lot. Such temporary parking lot
shall be constructed of such material, including, but not limited to, gravel,
which shall be approved by the Village Engineer as providing a firm base to
vehicles and such temporary parking lot shall be adequately drained. A permit
to maintain a temporary parking lot shall be granted only under those
circumstances which would make the construction of a permanent parking lot an
economic hardship upon the applicant. Temporary parking lot permits shall be
allowed for up to one non-renewable period of 18 months.



§ 7-4-22  SIDEWALKS AND CROSS WALKWAYS.



   Sidewalks and cross walkways shall be constructed of portland cement
concrete to a thickness of five inches. Concrete for such sidewalks shall
have a minimum 28-day compressive strength of 4,000 pounds, and shall contain
not less than 4%, nor more than 7%, entrained air. Slump shall be not less
than two inches, nor more than four inches.



§ 7-4-23  LIGHTING IMPROVEMENTS; STREETS.



   (A)   Design criteria by type of street.



      (1)   Minor subcollector and collector streets. Required
illumination on local, subcollector and collector streets, as defined in this
code, is dependent on the zoning district in which the project is located.
Required luminaire and uniformity ratios for the various districts are
detailed in “Table 2: Street Lighting Standards”, set forth at the end of
this Ch. 7, Art. 4. All light standards shall be aluminum. The identification
of local, subcollector and collector streets shall be exemplified by the
following:



         (a)   Local: Illini, Arrowhead, Evergreen;



         (b)   Subcollector: Thunderbird, Birchbark; and



         (c)   Collector: Kuhn, Lies, Morton.



      (2)   Secondary major streets and major streets. Required
luminaire and uniformity ratios for secondary major and major streets, as
defined in this code, are detailed in “Table 2: Street Lighting
Standards”, set forth at the end of this Ch. 7, Art. 4. All light standards
on state or county maintained rights-of-way shall be break away aluminum
poles. Light standards on village maintained rights-of-way shall be aluminum
poles. The identification of secondary major and major streets shall be
exemplified by the following:



         (a)   Secondary major: Gary Avenue, Schmale Road; and



         (b)   Major: North Avenue.



   (B)   Location of street lights. The street lighting system is to be
constructed within rights-of-way or easements at locations to be approved by
the Village Engineer. Street lights shall be located on one side of the
street unless, in the judgment of the Village Engineer, it is impractical to
do so. They shall be two and one-half feet back from the back of curb.



   (C)   Pole location and spacing. Unless otherwise directed by the
Village Engineer, at least one luminaire oriented at right angles to the
roadway centerline shall be provided at each four-way intersection at about
the point of tangency of the return on the far side of the street in the
major direction of traffic. For “T” intersections, a luminaire shall be
provided on the centerline extended on the intersecting roadway at the top of
the “T”.



   (D)   Equipment standardization. In the interest of encouraging
uniform appearance, standardization of replacement parts and familiarization
of maintenance personnel with the equipment, the village has selected certain
standard equipment, or a Village Engineer approved equal, which is to be
incorporated when appropriate in work required under this section.



      (1)   Light standards.



         (a)   Aluminum light standards shall be manufactured by
Hapco Division of Kearney-National Inc., Abingdon, Virginia or of a similar
type as approved by the Village Engineer. Required mounting height and
bracket lengths are given in “Table 2: Street Lighting Standards”, as set
forth at the end of this Ch. 7, Art. 4. A hand hole shall be provided and
shall be covered with a heat-treated cast aluminum door, fastened to
non-ferrous inserts in the standard with stainless steel bolts. All standards
shall be provided with an aluminum mast cap held at the top of the standard
by stainless steel screws, and non-ferrous inserts.



         (b)   Aluminum for the hand hold doors and mast caps
shall conform to the American Society of Testing Materials (ASTM)
specifications S5A-F or SG70A-56 and B26-50T.



         (c)   Required mounting heights and bracket lengths are
given in “Table 2: Street Lighting Standards”, set forth at the end of
this Ch. 7, Art. 4.



      (2)   Mast arm brackets.



         (a)   Mast arm brackets for lighting improvements to be
accepted by the village for maintenance shall have a minimum spread of
approximately eight feet, unless otherwise specified by the Village Engineer,
and shall be the upsweep type with wire inlet and necessary bracing. The
brackets shall be manufactured from aluminum alloy and shall be capable of
accommodating the slip filter arrangements of the luminaire.



         (b)   The mast arm clamps and fittings shall be
heat-treated aluminum castings, and shall be free of all imperfections to
ensure an even grip on the standard and to provide easy mounting of the mast
arms.



         (c)   Where drawn seamless tubing is used for the mast
arm, it shall conform to ASTM specifications 10-58T and GS10A-T6.



         (d)   Aluminum for the mast arm clamps and fittings
shall conform to ASTM specifications S5A-F or B26-50T.



      (3)   Luminaires and lamps.



         (a)   Luminaires shall be manufactured by Quality
Outdoor Lighting, Northbrook, Illinois, or of a similar type as approved by
the Village Engineer, complete with constant voltage ballasts, wired for
120-volt operation.



         (b)   The luminaires shall provide lighting distribution
equivalent to the Illumination Engineering Society’s (IES) type 11 (IES
Lighting Handbook, 1977 Ed.) unless otherwise stated, or approved by the
Village Engineer, and shall be reconnectable for 240-volt operation if
required. Luminaires in residential areas shall be semi-cutoff and shall be
provided with a house shield if necessary. Lamps shall be high pressure
sodium vapor. Lamp wattage is given in “Table 2: Street Lighting
Standards”, set forth at the end of this Ch. 7, Art. 4.



      (4)   Ballasts.



         (a)   Ballasts shall be of high quality, grain-oriented
strip steel, high power factor, constant wattage, and shall have a primary
voltage rating of 120/240 volts. They shall be suitable for outdoor service
and capable of starting the lamp at minus 20°F.



   (E)   Power supply and control. Street lighting projects shall
include a grounded steel and fiber conduit riser weather head installed on a
Common-wealth Edison Company pole at a location designated by the company and
in strict conformance with its requirements. Where power is supplied from a
Commonwealth Edison transformer, the power circuit being installed shall
terminate 18 inches from the Commonwealth Edison transformer, 24 inches below
grade. In both cases, sufficient cable must be provided for the connection by
the Commonwealth Edison Company. Power for street lighting may be either
metered or non-metered, as required by the Commonwealth Edison Company or as
may be required by the Village Engineer. Complete wiring schematics shall be
provided as part of the plans submitted to the Village Engineer for approval.



      (1)   Non-metered power. A light pole, designated as the
service pole, shall be provided, equipped as follows:



         (a)   A circuit disconnect box which is eight inches by
six inches by four inches or larger, cast aluminum with tamper proof screwed
cover, one and one-half inch back hub, thermal magnetic breaker, back mounted
screw hub for ground lug and stainless steel mounting hardware shall be
mounted on the pole, approximately ten feet above the ground;



         (b)   A pole top adapter;



         (c)   A 120- or 240-volt coil, G.E. No. G420 G005 relay,
if the wattage is over 800 V.A. electrically held, with self-protecting
fuses, and receptacle on top for the photo-cell; and



         (d)   A photo-electric cell, 120/240 volts, with twist
lock receptacle, tubeless type, G.E. polyvolt.



      (2)   Metered power. When power is to be metered, a control
center shall be provided. The control center shall comply with the following
requirements.



         (a)   Foundation shall be a State of Illinois, Type A,
Traffic Signal Controller Foundation, modified as required.



         (b)   Enclosure shall be Grouse Hinds Company Number
46886 Traffic Signal Type Cast Aluminum Meter Cabinet.



         (c)   Equipment to be installed in the enclosure shall
include an electrically held contactor of proper size for system with
240-volt coil, a thermal magnetic main circuit breaker of adequate size, a
500-watt 240/120 transformer, GB Duplex Convenience outlet and porcelain lamp
holder with pull chain, wiring for four circuit breakers and four circuit
breakers of required size.



         (d)   A meter socket to be mounted on rear of enclosure.



      (3)   Photo-electric cell.



         (a)   A photo-electric cell, 1,800-volt ampere capacity,
shall be installed, complete with pole top adapter and receptacle on light
post nearest to the control center interconnected with the control center
with a three-wire No. 12 color coded circuit conforming with the requirements
of division (F) of this section.



         (b)   The circuit from the power source to the control
center shall be installed in continuous rigid steel conduit.



   (F)   Cable.



      (1)   Underground cable shall be single conductor copper,
commercial grade for direct burial, RHW or XLP Type RR, 600-volt insulation
with two-sixty-fourths inch or more neoprene jacket.



      (2)   Cable within the pole from the hand hole to the
luminaire shall be standard Type THHN, 600 volt insulation, No. 10 AWC. Two
“Tron” fuse holders and fuses shall be installed inside the hand hole of
each pole. Cable shall be color coded as follows:



 

Neutral
 
White


Phase Wire No. 1
 
Black


Phase Wire No. 2
 
Red



 



      (3)   Except for pole wire, minimum wire size is No. 8, AWG.
All splices shall be made in poles or hand holes. All conductors shall be
copper.



      (4)   All systems shall pass a five megohm insulation
resistance test when measured with a megger generating not less than 500
volts. Circuits shall be three-wire 120/240 volts or two-wire, 240 volts, as
required. All circuits shall be designed for a voltage drop not greater than
that required for the proper operation of the lamps and, in any case, not to
exceed 10%. Each circuit shall use the same wire size throughout.



   (G)   Conduit. Cable for street lighting in the right-of-way of
major streets shall be installed in a two-inch galvanized rigid steel conduit
(GRC) running from pole to pole, pole to hand hole, or hand hole to hand
hole. At locations other than in the right-of-way of major streets, at the
design engineer’s option, a unit assembly of cable and duct for underground
application may be used; except that, steel conduit shall be installed under
present and future streets. When conduit is to be installed under existing
pavement, it shall be pushed in place.



   (H)   Ground. In addition to the power circuit, a direct buried bare
equipment ground wire shall be provided, interconnecting all poles,
controllers and ground rods. Ground rods shall be provided at the controller
Commonwealth Edison pole at the one-third points and end of each circuit.
Ground rods shall be three-fourths inch in diameter and eight feet long, with
steel core and heavy exterior layer of pure copper, driven into the ground.



   (I)   Aluminum light pole foundations. Aluminum pole foundations
shall be constructed of class X concrete as described in the Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, State Department of
Transportation. Required details are shown in “Table 3: Street Lighting
Design”, set forth at the end of this Ch. 7, Art. 4.



   (J)   Hand holes. Hand holes are required at the ends of all
isolated rigid steel conduit and at intermediate locations between light
poles on rigid steel conduit systems to facilitate pulling cable. Hand holes
shall be constructed of class X concrete as described in the Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, State Department of
Transportation. Required details are shown in “Table 4: Electrical Hand
Hole”, set forth at the end of this Ch. 7, Art. 4.



   (K)   Splices. All underground cable shall be continuous. Necessary
splices shall be made in poles or hand holes and shall have location recorded
on plans. Underground splices in hand holes shall be made by using 3M Scotch
cast kits. Connection to Commonwealth Edison feeder lines must include a fuse
box for shut-off to Commonwealth Edison power supply. Such fuse box shall be
of the type approved by the Village Engineer.



   (L)   Installation requirements.



      (1)   All poles shall be vertical. The pole shall be
considered plumb when the centerline of the pole is within one inch per ten
feet of true vertical when viewed from any direction. Any leaning poles shall
be straightened by the contractor when requested by the Village Engineer at
any time during a minimum of a one-year period after installation and before
village acceptance of the subdivision improvements.



      (2)   Luminaires shall be installed as part of the pole
erection process and shall be individually leveled after installation.



      (3)   Steel conduit and cable duct shall be installed 18
inches behind street curbing in a 24-inch deep trench, unless otherwise
approved by the Village Engineer. Backfill shall be select earth, carefully
compacted, except under future streets, where it shall be selected granular
backfill.



(Ord. 94-02-17, passed 2-8-1994)



§ 7-4-24  LIGHTING OF OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS.



   (A)   Terms and definitions. Definitions and terms used in this
section shall be defined by the Illumination Engineering Society in the IES
Lighting Handbook, 1977 Edition.



   (B)   Application of these requirements. Parking installed for the
public benefit by public bodies, educational and religious institutions shall
be exempt from the requirements of this section.



   (C)   Height of luminaires.



      (1)   Luminaires shall not be erected higher than 40 feet
above ground level.



      (2)   All luminaires erected zero feet to 20 feet above ground
level:



         (a)   Shall be of translucent materials and not
transparent materials, as approved by the Village Engineer;



         (b)   Shall not be installed with diffusing refractors;
and



      (3)   All luminaires erected 20 feet to 40 feet above ground
level:



         (a)   Shall be flat bottom optically controlled sharp
cut-offs, as approved by the Village Engineer;



         (b)   Shall not be installed with diffusing refractors;
and



         (c)   Shall maintain a ratio of three to one (3:1) or
less of luminaire spacing to luminaire mounting heights.



   (D)   Illumination of off-street parking areas. All off-street
parking areas shall be lighted using the horizontal foot candles and
uniformity ratios as listed below.



 

 
Multi-Family
 
Industrial
 
Commercial


Horizontal foot candles
 
1.2
 
1.6
 
2.0


Uniformity ratio
 
1:3
 
1:3
 
1:3



 



   (E)   Permissible light spillage on adjacent property. All
off-street parking areas with lighting shall limit light spillage onto
adjacent property. Maximum horizontal foot candles measured at the property
line shall not exceed the following:



 

Type of Adjacent Use
 
Foot Candles
 
Lux


Business uses
 
2.0
 
21.5


Light industrial and industrial uses
 
5.0
 
53.8


Multi-family residential uses
 
0.2
 
2.0


Park, school and institutional uses
 
5.0
 
53.8


Single-family residential uses
 
0.1
 
1.0



 



   (F)   Conductors. Conductors for parking lot lighting shall conform
to § 7-4-23(G) and the National Electrical Code, current edition.



§ 7-4-25  STREET SIGNS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.



   The subdivider shall provide street signs in accordance with the
following specifications.



   (A)   The subdivider shall erect an approved street sign at each
street intersection, whenever possible on the northwest corner of the
intersection. Such street sign shall indicate the names of the streets as
shown on the final plat, together with the proper numbering according to the
established house numbering system of the village.



   (B)   The street sign shall be constructed according to the
standards of this code.



   (C)   The street names along minor and collector streets shall
appear in lettering not less than three inches high. The street names along
major highways shall be not less than four inches high. Suffixes such as
lane, trail and the like may be in smaller letters with a minimum height of
two inches.



   (D)   The signs shall be placed on posts not less than ten feet in
length and approximately seven feet above ground level. The post shall be not
less than two inches inside diameter, and of galvanized or painted metal
posts or the equivalent. Each sign post shall be set in a hole in the ground
not less than 36 inches in depth, with a diameter of not less than four
inches greater than the diameter of the post, and the hole shall be filled
with portland cement concrete to two parts sand and four parts of gravel or
stone.



   (E)   In addition to signs indicating the name of streets, the
subdivider shall also provide traffic control signs including, but not
limited to, stop, yield and speed limit signs within new subdivisions.
Pavement striping and intersection pavement marking shall also



be provided in accordance with the Federal Highway Administration Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The Village Engineering Department, with the
assistance of the Police and Public Works Department will indicate on all
proposed engineering plans any necessary traffic control devices required by
the anticipated development of the subdivision. The cost of such traffic
control devices shall be included within the estimated costs of subdivision
improvements, the construction of which must be secured in accordance with
this code.



   (F)   All traffic control devices shall be installed by the Public
Works Department of the village and the subdivider shall pay to the village
the cost of such devices and their installation as reasonably established by
the Village Engineer.



TABLE 1:  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN



 

Street
 
Right-of-Way Width
 
Pavement Width*
 
Maximum Gradient
 
Minimum Gradient


Collector
 
80 ft.
 
36 ft.
 
4%
 
0.7%


Cul-de-sac **
 
66 ft.
 
27 ft.
 
5%
 
0.7%


In Business and Industrial Districts
 
66 - 80 ft.
 
36 - 44 ft.
 
2%
 
0.7%


Local
 
66 ft.
 
27 ft.
 
5%
 
0.7%


Marginal access
 
40 ft.
 
24 ft.
 
5%
 
0.7%


NOTES TO TABLE:

*  Pavement widths are measured face to face of curb and include additional
width for on-street parking.

** The right-of-way width and the pavement width of the terminus are larger,
as specified in this code.

Geometric design shall be in conformance with A Policy on Design of Highways
and Streets, 1984, or latest edition and Illinois Department of
Transportation Design Standards.



 



TABLE 2: STREET LIGHTING STANDARDS



 

 
State or County Maintained
 
Village Maintained
 


Major 45 mph
 
Secondary Major 45 mph
 
Secondary Major
 
Collector
 
Local
 
Comments


R
 
I
 
C
 
R
 
I
 
C
 
R
 
I
 
C
 
R
 
I
 
C
 
R
 
I
 
C
 
R=Residential

I=Industrial

C=Commercial




Bracket
 
15’

or

20’
 
15’

or

20’
 
15’

or

20’
 
12’
 
12’
 
12’
 
12’
 
12’
 
12’
 
8’

or

6’
 
8’

or

6’
 
8’

or

6’
 
8’

or

6’
 
8’

or

6’
 
8’

or

6’
 
Standard

 

Alternate


Horizontal foot candles
 
1.0
 
1.4
 
2.0
 
0.6
 
0.9
 
1.2
 
0.4
 
0.6
 
0.9
 
0.4
 
0.6
 
0.9
 
0.2
 
0.4
 
0.6
 


Luminaire
 
250

or

400
 
250

or

400
 
250

or

400
 
150
 
250
 
250
 
150

or

100
 
250

or

150
 
250

or

150
 
100
 
150
 
150
 
100
 
150
 
150
 
HPSV


Mounting height
 
35’
 
35’
 
35’
 
30’
 
30’
 
30’
 
30’

or

26’
 
30’

or

26’
 
30’

or

26’
 
30’

or

22’
 
26’

or

22’
 
26’

or

22’
 
26’

or

22’
 
26’

or

22’
 
26’

or

22’
 
Standard

 

Alternate


Pole
 
Alum
 
Alum
 
Alum
 
Alum
 
Alum
 
Alum
 
Alum
 
Alum
 
Alum
 
Alum
 
Alum
 
Alum
 
Alum
 
Alum
 
Alum
 


Spacing
 
150
 
125
 
75
 
165
 
164
 
124
 
165
 
165
 
124
 
165
 
165
 
124
 
300
 
300
 
165
 


Uniformity ratio
 
1:3
 
1:3
 
1:3
 
1:3
 
1:3
 
1:3
 
1:6
 
1:4
 
1:3
 
1:6
 
1:4
 
1:3
 
1:10
 
1:8
 
1:6
 




 



TABLE 3:  STREET LIGHTING DESIGN







 



TABLE 4: ELECTRICAL HAND HOLE







 



ARTICLE 5:  LAND MOVEMENT REGULATIONS



Section



   7-5-1   General criteria and standards



   7-5-2   Permit required



   7-5-3   Exemptions



   7-5-4   Application; plan



   7-5-5   Land movement permit fees



   7-5-6   Bond



   7-5-7   Prohibition of land removal



   7-5-8   Compliance with manuals and standard specifications



   7-5-9   Special precautions



   7-5-10   Expiration of permit



   7-5-11   Revocation of permit



Cross-reference:



   Building construction and maintenance, see Ch. 6, Art. 9



   DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance, see Ch.
6, Art. 14



   Issuance of Building and Occupancy Permits, see Ch. 6, Art. 1



   Storm water detention, see Ch. 7, Art. 9



   Subdivisions, see Ch. 7, Arts. 2 and 7



§ 7-5-1  GENERAL CRITERIA AND STANDARDS.



   The following general principles shall apply to any movement of land
and any sedimentation and erosion control plan and the granting of a permit
for the execution of such plan as hereinafter provided.



   (A)   The smallest practical area of land shall be disturbed at any
given time during development.



   (B)   Such minimum area disturbance shall be kept to as short a
duration of time as is practical.



   (C)   Temporary vegetation or, where appropriate, mulching or other
non-viable cover shall be used to protect areas disturbed during development.



   (D)   Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins or silt traps
shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters from
land undergoing development.



   (E)   Provision shall be made to effectively accommodate the
increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and
after development.



   (F)   Permanent, final plant covering or structures shall be
installed as soon as possible.



   (G)   “Issuance of Building and Occupancy Permits”, as provided
in Ch. 6, Art. 1, of this code, shall be adhered to so that the lowest
potential for erosion is created.



   (H)   Natural plant covering shall be retained and protected so far
as is consistent with developing the site.



(Ord, passed 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-5-2  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Before any site is cleared, excavated, graded, transported,
filled or otherwise disturbed by the movement of land for purposes including,
but not limited to, the construction of buildings, the mining of minerals,
including sand and gravel, the development of golf courses, and the
construction of roads and streets by any person, partnership or corporation
within the village, a land movement permit embodying the proposed land
movement shall be obtained from the Village Engineer. It shall be necessary
to obtain a permit to move land within the village unless such development is
exempted.



   (B)   The standards and requirements of Article VII Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control of the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain
Ordinance in Ch. 6, Art. 14 of this code, are hereby incorporated into this
section and made a part hereof by this reference, for the purpose of
exemplifying the considerations and factors which should enter into the
granting of the land movement permit.



(Ord, passed 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-5-3  EXEMPTIONS.



   A land movement permit shall not be required if it meets all conditions
of Article IV Stormwater Management Certifications, § 15-30 Stormwater
Management Certifications of the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and
Flood Plain Ordinance as adopted in Ch. 6, Art. 14 of this code.



(Ord, passed 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-5-4  APPLICATION; PLAN.



   (A)   No land movement permit or building permit shall be issued
until the owner of the property or his or her authorized agent submits a land
movement plan, together with other submissions required by this article, and
certifies that any land movement shall be in accordance with such plan and
submissions and has obtained all certifications as required by the DuPage
County Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance as adopted in Ch. 6,
Art. 14 of this code.



   (B)   Each application for a land movement permit shall be made by
the owner of the property or his or her authorized agent to the Village
Engineer in writing. A registered land surveyor or a professional engineer
shall certify as to the accuracy of the existing and proposed contour lines.
Each application shall be accompanied by the documentation and submittals as
specified in the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain
Ordinance as adopted in Ch. 6, Art. 14 of this code unless the Village
Engineer finds any item unnecessary to insure compliance with the provisions
of this article.



(Ord, passed 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-5-5  LAND MOVEMENT PERMIT FEES.



   The engineering plan review and inspection fee for any land movement
within the jurisdiction of the village shall be as given in §§ 6-13-9(A),
6-13-9(B) and 6-13-9(C).



(Ord. 92-02-20, passed 2-11-1992; Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord,
passed 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-5-6  BOND.



   The engineering plan review and inspection fee for any land movement
within the jurisdiction of the village shall be as given in §§ 6-13-9(A),
6-13-9(B) and 6-13-9(C).



(Ord. 92-02-20, passed 2-11-1992; Ord, passed 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-5-7  PROHIBITION OF LAND REMOVAL.



   No land movement permit shall be issued for an intended building site
unless the proposed land movement is coordinated with an overall plan
previously approved by the village for the area in which the site is
situated. Provided, however, that where land movement on the intended
building site can take place without temporary or permanent interference with
adjacent parcels and no area plan has been developed, the Village Engineer
may waive this requirement.



(Ord, passed 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-5-8  COMPLIANCE WITH MANUALS AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS.



   All land movement not specifically exempted by the provisions of this
article shall comply with the applicable standards, specifications and
requirements set forth in The Illinois Urban Manual, as amended, DuPage
Appendix E Water Quality Best management Practices Technical Guidance Manual,
and the IDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction in
addition to the other requirements of this Article. In the event of conflict
between provisions of the previously identified manuals and standard
specifications and other provisions of this article or the DuPage County
Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance, the provisions of the DuPage
County Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance shall govern.



(Ord, passed 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-5-9  SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS.



   (A)   If at any stage of the land movement operation the Village
Engineer determines by inspection that the nature of the formation is such
that further work as authorized by an existing permit is likely to imperil
any property, public way, watercourse or drainage structure, the Village
Engineer may require, as a condition to allowing the work to be done or
continued, that such reasonable safety precautions be taken as he considers
advisable to avoid the likelihood of such peril. SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS may
include, but shall not be limited to, specifying a more level exposed slope,
construction of additional drainage facilities, berms, terracing, compaction
or cribbing, installation of plant materials for erosion control and reports
of a registered soils engineer and/or of a registered engineering geologist
whose recommendations may be made requirements for further work.



   (B)   Where it appears that storm damage may result because the land
movement is not complete, work may be stopped and the permittee required to
install temporary planting to control erosion, install temporary structures
or take such other measures as may be required to protect adjoining property
or the public safety. On large operations or where unusual site conditions
prevail, the Village Engineer may specify the time of starting grading and
time of completion or may require that the operations be conducted in
specific stages so as to insure completion of protective measures or devices
prior to the advent of seasonal rains.



(Ord, passed 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-5-10  EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.



   Every land movement permit shall only be valid for the time period as
specified in Article IV Stormwater Management Certifications, § 15-44
Duration and Revision to Certifications and Authorizations of the DuPage
County Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance as adopted in Ch. 6,
Art. 14 of this code or otherwise become null and void unless the Village
Engineer extends the expiration date as allowed by § 15-44.



(Ord, passed 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-5-11  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   In the event any person holding a land movement permit pursuant to this
article violates the terms of the permit or conducts or carries on such site
development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health,
welfare or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the
property of the permittee or conducts or carries on such site development so
that it is materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to
property or improvements in the neighborhood, the Village Engineer shall
revoke or suspend the land movement permit in accordance with Article XIV
Prohibited Acts/Enforcement/Penalties, § 15-107 Revocation and Suspension of
Certifications of the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain
Ordinance as adopted in Ch. 6, Art. 14 of this code.



(Ord, passed 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



ARTICLE 6:  MISCELLANEOUS



Section



   7-6-1   Acceptance of required land improvements



   7-6-2   Stop work orders



   7-6-3   Fees for filing preliminary plans and plats



   7-6-4   Buildings within proposed major street rights-of-way



   7-6-5   Building permit; earthwork regulations



   7-6-6   Occupancy permit



   7-6-7   Occupancy permits; blueprints required



   7-6-8   Rear yard grading



   7-6-9   Grading guarantee deposit for new one- and two-family
residential construction



   7-6-10   Occupancy variance deposit



   7-6-11   Variations



   7-6-12   Enforcement



   7-6-13   Record of plats



   7-6-14   Severability



   7-6-15   Violation; penalty



   7-6-16   Repeal of conflicting ordinances



   7-6-17   Subdivision without improvements



§ 7-6-1  ACCEPTANCE OF REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   (1)   Upon the completion of construction of all public
improvements required by this code, in conformance with approved engineering
plans and specifications, the subdivider shall prepare and submit to the
Department of Public Works three sets of as-built plans along with a sepia
Mylar or other approved reproducing copy and certification by the Village
Engineer that all public improvements have been satisfactorily completed in
accordance with the approved engineering plans and specifications. The
developer shall also submit a complete inventory of all public improvements
on forms specified by the village. The Village Board will enact a resolution
accepting such improvements.



      (2)   After completion and acceptance of a sewer and/or water
main, title to it shall be transferred and conveyed to the village by the
owner (or owners) free and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances,
without cost to the village.



   (B)   If any plat of subdivision contains public streets or
thoroughfares which are therein dedicated as such, whether located within the
corporate limits of the village, or all or in part outside thereof, or
contains existing streets located outside of the corporate limits, the
approval of the plat by the Board of Trustees or the subsequent annexation of
the property to the village shall not constitute an acceptance thereon or
therein, irrespective of any act or acts by an officer, agent or employee of
the village with respect to such streets or improvements. The acceptance of
such streets or thoroughfares shall be made only by the adoption of a
resolution by the Board of Trustees, after there has been filed with the
village a certificate by the Village Engineer certifying that all
improvements required to be constructed or installed in or upon such streets
or thoroughfares, in connection with the approval of the plat of subdivision
by the Board of Trustees, have been fully completed and the construction or
installation thereof has been approved by him or her.



   (C)   The subdivider shall, in all cases, guarantee the workmanship
of the improvements for one year following their acceptance by the village,
and shall insure such guarantee by posting cash or negotiable securities in
the amount of a surety bond with sureties approved by the Plan Commission and
the Board of Trustees in the amount of 20% of the cost of such improvements.
The fulfillment of this requirement is a condition to acceptance of the
improvements by the village and is in addition to the requirements of
divisions (A) and (B) of this section.



(Ord. 90-04-26, passed 4-10-1990)



§ 7-6-2  STOP WORK ORDERS.



   (A)   Upon written notice from the Village Engineer or his or her
subordinates that work on any building, structure or land improvements is not
in accordance with the requirements of this code, such work shall be stopped
immediately.



   (B)   The stop work order described herein shall be in writing and
shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner’s
agent, or to the person doing the work. The order shall state the conditions
upon which work may be resumed.



   (C)   Any person who shall continue any work on any building
structure or land improvement after being served with a stop work order,
except such work as is necessary to bring the building, structure or land
improvement in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, shall be
liable to a fine of not less than $75, nor more than $750, per day. Each day
upon which such work is continued in violation of a stop work order shall
constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010)



§ 7-6-3  FEES FOR FILING PRELIMINARY PLANS AND PLATS.



   The fees for filing an application for approval of a preliminary plan
or plat shall be as prescribed in § 6-13-12.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010)



§ 7-6-4  BUILDINGS WITHIN PROPOSED MAJOR STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   After the effective date of this code, no permanent building or
structure shall be erected within the rights-of-way of major thoroughfares as
shown on the Comprehensive Plan or official map of the village.



§ 7-6-5  BUILDING PERMIT; EARTHWORK REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No building, earthwork or excavation permit shall be sought by
any owner, duly authorized agent or successors and assigns, nor shall such
permits be issued by any village official for the construction of any
building, structure or improvement to any lot within a subdivision as defined
in this code, which has been approved for platting or replatting, until and
unless compliance is achieved with the ordinances of the village relating to
surface waters, drainage, water retention and detention and with all
requirements of this code.



   (B)   Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a proposed
single-family lot, the developer shall be required to submit three blueprint
copies of the plat of the proposed lot, stamped and signed by a registered
land surveyor or registered professional engineer, to the Village Engineering
Department indicating the following:



      (1)   Builder’s name, unit number and lot number;



      (2)   Proposed top of foundation grade;



      (3)   Proposed garage floor elevation at front of home;



      (4)   Proposed driveway slope in percentage to house side edge
of sidewalk, or to curb flowline if there is no sidewalk;



      (5)   Proposed location of foundation;



      (6)   Proposed lot corner elevation and drainage arrows; and



      (7)   Proposed house model number.



   (C)   Once the foundation of the single-family home has been
completed, but prior to the construction of any walls for the home, the
builder/developer shall be required to submit two blueprint copies of the
plat to the Village Engineering Department indicating the existing elevation
and location of the foundation of the home.



§ 7-6-6  OCCUPANCY PERMIT.



   No occupancy permit shall be granted by any governing official for the
use of any building or structure within a subdivision or lot division
approved under this chapter until required land improvements have been
installed and accepted by the Board of Trustees, except street and alley
improvements as herein required may be in the process of installation;
provided that, either a concrete pavement or the initial layer of bituminous
concrete pavement has been installed and is suitable for vehicular traffic.



§ 7-6-7  OCCUPANCY PERMITS; BLUEPRINTS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a
single-family residence, the builder shall be required to submit two
blueprint copies of the plat for the existing lot to the Village Engineering
Department, indicating the following:



      (1)   Builder’s name, unit number and lot number;



      (2)   Existing top of foundation grade;



      (3)   Existing garage floor elevation at front of home;



      (4)   Indicate existing driveway slope in percentage to house
side edge of sidewalk, or to curb flowline if there is no sidewalk;



      (5)   Existing lot corner elevation and drainage arrows;



      (6)   Existing finished grade elevation at the four corners of
the home and at all foundation windows which do not have window walls;



      (7)   Existing elevation of all drainage break points within
the lot, including location and elevation of swales which are not located
along property lines;



      (8)   Existing location and elevation of all utility
structures on the lot;



      (9)   Location of sump pump discharge from building;



      (10)   Location and pertinent elevations of any unique grading
features such as, retaining walls and stepped building foundations;



      (11)   Constructed house model numbers; and



      (12)   Stamp and signature of a registered land surveyor or a
registered professional engineer, including the following statement:



         “The final grading of the lot has been completed and
fully complies with the approved engineering plans for the lot. This survey
was performed on                     , 20        ,        
      (with) or                     (without) sod in place.”



   (B)   In the event that the final grading of the lot differs from
the approved plans, a statement must be made as to the nature of the change.
The Village Engineer may approve minor changes discovered during this final
blueprint preparation providing that the changes do not adversely affect the
drainage on the land in question or other lands.



§ 7-6-8  REAR YARD GRADING.



   No certificate of occupancy for a single-family lot shall be granted
until the Engineering Department has certified that the rear yard does not
exceed a 5% slope and that the entire lot has a topsoil respread of at least
four inches. In critical cases, because of the contours of the land and
roadway elevation, the Engineering Department may require that a berm be
constructed with a maximum slope of two and one-half to one (2.5:1) and a
width not to exceed ten feet on any one lot.



§ 7-6-9  GRADING GUARANTEE DEPOSIT FOR NEW ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
CONSTRUCTION.



   In addition to any other permit fees  for new one- and two-family
residential construction, there shall be deposited with the village cash, or
adequate security, as specified in § 6-13-9(F).



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010)



§ 7-6-10  OCCUPANCY VARIANCE DEPOSIT.



   A variance from any part of the requirements for the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy may be granted by the Village Manager, or his or her
designee,  in light of an inability of the builder to complete such
requirements due to inclement weather or upon other good cause shown. When a
variance is so issued, there shall be deposited with the village a cash
payment in accordance with § 6-13-10.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010)



§ 7-6-11  VARIATIONS.



   The Board of Trustees may approve variations from the requirements of
this code when, in its opinion, such variations will not adversely affect the
Comprehensive Plan or the intent of this code. The Board of Trustees may only
grant such variations by ordinance which shall state the special reasons
which require a variation of this Subdivision Code. The Board of Trustees
shall not approve variations that result in requirements less than required
by the DuPage County Subdivision Regulations Ordinance for subdivisions
located in the unincorporated areas under the extra-territorial jurisdiction
of this code.



(Ord. 2007-03-11, passed 3-19-2007)



§ 7-6-12  ENFORCEMENT.



   No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to record in the
Recorder’s office or have any validity until it shall have been approved in
a manner prescribed in this code. The Board of Trustees, by resolution, shall
appoint the enforcing officer of this code, and it shall be his or her duty
to enforce the provisions hereof. The enforcing officer may call upon any
department or official of the village to furnish him or her with such
information and assistance as he or she may deem necessary for the observance
of this code, and it shall be the duty of such department or officer to
furnish such information and assistance whenever required.



§ 7-6-13  RECORD OF PLATS.



   All of such plats of subdivision, after the same have been submitted
and approved as provided in this code, shall be filed and kept by the village
among the records of the village.



§ 7-6-14  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
Subdivision Code is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions thereof.



§ 7-6-15  VIOLATION; PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who constructs any public
improvements or portion thereof in violation of the provisions of this code
shall be, upon conviction, fined not less than $75, nor more than $750, for
each offense, plus the costs of the action, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.



   (B)   Whoever shall sell or offer for sale, lease or offer for
lease, while this code is in effect any lot or blocks, within the
incorporated limits of the village, or any resubdivision of any block
therein, or within contiguous territory and not more than one and one-half
miles beyond the incorporated boundary of the village, before a final plat of
subdivision has been approved by the Plan Commission and the Village Board of
Trustees as required by this code, shall be fined not less than $75, nor more
than $750, for each lot or block or part thereof so disposed of, offered for
sale or lease.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010)



§ 7-6-16  REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances or parts in conflict with the provisions of this code
are, to the extent such conflict exists, hereby repealed.



§ 7-6-17  SUBDIVISION WITHOUT IMPROVEMENTS.



   Whenever a parcel of land within the village or its planning
jurisdiction shall have been subdivided and the subdivision improvements
specified within this Subdivision Code shall not have been installed, the
construction of any building or structure upon such subdivided lot without
the contemporaneous construction of the aforesaid improvements or the posting
of adequate security with the village to guarantee such construction shall
constitute a violation of the provisions of this code. This section is
intended to deal with the situation in which land was subdivided prior to the
time that subdivision improvement bonds were required, or the subdivision
improvement bonds or other security which were posted for the benefit of the
village or another governmental body were not available at the time that such
funds were required, or were not in a sufficient amount to construct all of
the public improvements required under this code. The village may allow the
construction on an individual lot or lots to take place when the owners of
that lot or lots post with the village adequate security to guarantee that at
the time that the construction of public improvements which are at best
constructed for more than a single lot or lots is to take place, funds will
be available to pay for the portion of those public improvements attributable
to the lot or lots owned by the applicant. The Village Manager will determine
the adequacy of the security proposed to be posted by the applicant,
considering among other things the possible increase in the cost of the
improvement at the time that it would actually be installed, the nature of
the proposed security and the number of other contributors to the financing
of the improvement.



ARTICLE 7:  FLOOD PRONE AREAS



Section



   7-7-1   Purpose



   7-7-2   Definitions



   7-7-3   General conditions



   7-7-4   Provisions for accomplishing the purpose



   7-7-5   Other regulations



   7-7-6   Preventing increased damages



   7-7-7   Other development requirements



   7-7-8   Subdivision, development and improvement regulations



   7-7-9   Required information



   7-7-10   Subdivision design



   7-7-11   Water supply and sanitary sewer; design



   7-7-12   Administration; responsibility



   7-7-13   Appeals of administrative decisions



   7-7-14   Variances



   7-7-15   Interpretation



   7-7-16   Disclaimer of liability



   7-7-17   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Building construction and maintenance, see Ch. 6, Art. 9



   DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance, see Ch.
6, Art. 14



   Land Movement Regulations, see Ch. 7, Art. 5



   Storm water detention, see Ch. 7, Art. 9



§ 7-7-1  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this article is:



      (1)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing the flood
or drainage hazards to others;



      (2)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to
buildings from flood damage;



      (3)   To protect human life and health from the hazards of
flooding;



      (4)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control
projects, repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood
rescue and relief operations;



      (5)   To maintain property values and a stable tax base by
minimizing the potential for creating flood blight areas;



      (6)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available
for property in the village; and



      (7)   To provide for the orderly growth and development
pursuant to the village's comprehensive plan of an environment that is
especially sensitive to changes from human activity.



   (B)   The provisions of this article further regulate, guide and
control:



      (1)   The use, subdivision layout and improvement of lands
located in flood plains.



      (2)   The excavating, filling and grading of lots and other
land parcels of areas located in flood plains and the storing of certain
materials thereon.



      (3)   The location, construction and elevation of sanitary and
storm sewers and appurtenances, such as manholes, located in flood plains.
Regulations concerning the development of buildings and other structures in
flood prone areas are to be found in Ch. 6, Art. 9 and Ch. 6, Art. 14.



(Ord. 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-7-2  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the definitions in Appendix A -
Acronyms, Initialisms and Definitions of the DuPage County Countywide
Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance as adopted in Ch. 6, Art. 14 of this
code shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



(Ord. 90-10-91, passed 10-23-1990; Ord. 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-7-3  GENERAL CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Floodways. In floodways which have been identified in
accordance with this article as elements of flood plains associated with the
flood having a 100-year recurrence interval, fill, encroachments and
development and substantial improvements of existing structures, which would
result in any increase in flood heights either upstream or downstream, shall
be prohibited unless allowed by Article X Flood Plain Management of the
DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance as adopted in
Ch. 6, Art. 14 of this code.



   (B)   Flood fringes. In flood fringes, which have been identified in
accordance with Article X Flood Plain Management of the DuPage County
Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance as elements of the flood
plains associated with floods having a 100-year recurrence interval,
development, filling or use of those low lying lands may be permitted under
the conditions specified in Article X.



   (C)   Compensatory storage. Such filling as may be required or
permitted by Article X Flood Plain Management of the DuPage County Countywide
Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance, for a building site, or as may
otherwise be done in a flood plain shall be compensated for and balanced by a
volume at least equal to 150 % of the volume of flood plain storage
displaced. Existing flood storage that is lost due to channel modifications
or flood plain fill resulting from public roadway developments shall require
compensatory storage at a one to one ratio. In the case of streams and
channels, such excavation shall be made opposite or immediately adjacent to
the areas so filled or occupied and shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse.



   (D)   Watercourse alteration. When required by the Illinois
Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources (IDNR-OWR) or the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the Village Engineer shall notify
each agency prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse within the
village's jurisdiction by any person or agencies.



   (E)   Land use controls. This flood plain ordinance is not intended
to reduce or eliminate existing flooding, nor is it intended to impose a
complete prohibition of development in flood plain areas. On the contrary,
these regulations are designed to guide and control development in such a
manner as not to increase the damaging effects of floods on developments
proposed for the low lying areas of this community.



   (F)   Base flood. The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled
or exceeded in a given year as adopted by the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP). It is the basis for mapping, insurance rating and regulating
new construction and is also known as the 1% chance or 100-year flood.



   (G)   Base flood elevation. This article's protection standard is
the base flood according to the best data available to the Illinois State
Water Survey Flood Plain Information Repository and the County of DuPage in
accordance with the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain
Ordinance as adopted in Ch. 6, Art. 14 of this code. Whenever a party
disagrees with the best available data, he or she may finance the detailed
engineering study needed to replace existing data with better data and submit
it to the State Water Survey for their review and approval.



(Ord. 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-7-4  PROVISIONS FOR ACCOMPLISHING THE PURPOSE.



   (A)   All new development proposals in the special flood hazard
areas shall be reviewed and approved by the Village Engineer.



   (B)   The Village Engineer's review is to insure the following:



      (1)   New development will not change the flow of flood or
other surface drainage waters so that other properties become more
susceptible to damage;



      (2)   New developments will not create special hazards or
nuisances when flooded; and



      (3)   New buildings and major improvements to existing
buildings will not be subject to damage by the base flood.



(Ord. 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-7-5  OTHER REGULATIONS.



   Before starting any of the work regulated by this article, an applicant
shall comply with the requirements set forth in other applicable sections of
the code of ordinances with respect to the submission and approval of
preliminary and final subdivision plats, improvement plans, building and
zoning permits, inspections, appeals and similar matters, along with those
set forth in this article and as may be required by federal, state or county
laws and the regulations of any department of the state. Where provisions of
this article are more restrictive than other requirements, this article shall
apply.



(Ord. 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-7-6  PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES.



   (A)   No development in the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) shall
create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or
velocity, or threat to public health and safety.



   (B)   Within the floodway identified on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map, the standards set forth in Article X Flood Plain Management of the
DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance as adopted in
Ch. 6, Art. 14 shall apply.



   (C)   For all projects involving channel modifications or fill
(including levees) in the SFHA, the village will submit sufficient data to
the Federal Emergency Management Agency to revise the regulatory flood data.



   (D)   Within all other SFHA's, the standards set forth in Article X
Flood Plain Management of the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Flood
Plain Ordinance as adopted in Ch. 6, Art. 14 shall apply.



(Ord. 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-7-7  OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The Village Board shall take into account flood hazards, to
the extent that they are known, in all official actions related to land
management, use and development.



   (B)   Plans for the development activities to be undertaken by the
village in the SFHA shall be reviewed by the Village Engineer to ensure that
they comply with this code. Except as exempted by law, no other local
government shall commence any development activity in the SFHA without first
obtaining a development permit from the Village Engineer.



   (C)   The Community Development Department shall take the following
into consideration when preparing or revising the comprehensive plan,
community development program, housing assistance plan, and other land use or
development programs:



      (1)   Preserving SFHA land for open space uses such as farming
or recreation;



      (2)   Acquiring and removing frequently flooded buildings;



      (3)   Prohibiting hospitals, water treatment plants, natural
gas storage and other critical or especially hazardous facilities from
locating in the SFHA;



      (4)   Identifying the elevations of the base flood and past
floods at entrances to public buildings, on street signs, or other prominent
locations; and



      (5)   Other flood hazard mitigation or flood plain management
activities that could help accomplish the purposes of this article.



(Ord. 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-7-8  SUBDIVISION, DEVELOPMENT AND IMPROVEMENT REGULATIONS.



   No preliminary plan or final plat for land inside or outside the
village shall be approved for a tract of land which is subject to periodic
flooding or which contains poor drainage facilities without the engineering
plans for the project being reviewed and approved by the Village Engineer
under the standards established in this article.



(Ord. 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-7-9  REQUIRED INFORMATION.



   Accompanying the preliminary plans of each proposed subdivision which
involves any portion of a base flood area, there shall be furnished at least
the following information and data:



   (A)   Contour map. A topographic map with two foot interval contours
of the land to be subdivided and such adjoining land whose topography may
affect the layout or drainage of the subdivision. On such a map, there shall
be shown the following:



      (1)   The location of streams and other floodwater runoff
channels, their normal channels, the extent of their flood plains at the
established high water elevations, and the limits of the floodway, all
properly identified;



      (2)   The boundary of the SFHA;



      (3)   The boundary of the floodway, if shown on available SFHA
maps;



      (4)   The normal shoreline of lakes, ponds, swamps, wetlands,
riparian areas and detention basins, their flood plains and lines of inflow
and outflow, if any;



      (5)   The location of farm drains and their inlets and outlets;



      (6)   Storm, sanitary and combined sewers and any sewer
outfalls;



      (7)   Septic tank systems and outlets, if any;



      (8)   Seeps, springs and flowing waters and other wells;



      (9)   Location of existing structures that will remain;



      (10)   100-year flood elevation and limits, including floodway
data for that portion of a subdivision or development which is in the base
flood area;



      (11)   The FPE for each building site. Where the base flood
elevation is not available from an existing study filed with the State Water
Survey, the applicant shall be responsible for calculating the FPE and
submitting it to the state water survey for review and approval as best
available elevation data.



   (B)   Channel profiles. Profile drawings of each stream channel,
pond and basin showing elevations of the following:



      (1)   The streambed;



      (2)   Channel banks, if any;



      (3)   Waterway openings of existing culverts and bridges
within and near the tract;



      (4)   Size and elevation of sewer and drain outlets into the
stream channel or basin;



      (5)   The base flood elevations established by this article.



(Ord. 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-7-10  SUBDIVISION DESIGN.



   (A)   General. All proposed subdivision and other developments
within the base flood area shall be reviewed to ensure that the proposed
developments are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage, that all
public utilities and facilities (such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems) are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage
and that adequate drainage is provided.



   (B)   Design. Streets, blocks, depths of lots, parks and other
public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve
and utilize natural streams, channels and detention basins. Whenever
possible, the larger streams and flood plains shall be included with parks or
other public grounds.



   (C)   Channel straightening. Sharply meandering streams or channels
may be partially straightened and minor changes made in other channels,
subject to the approval of the Village Engineer, provided:



      (1)   The hydraulic capacity of the floodway is maintained;



      (2)   The volume of floodwater storage outside the floodway is
not reduced;



      (3)   Provision is made to stabilize the banks of the modified
channel to control erosion; and



      (4)   Any additional permits for this work that are required
by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources and the Corps of Engineers
are obtained.



   (D)   Drainageways. Whenever the plans call for the passage and/or
storage of surface runoff or excess stormwater on lots, the grading of all
such lots shall be prescribed and established as part of the subdivision
plat. The areas so designated for the passage and/or storage of such waters
shall not be obstructed. The limits of the high water levels resulting from
the passage and/or storage of surface runoff or excess stormwater on lots
shall be covered by an easement.



(Ord. 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-7-11  WATER SUPPLY AND SANITARY SEWER; DESIGN.



   The design of water supply and sanitary sewer systems to be located in
the flood plain shall minimize or eliminate the discharges from the system
into the floodwaters and the infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located so as to avoid impairment of
them or contamination from them during or subsequent to flooding.



(Ord. 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-7-12  ADMINISTRATION; RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   The administration of this article shall be the responsibility
of the Village Engineer.



   (B)   Wherever specific provisions of this article fall within the
purview of any other commission or agency of the village, responsibility is
hereby transferred, provided that:



      (1)   Variances. No variance shall be issued without the prior
concurrence of the Village Board.



      (2)   Special use permit. No special use permit shall be
issued without meeting all the provisions in Ch. 6, Art. 14 of this code and
without prior concurrence of the Village Board.



      (3)   Official maps and profiles. Responsibility for all
changes to official maps and profiles remains with the Village Board.



(Ord. 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-7-13  APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS.



   Appeals to the decisions of any administrative body or official of this
village in the interpretation of this article may be made in writing to the
Village Board by any aggrieved person or governmental unit within 30 days of
approval or rejection. The decision of the Village Board shall be final.



(Ord. 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-7-14  VARIANCES.



   The Village Board may grant variances from the regulatory standards of
this article in accordance with the following requirements:



   (A)   All variance requests. No variance shall be granted unless the
applicant for the variance can demonstrate that:



      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the
SFHA;



      (2)   A substantial economic hardship would result if the
variance were not granted;



      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;



      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health or
safety or creation of a nuisance;



      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood
protection, rescue or relief operations, policing or repairs to roads,
utilities or other public facilities; and



      (6)   The variance shall not prevent the issuance of any
permits or stormwater management certifications required by another
governmental body,



      (7)   The variance shall be in conformance with all
requirements of Article XVI Variances of the DuPage County Countywide
Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance as adopted in Ch. 6, Art. 14 of this
code.



   (B)   Variances to lower protection levels. In addition to the
requirements of division (A) above, a variance from the requirements of this
article that would result in a structure not being protected to the elevation
of the base flood shall also meet the following requirements:



      (1)   The Village Board, by a notation on the application,
notifies the applicant in writing that such construction below the base flood
level will increase the risks to life and property and that the applicant
proceeds with full knowledge of these risks;



      (2)   The Village Board notifies the applicant that if the
variance is issued, it is contingent upon the applicant obtaining approval
from other agencies having jurisdiction, when the variance violates the
requirements of such agencies;



      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with full knowledge
of these risks and that he or she will acknowledge in writing that he or she
assumes all risks and complete liability.



   (C)   “Wet floodproofed” building. A variance from the
requirements of this article may be granted to permit a “wet
floodproofed” building, that is, a building to be intentionally flooded
during a flood, provided:



      (1)   No part of such a building below the FPE may be subject
to flood damage;



      (2)   The variance shall be conditioned on the contents being:



         (a)   Of materials resistant to flood damage; or



         (b)   Items declared “property not covered” by a
standard flood insurance policy of the National Flood Insurance Program.



      (3)   Any future alteration of the area below the FPE that
violates the conditions of the variance shall be deemed a violation of this
article. The applicant shall be informed by a notation on the application or
otherwise that any such alteration is considered a willful act to increase
flood damages and therefore will cause coverage by a standard flood insurance
policy to be suspended.



   (D)   Historical structures. Variances requested in connection with
the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on
the National Register of Historical Places or documented as worthy of
preservation by the state Department of Conservation may be granted.



(Ord. 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-7-15  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this article, the provisions
expressed herein shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall be
liberally construed in favor of the village and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.



(Ord. 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-7-16  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may
occur or flood heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This
Article does not imply that development either inside or outside of the SFHA
will be free from flooding or damage. This article, nor any other provisions
of this code relating to flood prone areas, does not create liability on the
part of the village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage
that results from reliance on this code or any administrative decision made
lawfully thereunder.



(Ord. 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-7-17  PENALTY.



   (A)   Failure to obtain a permit or certification for development in
the SFHA or failure to comply with the requirements of this article or
conditions of a variance granted under this article shall be deemed to be a
violation of this article.



   (B)   The Village Engineer may determine upon due investigation that
a violation of the minimum standards of this article exist, and after such
owner fails, after ten-days’ notice, to correct his or her property, the
village may make application to the circuit court for an injunction requiring
conformance with this article or make such other order as the court sees
necessary to secure compliance with the article.



   (C)   Any person who violates this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not less than $75 nor more than $750. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs
or continues. Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit,
certification or conditions of a variance resolution shall be deemed to be a
violation of this article.



   (D)   The Village Engineer shall inform the owner that any such
violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and,
therefore, may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be
suspended.



   (E)   Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such
other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.



(Ord. 09-05-20 passed 5-4-1990; (Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord.
2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



ARTICLE 8:  LAND AND CASH DONATIONS



Section



   7-8-1   Purpose



   7-8-2   Donations required



   7-8-3   Donations required from properties outside village corporate
limits



   7-8-4   Donations computed on projected population



   7-8-5   Land contribution to school districts



   7-8-6   Cash contribution to school districts



   7-8-7   Contributions; park sites



   7-8-8   Credit for private open spaces and recreation areas



   7-8-9   Reservation of additional land



   7-8-10   Combining with adjoining developments



   7-8-11   Combined school/park sites



   7-8-12   Distribution of plans and plats



   7-8-13   Time of conveyance of donations



   7-8-14   Title insurance, survey, assessment plats



   7-8-15   Topography and grading



   7-8-16   Cash contributions in lieu of land



   7-8-17   Contributions; village services



   7-8-18   Contributions; additional school services



   7-8-19   Contributions; fire protection district



   7-8-20   Contributions; public library



   7-8-21   Updating of required contributions and fair market value



   7-8-22   Severability



   Table 1:   Table of Estimated Population per Dwelling Unit



§ 7-8-1  PURPOSE.



   (A)   Since 1970, land developers have annexed more than 2,525 acres
to the village. As part of many annexations, through annexation agreements,
the village has negotiated and obtained land and cash donations for parks and
schools, and cash donations for village services, the Carol Stream Fire
Protection District; the Carol Stream Public Library; and various school
districts serving the village.



   (B)   Within the village, tracts of land exist which have been or
may be subdivided or zoned planned unit development for residential use which
are not subject to an annexation agreement or for which annexation agreements
could expire without land and cash donations having been met.



   (C)   The residential development projected over the next several
years will have a significant impact on the village community, including the
village itself, Carol Stream Park District, Carol Stream Fire Protection
District, Carol Stream Public Library and several school districts which
provide education to the students residing in the village, including Elgin
U-46 School District, Community Consolidated School District 93, Glenbard
High School District 87, Glen Ellyn District 41, Benjamin District 25, West
Chicago High School District 94, and Wheaton U-200 School District. This
development will cause a greatly increased demand for services and facilities
provided by these entities.



   (D)   The developers of new subdivisions and planned unit
developments, and residents thereof, will require village, educational,
recreational, library and fire protection services prior to the time that tax
revenues are generated by such subdivisions and planned unit developments.



   (E)   The development projected will result in the rapid
disappearance of land available for schools and parks, and the price of the
remaining land will in all probability increase faster than the borrowing
capacity of the various taxing bodies responsible for providing village,
school, recreational and fire protection services.



   (F)   It is essential to the health, welfare and safety of the
village that:



      (1)   Adequate land and facilities are available to provide
village, educational, library, recreational and fire protection services;



      (2)   School sites be provided within the village in
accordance with the criteria hereinafter set forth, which are consistent with
the minimum school site recommendations heretofore issued by the various
affected school districts and that funds be provided to the village to defray
a portion of the cost of new school construction;



      (3)   Park sites be provided within the village in accordance
with the standards hereinafter set forth, which are consistent with the
criteria for park land requirements as recommended by the Carol Stream Park
District;



      (4)   Funds be provided to the village to help defray the
increased cost of providing village services and fire protection in areas
which are in the process of development with a high potential for theft and
vandalism, unfinished streets that cause extra-ordinary wear and tear to
emergency vehicles, and increased patrol requirements that will strain the
Police Department’s human resources and vehicular resources; and



      (5)   The combining of school sites with park sites to provide
the maximum in educational and recreational services and facilities should be
encouraged.



§ 7-8-2  DONATIONS REQUIRED.



   Unless otherwise provided for in an annexation agreement with the
village, as a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision or of a
final plat of a planned unit development, each subdivider or developer shall
be required to dedicate land and/or make cash contributions in lieu of land
for acquisition of park and school sites; and cash donations for school
construction, fire protection, village services, books and library services,
and recreation to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of
the subdivision or planned unit development as herein-after set forth.



§ 7-8-3  DONATIONS REQUIRED FROM PROPERTIES OUTSIDE VILLAGE CORPORATE
LIMITS.



   (A)   In the event that land which is subject to subdivision
approval by the village is not within the corporate limits of the village at
the time of approval of a final plat of subdivision for the land, the
provisions of this article shall not apply to such land with respect to
contributions for village library services or in any other instance where the
land is not within the jurisdiction of the governmental entity to which the
contribution or donation is to be made.



   (B)   However, in the event that land which is subject to
subdivision approval by the village is not within the corporate limits of the
village at the time of approval of a final plat of subdivision for the land,
the governing body of any governmental entity which would be entitled to land
and/or cash donations pursuant to this article may request that the village
vary the terms of this article by allowing such governmental entity to make
its own agreement and/or waiver as to any or all of the donations and amounts
thereof required in this article with the subdivider, developer and/or owner
of such land. The request shall be made in writing by a resolution adopted by
the governing board of such governmental entity. In such an event, the
village may, by motion, condition subdivision approval upon compliance with
the provisions of this article as the provisions of this article have been
modified by the variation and/or waiver.



§ 7-8-4  DONATIONS COMPUTED ON PROJECTED POPULATION.



   (A)   For purposes of computing the amount of land donations or cash
contributions in lieu of land for park and school sites, and cash donations
for school construction, fire protection, village services, books and library
services and recreation that will be required of each subdivision or planned
unit development to enable the village to provide facilities and services to
meet the needs of such subdivision or planned unit development, its projected
population density shall be computed in accordance with Table 1, set forth at
the end of this article, which is generally indicative of current and short
range projected trends in family size by age groups.



   (B)   Table 1, set forth at the end of this article, shall be used
for all population estimates unless a subdivider or developer files a written
objection to the village data, together with his or her own demographic study
showing the estimated population to be generated by his or her subdivision or
planned unit development. In that event, the final determination of the
density formula to be used in such calculations shall be made by the
corporate authorities on the basis of the foregoing village data, data
submitted by the subdivider or developer, and from other sources which may be
submitted to the corporate authorities by the park district, school
districts, fire protection district, public library or others. It is
recognized that population density, age distribution and local conditions
change over the years and that Table 1 is subject to periodic review and
amendment, if necessary.



§ 7-8-5  LAND CONTRIBUTION TO SCHOOL DISTRICTS.



   School sites shall be donated and conveyed to the village in accordance
with the following criteria.



   (A)   Number of students. The ultimate number of students that will
be generated by the proposed subdivision or planned unit development shall be
determined in accordance with the current (at the time of plan review)
edition of Table 1, set forth at the end of this article, adjusted as set
forth in § 7-8-4.



   (B)   Land donation to school. The amount of land required to be
dedicated shall be determined by dividing the estimated number of children in
each of the school age brackets hereinafter set forth that will be generated
by the proposed subdivision or planned unit development by the maximum
recommended number of students that can be served in the type of school
assigned to such age bracket, hereinafter set forth, and multiplying the
quotient times the minimum number of acres recommended for a school site,
hereinafter set forth. The product thereof shall be the acres of land deemed
needed to have sufficient land for school sites to serve the estimated
increased children in each such school classification.



   (C)   School classifications and size of school site. School
classifications and size of school sites shall be determined in accordance
with the following criteria:*



 

School Classification by Grades
 
Maximum Number of Students for Each Such School Classification
 
Minimum Number of Acres of Land for Each School Site of Such Classification


Elementary Schools, Grades K - 5
 
600 students
 
11 acres


Middle Schools, Grades 6 - 8
 
900 students
 
29 acres


High Schools, Grades 9 - 12
 
2,300 students
 
53 acres



 



*The residents of the village are served by seven different school districts.
In the event that an affected school district has a different school
classification than as shown in the table above, such school classifications,
size of school sites and minimum acres of land set forth in the table above
shall be modified to meet the requirements of the affected district.



   (D)   Location of school site. The Comprehensive Plan of the village
shall be used as a guideline in locating sites.



   (E)   Improved sites. Prior to conveyance, all sites shall be
prepared in accordance with the village Subdivision Code and water
retention/detention requirements. All sites shall be conveyed in a condition
ready for full service of electrical, water, sewer and streets (including
enclosed drainage and curb and gutter) as applicable to the location of the
site, or acceptable provision made therefor. The sidewalks and trees normally
included within the definition of improved sites may be deferred due to the
delay time between conveyance of any such school sites and construction of
school facilities thereon.



   (F)   School land conveyed to the village. School land conveyed to
the village shall be held by it for transfer to the affected school district
or other entity. Any school land conveyed to the village or thereafter
transferred to a school district or other entity pursuant to this article
which is not used for school purposes within 20 years after it is conveyed to
the village shall be reconveyed to the developer.



§ 7-8-6  CASH CONTRIBUTION TO SCHOOL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   In addition to the land donation referred to in § 7-8-5, or a
cash contribution in lieu of land referred to in § 7-8-16 of this article,
each subdivider or developer shall be required to make a cash contribution to
aid in the provision of necessary funds for the construction, expansion or
rehabilitation of a school for the use of the children who will be generated
by the proposed subdivision or planned unit development, or for other
improvements to the extent required in whole or part by the existence of a
school.



   (B)   The amount of the cash donation shall be determined by
multiplying the estimated number of children in the K-12 school age bracket
that will be generated by the proposed subdivision or planned unit
development times $1,000 per child. The contribution required for school
construction shall be regularly updated, pursuant to § 7-8-13. Funds
contributed by a developer pursuant to this section shall be deposited with
the Village Treasurer to be held in a special fund which shall not be used
for any purpose other than for payment of the cost of school construction,
expansion or rehabilitation or for other improvements to the extent required
in whole or in part by the existence of a school. Any interest which accrues
shall also be used for the purposes set forth in this section. Any cash
donated to the village for school construction or expansion purposes pursuant
to this article which has not been expended for those purposes within 20
years shall be refunded to the developer.



   (C)   The funds and any accrued interest will be apportioned among
the school districts affected by a particular development based on the number
of students estimated to be generated as set forth at the end of this article
in Table 1, or may be expended by the village for construction, maintenance
or replacement of physical structures and facilities owned or operated by the
village to the extent required in whole or in part by the existence of a
school.



   (D)   This cash contribution is a requirement of the village’s
Subdivision Code. However, in order not to make this requirement overly
onerous and to assist developers in meeting this financial responsibility,
the cash contributions required in this section shall be payable upon the
issuance of the building permit for each dwelling unit.



(Ord. 99-06-38, passed 6-21-1999)



§ 7-8-7  CONTRIBUTIONS; PARK SITES.



   Park sites shall be donated and conveyed to the park district in
accordance with the following criteria.



   (A)   Number of residents. The ultimate number of residents that
will be generated by the proposed subdivision or planned unit development
shall be determined in accordance with Table 1, set forth at the end of this
article. The amount of land required to be dedicated for park sites in each
subdivision or planned unit development shall be determined by dividing the
estimated population of such subdivision or planned unit development by 1,000
and multiplying the quotient times five and one-half acres of park land
required for each 1,000 people.



   (B)   Location of park sites.



      (1)   Except for combined school/park sites, as defined in §
7-8-11 of this article, the Comprehensive Plan adopted by the village, and
the Carol Stream Park District Master Plan shall be used as a guideline in
locating sites. If the village or the park district has not planned a park
within the subdivision or planned unit development or the neighborhood in
which the subdivision or planned unit development is located, the park site
shall be so located as to be readily accessible to the people within such
neighborhood. Play and athletic fields and large park sites must be
conveniently accessible to the community at large.



      (2)   Proper ingress, egress and curb cuts shall be provided.
For water areas, provisions must be made for pathway/driveway around these
areas for emergency vehicles and police patrol. Provisions for major use of a
pathway/driveway for bike riding, walkway, jogging trail and pedestrian
traffic shall be made.



   (C)   Environmental quality.



      (1)   Land to be dedicated for park sites shall be approved by
the village according to its environmental quality, as well as its
suitability for active and passive recreational activities. The land is to be
dry and usable at all times and not subject to flooding or used as detention.
Should a donation include a detention/retention area over and above the five
and one-half acres required per 1,000 of ultimate population estimated to be
generated by the development, the park district may accept such additional
land. No bogs or swamps shall be acceptable as required park sites. Lakes and
native prairie wetlands shall not normally be acceptable, but may be approved
by the village where the area offers an exceptional amenity or the chance to
protect a significant natural resource. No site that has been part of an
unlicensed landfill or a toxic waste dump shall be acceptable as required
park acreage.



      (2)   Every effort shall be made to conserve for public use
and enjoyment those areas of significant natural and environmental value.
Except in those specific areas designated by the village for development as
playfields or other active areas, all trees, other plant materials, streams
and other natural features shall be retained on land to be dedicated for park
site use, unless specifically cited by the village for removal by the
developer.



   (D)   Shape. Dedicated park sites shall be regularly configured to
permit efficient park programming, security and maintenance. Sites shall be
rectangular, or nearly rectangular, in shape with no interior angle of the
boundary line less than 60 degrees, unless specifically approved by the
village. Narrow strips of land, small parcels that intrude into adjacent
orderly development, or left over parcels that are oddly shaped or located
shall be avoided.



   (E)   Improvements.



      (1)   Prior to conveyance, all sites shall be prepared in
accordance with the village’s Subdivision Code and water
retention/detention requirements, except as varied by the specific terms of
this article. In addition, in the event that a park site includes
retention/detention areas, slopes must be mowable and shall not exceed a five
to one (5:1) slope. Those areas, where by necessity and subject to the
approval of the Village Engineer, the grade exceeds five to one (5:1), must
have a covering of flagstone or crown vetch which eliminates the need to mow.
All areas must be final graded and seeded to meet park district
specifications as to seed mixture.



      (2)   All sites shall be conveyed in a condition ready for
full service of electrical, water, sewer and streets (including enclosed
drainage and curb and gutter) as applicable to the location of the site, or
acceptable provision made therefor. In addition, location of hydrants shall
be made in conformance with village requirements. Provision for water for
watering vegetation and flooding for ice skating shall be made where
appropriate. Sewers for possible installation of restrooms/shelter at a later
date shall be provided. Electricity for street lights for future lighting for
shelters and security shall be provided. Security lighting along pathway
shall be provided.



§ 7-8-8  CREDIT FOR PRIVATE OPEN SPACES AND RECREATION AREAS.



   (A)   When subdividers or developers provide their own open space
for recreation areas and facilities, it has the effect of reducing the demand
for local public recreational services. Depending on the size of the
development, a portion of the park and recreational area in subdivisions or
planned unit developments may, at the option of the Village Board, be
provided in the form of “private” open space in lieu of dedicated
“public” open space. The extent of same shall be determined by the
Village Board, based upon the needs of the projected residents and in
conformance to the total park and recreation land for the general area.



   (B)   In general, a substitution of private open space for dedicated
parks will imply a substantially higher degree of improvement and the
installation of recreational facilities, including equipment by the developer
as part of his or her obligation. Detailed plans of such areas, including
specifications of facilities to be installed, must be approved by the
village, and before any credit is given for private recreation areas, the
subdivider or developer must guarantee that these private recreation areas
will be permanently maintained for such use by the execution of the
appropriate legal documents.



§ 7-8-9  RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND.



   Where the Comprehensive Plan of the village calls for a larger amount
of park and recreational land or school sites in a particular proposed
subdivision or planned unit development than the developer is required to
dedicate, the land needed beyond the developer’s contribution shall, if so
determined by the Village Board, be reserved for subsequent purchase by the
village or other public body designated by the village; provided that, such
acquisition is made within one year from the date of approval of the final
plat.



§ 7-8-10  COMBINING WITH ADJOINING DEVELOPMENTS.



   Where the subdivision or planned unit development is less than 40
acres, public open space or a school site which is to be dedicated should,
where possible, be combined with dedications from adjoining developments in
order to produce usable recreation areas or school sites without hardship on
a particular developer.



§ 7-8-11  COMBINED SCHOOL/PARK SITES.



   The developer and the village may agree that the developer shall
dedicate and convey land (or contribute cash in lieu of land pursuant to §
7-8-16 of this article) for combined school/park sites in lieu of land
donations otherwise required under §§ 7-8-5 and 7-8-7 in accordance with
the following standards.



   (A)   The amount and quality of land required to be dedicated for
park purposes shall first be determined pursuant to § 7-8-7.



   (B)   The amount of land required to be dedicated for school
purposes shall be determined by dividing the estimated number of children in
each of the school age brackets hereinafter set forth that will be generated
by the proposed subdivision or planned unit development, by the maximum
recommended number of students that can be served in the type of school
assigned to such age bracket, set forth in the following table, and
multiplying the quotient times the minimum number of acres recommended for a
school site, within a combined school/park site, for each school
classification hereinafter set forth:*



 

School Classification by Grades
 
Maximum Number of Students for Each Such School Classification
 
Minimum Number of Acres of Land for Each School Site Within a Combined
School/park Site of Such Classification 


Elementary Schools, Grades K-5
 
600 students
 
6-1/2 acres


Middle Schools, Grades 6-8
 
900 students
 
8-1/2 acres


High Schools, Grades 9-12
 
2,300 students
 
22-1/2 acres



 



*The residents of the village are served by seven different school districts.
In the event that an affected school district has a different school
classification than as shown in the table above, such school classifications,
size of school sites and minimum acres of land set forth in the table above
shall be modified to meet the requirements of the affected district.



   (C)   A combined elementary school/park site shall be at least 13
acres in area, of which six and one-half acres shall be conveyed to the park
district and the remaining six and one-half acres shall be held by the
village for transfer to the affected school district or other entity.



   (D)   A combined middle school/park site shall be at least 17 acres
in area, of which eight and one-half acres shall be conveyed to the park
district and the remaining eight and one-half acres shall be held by the
village for transfer to the affected school district or other entity.



   (E)   A combined high school/park site shall be at least 55 acres in
area, of which 22-1/2 acres shall be conveyed to the park district and the
remaining 22-1/2 acres shall be held by the village for transfer to the
affected school district or other entity.



   (F)   The standards set forth in §§ 7-8-5, 7-8-7 and 7-8-15 as to
location, improvements and topography shall be applicable to combined school/
park sites.



§ 7-8-12  DISTRIBUTION OF PLANS AND PLATS.



   Copies of each subdivision plat or planned unit development plan shall
be transmitted to the park district and the affected school districts for
their written recommendations at the same time that they are transmitted to
the Plan Commission, but nothing herein contained shall be construed as
requiring receipt of a recommendation prior to action by the corporate
authorities of the village.



§ 7-8-13  TIME OF CONVEYANCE OF DONATIONS.



   All land donations required pursuant to this article shall be conveyed
no later than the earlier of the following to occur:



   (A)   Within 180 days after a written demand by the village; and



   (B)   The fourth anniversary of the approval of the plat of
subdivision or planned unit development by the village.



§ 7-8-14  TITLE INSURANCE, SURVEY, ASSESSMENT PLATS.



   Each deed or other instrument conveying land to the village or the Park
District shall be accompanied by the following:



   (A)   A written commitment issued by a title insurer licensed to do
business in this state to insure that grantee has good merchantable title to
such real estate in an amount equal to its value computed pursuant to §
7-8-16(E), subject only to then current general real estate taxes as of the
date of transfer; covenants, conditions and restrictions which do not
prohibit the use of the subject real estate for school or park use; utility
easements located within 20 feet of the boundary lines of the subject real
estate; drainage ditches, feeders, laterals and underground pipe or other
conduit;



   (B)   A current boundary line survey, certified to the grantee by a
licensed state land surveyor to be in compliance with the state’s Land
Survey Standards; and



   (C)   Except in instances where the real estate to be conveyed is a
lot in a recorded subdivision, an assessment plat and tax division petition
in form acceptable to the appropriate county authorities so that the land to
be conveyed can be assigned its own permanent real estate index number for
exemption purposes.



§ 7-8-15  TOPOGRAPHY AND GRADING.



   The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site, as well as its
surroundings, must be suitable for its intended purposes. Grading on sites
dedicated for park and recreational uses shall not differ greatly from
surrounding land.



§ 7-8-16  CASH CONTRIBUTIONS IN LIEU OF LAND.



   Criteria for requiring cash contributions in lieu of land donations.



   (A)   Whenever, in the determination of the village, any subdivision
or planned unit development is so small that the school or park sites
required under the provisions of §§ 7-8-5, 7-8-7 and/or 7-8-11 will not be
large enough for practical development and maintenance as school or park
sites, or when the available land cannot meet the standards set forth in §§
7-8-5 and 7-8-7, or is otherwise inappropriate for park or recreational
purposes or for a school site, the village shall require the subdivider or
developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the land dedication required.



   (B)   (1)   The cash contribution to be paid in lieu of land
donations for school sites shall be held in trust by the village or other
public body designated by the village, solely for use in the acquisition of a
school site to serve the immediate or future needs of children from that
subdivision or planned unit development, or for reimbursement to the school
district for prior acquisition of a school site(s) for which bonds or other
financing obligations are outstanding which will serve immediate or future
needs of children from that subdivision or planned unit development, or for
the improvement of any existing school site which predominantly serves such
needs, but not for the construction, repair or rehabilitation of any school
building(s) or addition(s) thereto.



      (2)   All cash donations shall be apportioned among the
affected school districts on a pro rata basis determined by the estimated
population to be generated in the subdivision or planned unit development as
set forth in Table 1, set forth at the end of this article.



   (C)   The cash contribution to be paid in lieu of land donations for
park and recreational purposes shall be held in trust by the village or other
public body designated by the village solely for the acquisition of park and
recreational land which will be available to serve the immediate or future
needs of the residents of that subdivision or planned unit development or for
the improvement of existing park and recreational lands which predominantly
serve such needs.



   (D)   If any portion of a cash contribution in lieu of park or
recreational land donations, or school site donations made pursuant to this
article is not expended for the purposes above set forth within 20 years from
the date of its receipt, it shall be refunded to the subdivider or developer
who made such contribution.



   (E)   Fair market value:  The amount of cash contributions in lieu
of land shall be based on the “fair market value” of land in the proposed
subdivision or planned unit development improved as specified in §§ 7-8-5
and 7-8-7 that otherwise would have been donated for park, recreational and
school sites. The corporate authorities have determined that the present
“fair market value” of such improved land in and surrounding village is
$150,000 per acre. Such figure shall be regularly updated pursuant to §
7-8-21, and shall be used in making any calculation herein unless the
subdivider or developer files a written objection thereto. In the event of
any such written objection, the developer shall submit an appraisal showing
the “fair market value” of such improved land in the area of his or her
development or other evidence thereof and final determination of such “fair
market value” per acre of such improved land shall be made by the corporate
authorities based upon such information submitted by the subdivider or
developer and from other sources which may be submitted to the corporate
authorities by the park district, school districts or others.



   (F)   There will be situations in subdivisions or planned unit
developments when, in the determination of the village, a combination of land
donation and cash contribution in lieu of land is appropriate. These
occasions will arise when:



      (1)   Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed
as the location for a park or school site. That portion of the land within the



subdivision or planned unit development falling within the park or school
site shall be conveyed as aforesaid, and cash shall be donated by the
developer, and cash shall be donated in an amount equal to the difference
between the fair market value of the land donated and the fair market value
of the land required to be donated under §§ 7-8-5 and 7-8-7;



      (2)   A major part of a local park or recreation site or
school site has already been acquired and only a small amount of land is
needed from the proposed subdivision or planned unit development to complete
the site. The remaining amount of land shall be donated by the developer, and
cash shall be donated in an amount equal to the difference between the fair
market value of the land donated and the fair market value of the land
required to be donated under §§ 7-8-5 and 7-8-7; or



      (3)   Because of the large number of school districts serving
the village, there may be instances where a combination of land donation and
cash contributions in lieu of land will be appropriate, and will be decided
on a case by case basis in accordance with the criteria set forth in this
article. For example, a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as
one type of school site, for example elementary, but that there is no site
which is suitable for a high school site in accordance with the criteria set
forth in this section. In that event, a land donation will be made to the
elementary school district and a cash donation will be made to the high
school district.



   (G)   A cash contribution in lieu of land is a requirement of the
village’s Subdivision Code. However, in order not to make this requirement
overly onerous and to assist developers in meeting this financial
responsibility, the cash contributions required in this section shall be
prorated and payable upon the issuance of the building permit for each
dwelling unit.



(Ord. 92-09-104, passed 9-8-1992; Ord. 2003-03-13, passed 3-17-2003)



§ 7-8-17  CONTRIBUTIONS; VILLAGE SERVICES.



   (A)   In order to provide the village with funds to defray the
increased cost of providing village services to developers during the
construction process and residents of new subdivisions before tax revenues
are generated by such new subdivisions or planned unit developments in the
process of construction, a cash contribution in the amount of $360 per person
or fraction thereof shall be made to the village on the basis of the
estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit determined as set forth in
Table 1, set forth at the end of this article. The contribution required for
village services shall be regularly updated pursuant to § 7-8-21.



   (B)   This cash contribution is a requirement of the village’s
Subdivision Code. However, in order not to make this requirement overly
onerous and to assist developers in meeting this financial responsibility,
the cash contributions required in this section shall be payable upon the
issuance of the building permit for each dwelling unit.



(Ord. 92-09-104, passed 9-8-1992; Ord. 2000-03-17, passed 3-20-2000)



§ 7-8-18  CONTRIBUTIONS; ADDITIONAL SCHOOL SERVICES.



   (A)   In the event that an affected school district decides by
resolution at any time within five years after approval of a plat of
subdivision of planned unit development that a land donation or cash in lieu
of a land donation will not be required by that particular district within
the next five years to accommodate the number of students projected to be
generated by a proposed subdivision or planned unit development, but that
such projected number of students shall require the hiring of additional
teachers and expansion and creation of new programs, in order to provide the
affected school district with funds to provide such services before tax
revenues are generated by such new subdivision or planned unit development, a
cash contribution in the amount of $333 per student shall be made to the
village on the basis of the estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit
determined pursuant to the table set forth at the end of this article in
Table 1, and all such funds shall be paid over by the village to the affected
school district. The contribution required for school services shall be
regularly updated pursuant to § 7-8-21.



   (B)   All such donations shall be apportioned among the affected
school districts on a pro rata basis determined by the estimated population
in the subdivision or planned unit development as set forth at the end of
this article in Table 1.



   (C)   This cash contribution is a requirement of the village’s
Subdivision Code. However, in order not to make this requirement overly
onerous and to assist developers in meeting this financial responsibility,
the cash contributions required in this section shall be payable upon the
issuance of the building permit for each dwelling unit.



§ 7-8-19  CONTRIBUTIONS; FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT.



   In order to help defray the cost of providing fire protection for
residents of new subdivisions or planned unit developments during the
construction process, and before tax revenues are generated by such
subdivisions and planned unit developments in the process of construction, a
cash contribution in the amount of $600 per acre shall be paid to the
village, prior to the recordation of the ordinance annexing the property. The
contribution required for fire services shall be regularly updated pursuant
to § 7-8-21.



(Ord. 2000-03-17, passed 3-20-2000; Ord. 2003-03-12, passed 3-17-2003)



§ 7-8-20  CONTRIBUTIONS; PUBLIC LIBRARY.



   In order to help defray the cost of providing library services for
residents of new subdivisions or planned unit developments during the
construction process and before tax revenues are generated by subdivisions
and planned unit developments in the process of construction, a cash
contribution in the amount of $65 per person or fraction thereof shall be
made to the village on the basis of the estimated ultimate population per
dwelling unit determined pursuant to Table 1, set forth at the end of this
article, and all such funds shall be paid over by the village to the Carol
Stream Board of Library Trustees. The contribution required for library
services shall be regularly updated pursuant to § 7-8-21.



(Ord. 92-09-104, passed 9-8-1992; Ord. 2000-03-17, passed 3-20-2000)



§ 7-8-21  UPDATING OF REQUIRED CONTRIBUTIONS AND FAIR MARKET VALUE.



   It is recognized that population density, age distribution, land
values, the cost of providing park, school and village services, construction
costs and other local conditions change over the years. Therefore, the
specific formula for the dedication of land, or the payment of fees in lieu
thereof, the required contribution for school construction, police, fire,
library and administrative services, and the fair market value of land in and
around the village shall be reviewed at least every two years and amended if
necessary.



§ 7-8-22  SEVERABILITY.



   The various provisions of this article are to be considered as
severable and if any part or portion of this article shall be held invalid by
any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining provisions of this article.



TABLE 1: TABLE OF ESTIMATED POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT



 

Type of Unit
 
Pre-School
0 - 4 Years
 
Elementary
Grades K - 5
5 - 10 Years
 
Junior High
Grades 6 - 8
11 - 13 Years
 
Total
Grades K - 8
5 - 13 Years
 
High School
Grades 9 - 12
14 - 17 Years
 
Adults
18 - Up




Apartments


   Efficiency
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
1.000


   1-bedroom
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
1.190


   2-bedroom
 
.038
 
.065
 
.021
 
.086
 
.035
 
1.500


   3-bedroom
 
.208
 
.157
 
.037
 
.194
 
.082
 
2.330


Attached Single Family


   1-bedroom
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
-
 
1.050


   2-bedroom
 
.051
 
.075
 
.011
 
.086
 
.021
 
1.741


   3-bedroom
 
.217
 
.212
 
.022
 
.234
 
.051
 
1.775


   4-bedroom
 
.333
 
.316
 
.166
 
.482
 
.180
 
2.333


Detached Single Family


   2-bedroom
 
.125
 
.120
 
.026
 
.146
 
.018
 
1.700


   3-bedroom
 
.308
 
.381
 
.174
 
.555
 
.146
 
1.978


   4-bedroom
 
.472
 
.513
 
.314
 
.827
 
.313
 
2.195


   5-bedroom
 
.402
 
.260
 
.420
 
1.040
 
.327
 
2.650


NOTES TO TABLE:

There are only three significant categories provided in this chart. Because
of the similarity of yields of all types of attached single family, only one
category is provided. The same is true with apartments, thus only one
category. Because of the short history of some newer types of single units,
both detached and attached individual evaluations may be necessary.

 

Copyright 1983

Associated Municipal Consultants, Inc.




 



(Ord. 92-09-104, passed 9-8-1992)



ARTICLE 9:  STORM WATER DETENTION



Section



   7-9-1   Storm water detention areas



   7-9-2   Storm water detention criteria



   7-9-3   Detention basin design criteria



   7-9-4   Common detention areas



Cross-reference:



   Building construction and maintenance, see Ch. 6, Art. 9



   DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance, see Ch.
6, Art. 14



   Land Movement Regulations, see Ch. 7, Art. 5



   Subdivisions, see Ch. 7, Art. 7



§ 7-9-1  STORM WATER DETENTION AREAS.



   No building permits for new construction or for additions to present
structures shall be issued unless the Village Engineer has approved the
drainage plans scheduled for implementation providing for the storage and
controlled release of storm water runoff in accordance with the criteria set
out in this code.



(Ord. 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-9-2  STORM WATER DETENTION CRITERIA.



   In determining the sufficiency of a storm water storage and detention
plan submitted by a developer, the Village Engineer shall be governed by the
criteria contained in Ch. 6, Art. 14 of this code.



(Ord. 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-9-3  DETENTION BASIN DESIGN CRITERIA.



   The detention basin shall be designed in accordance with the village
design manual, copies of which can be obtained from the Department of
Engineering Services and of Ch. 6, Art. 14 of this code.



(Ord. 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



§ 7-9-4  COMMON DETENTION AREAS.



   In certain instances the creation of common detention or retention
areas serving multiple parcels under different ownership may best serve the
private utilization of property and the public's interest, achieving
economies of scale in the construction and maintenance of such storm water
facilities. In such circumstances, the village may, in lieu of on-site
retention and/or detention facilities, accept the furnishing of off-site
facilities or sufficient money to purchase facilities which, when added to
such detention and/or retention facilities as are furnished on site, are
sufficient to provide the water retention required by this code. Provided,
however, that until such time as the permanent off-site water retention
and/or detention facilities are available, the property owner shall provide
temporary on-site retention and shall comply with all regulations of Ch. 6,
Art. 14 of this code and Ordinance No. 2003-04-16 Establishing An Oversight
Committee And The Procedures For The Granting Of Variances Under The
Village's Storm Water Ordinances Including The Establishment Of A Fee For Any
Site Run-Off Storage Not Provided.



(Ord. 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)



CHAPTER 8: TRAFFIC CODE



      Article



         1.   UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE



         2.   THROUGH STREETS, STOP STREETS, ONE-WAY STREETS,
LOAD LIMITS, PROHIBITED PARKING AND MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



         3.   TOWING PROVISIONS



         4.   BICYCLES



         5.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



         6.   PARKING SCHEDULES



         7.   MOTORIZED SKATEBOARDS



         8.   VEHICLE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT



         9.   AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEMS



ARTICLE 1:  UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE



Section



   8-1-1   Adoption of provisions of Illinois Vehicle Code by reference



   8-1-2   Penalties and related provisions



§ 8-1-1  ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   The Illinois Vehicle Code, 65 ILCS 5/100 et seq., as amended
from time to time is hereby adopted by reference to be applied within the
corporate limits of the village to the extent permitted by law and to the
extent that its subject matter is not regulated by the Carol Stream Village
Code or inconsistent with any lawful provisions of the Carol Stream Village
Code.



   (B)   All references in section of the Illinois Vehicle Code to
“this code” shall be to sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code. References
to a state employee or official may be to a corresponding village employee or
official where such reference is applicable or necessary. Any provisions of
the Illinois Vehicle Code adopted herein may be cited by placing “8-1:”
before the appropriate Illinois Vehicle Code section (i.e., 8-1-11-501, Carol
Stream Traffic Code).



   (C)   The burden of proof for any offense classified as a
“petty” offense or “business” offense in the Illinois Vehicle Code
adopted herein shall be by a preponderance of the evidence. Offenses
classified therein as “misdemeanor” offenses shall be proven beyond a
reasonable doubt.



(Ord. 2004-10-56, passed 10-4-2004)



§ 8-1-2  PENALTIES AND RELATED PROVISIONS.



   (A)   A violation of any provision of this title, unless otherwise
specified, or of an offenses classified as “petty” offenses under the
aforesaid provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code shall be punishable by a
fine of not less than $60, nor more than $1,000, for each offense. Offenses
classified as business offenses under the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, adopted by reference pursuant to this chapter, shall be punishable as
set forth herein.



   (B)   Offenses classified as “misdemeanors” under the provisions
of the Illinois Vehicle Code, adopted by reference pursuant to this chapter,
shall be subject to a fine or imprisonment for a determinant term according
to the following limitations:



      (1)   For a class A misdemeanor, imprisonment for any term
less than one year and/or a fine of not less than $1,000 and not to exceed
$2,500, except as provided in division (B)(4) below;



      (2)   For a class B misdemeanor, imprisonment for not more
than six months and/or a fine of not less than $300 and not to exceed $1,500;



      (3)   For a class C misdemeanor imprisonment for not more than
30 days and/or a fine of not less than $150 and not to exceed $1,500;



      (4)   The court, upon making a finding of guilty for any
offense under §§ 8-1-11-501 or 8-1-11-503 of this code, in addition to any
sentence alternative elected by the court, shall impose a fine of not less
than $2,000 if the defendant has previously been convicted of driving under
the influence of alcohol or any prohibited controlled substance under any
local code or under § 11-503 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, or a similar
provision under local ordinance;



      (5)   The court, upon making a finding of guilty of any
offense under § 8-1-11-501 of this code, in addition to any sentencing
alternative elected by the court, shall impose an additional fine of $500 if
the defendant had a breath alcohol content of 0.160 or higher in the case for
which he or she is being sentenced; and



      (6)   In addition to any other alternative sentence imposed by
the court, an individual found guilty of a violation of § 8-1-11-501, whose
operation of a motor vehicle while in violation of § 8-1-11-501, proximately
caused an incident resulting in an appropriate emergency response, shall be
required to make restitution to a public agency for the costs of that
emergency response. The restitution may not exceed $1,000 per public agency
for each emergency response. As used in this division (B)(6), EMERGENCY
RESPONSE means any incident requiring a response by a police officer, a
firefighter carried on the rolls of a regularly constituted Fire Department
or an ambulance.



   (C)   All fines recited herein are in addition to all costs,
including DUI tech fees mandated by state statute which is adopted herein by
reference.



   (D)   The court, upon making a finding of guilty for any offense
under § 8-1-11-501(a)(3), 8-1-11-501(a)(4), 8-1-11 -501(a)(5) or
8-1-11-501(6) of this code, in addition to any sentence alternative elected
by the court, shall impose a fee in the amount of $50 for costs incurred by
the village for equipment and the handling of drug samples.



(Ord. 2004-10-56, passed 10-4-2004; Ord. 2011-12-45, passed 12-19-2011)



ARTICLE 2:  THROUGH STREETS, STOP STREETS, ONE-WAY STREETS, LOAD LIMITS,
PROHIBITED PARKING AND MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section



   8-2-1   Through streets



   8-2-2   Duty of driver at stop intersections; maintenance of signs



   8-2-3   Yielding right-of-way



   8-2-4   One-way streets and alleys



   8-2-5   Overweight and/or overdimension vehicles



   8-2-6   Permits for overweight and/or overdimension vehicles



   8-2-7   Vehicles prohibited on certain streets



   8-2-8   Limited parking zones



   8-2-9   Prohibited parking; alleys



   8-2-10   Prohibited parking; overnight



   8-2-11   Prohibited parking; after snowstorm



   8-2-12   Prohibited parking; private property



   8-2-13   Prohibited parking; unpaved surfaces



   8-2-14   Prohibited parking; for sales of vehicles and merchandise



   8-2-15   Prohibited parking; loading zones



   8-2-16   Prohibited parking; bus and taxicab stands



   8-2-17   Parking prohibited; intersections



   8-2-18   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited; no signs required



   8-2-19   Issuance of permits for special parking privileges for
persons with disabilities



   8-2-20   Prohibited parking in parking areas for persons with
disabilities



   8-2-21   Authority to erect signs



   8-2-22   Operation of motor vehicles upon sidewalks, unpaved public
rights-of-way and certain public property prohibited



   8-2-23   Unnecessary noise; loss of control in operation of vehicles
prohibited



   8-2-24   Riding on part of vehicle not intended for passengers
prohibited



   8-2-25   Firefighters authorized to direct traffic



   8-2-26   Use of crosswalks by pedestrians



   8-2-27   Visibility of traffic signals and the like; clearview areas



Cross-reference:



   Towing provisions, see Ch. 8, Art. 3



§ 8-2-1  THROUGH STREETS.



   (A)   Every operator of a vehicle or other conveyance traveling upon
any street intersecting any through street herein designated shall bring such
vehicle or conveyance to a full stop at the stop sign posted at such
intersection or at a clearly marked stop line before entering the
intersection; subject, however, to the direction of any police officer or
traffic control signal at such intersection.



   (B)   The operation of any vehicle or conveyance which has come to a
full stop as required above, upon entering the through street, as well as
operators of vehicles on such through streets, shall be subject to the usual
right-of-way rule prescribed by law and applicable to vehicles at
intersections.



§ 8-2-2  DUTY OF DRIVER AT STOP INTERSECTIONS; MAINTENANCE OF SIGNS.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign
at an intersection where a stop sign is erected and designated by this
article at one or more entrances thereto, and shall proceed cautiously,
yielding to the vehicles not so obliged to stop which are within the
intersection or approaching so close as to constitute an immediate hazard,
unless traffic at such intersection is controlled by a police officer on
duty, in which event the directions of the police officer shall be obeyed.



   (B)   Stop signs shall be maintained at the appropriate approaches
to such intersections. The driver of every vehicle approaching the stop sign
shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection
or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked line,
or if none, then the point nearest the intersection roadway where the driver
has a view of the approaching traffic on the intersecting highway, before
entering the intersection, except where directed to proceed by a police
officer.



(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990)



§ 8-2-3  YIELDING RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   The intersections named in Art. 5, Schd. I, of this chapter
are designated as yield right-of-way intersections.



   (B)   Yield right-of-way signs shall be maintained at the
appropriate approaches to said intersections and thereupon the driver of
every vehicle approaching said sign shall reduce the speed of his or her
vehicle to not more than 20 mph and shall yield the right-of-way to other
vehicles which have entered the intersecting street either from the right or
left or which are approaching so closely on said intersecting streets as to
constitute an immediate hazard; but said driver having so yielded may proceed
at such time as a safe interval occurs. If a driver is involved in a
collision at such intersection or interferes with the movement of other
vehicles after driving past a yield right-of-way sign, such collision or
interference shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the driver’s failure
to yield the right-of-way.



(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990)



Cross-reference:



   Yield right-of-way intersections, see Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I



§ 8-2-4  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   Whenever this code or any ordinance designates any one-way street or
alley, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when
signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every
intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.



§ 8-2-5  OVERWEIGHT AND/OR OVERDIMENSION VEHICLES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in control of, to
drive, to park, or move on, upon or across or for the owner to cause or
knowingly permit to be parked, driven, or moved upon or across, any street or
highway under the jurisdiction of the village, any vehicle or combination of
vehicles exceeding the size and weight limitations stated in 625  ILCS
5/15-102 (width), 625 ILCS 5/15-103 (height), 625 ILCS 5/15-107 (length) and
625 ILCS 5/15-111 (weight).



   (B)   Size and weight limitations while operating on village streets
shall not apply to the following vehicles or equipment:



      (1)   Fire Department Vehicles;



      (2)   Those vehicles operating under an emergency declaration;



      (3)   Village owned vehicles engaged in emergency utility
repair;



      (4)   Equipment used for snow and ice removal, owned and
operated by any government body;



      (5)   Implements of husbandry temporarily operated or towed in
a combination in the furtherance of a farm or agricultural endeavor;



      (6)   Any vehicle or combination of vehicles operating under
the terms of a valid overweight and/or over dimension permit issued by the
village under the authority of § 8-2-6 .



   (C)   Where lower size and weight limits or other restrictions are
imposed by ordinance under authority of 625 ILCS 5/15-316 and 625 ICLS
5/15-317, and signs indicating such limitations or restrictions are posted,
it shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle or combination of vehicles in
excess of such size or weight limitations or in violation of such
restrictions.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful to operate any "construction vehicle" as
defined herein on any street in the village when signs are posted on that
street prohibiting "construction vehicle."  CONSTRUCTION VEHICLE shall be
defined as any vehicle over 10,000 pounds actual weight, registered weight or
gross vehicle weight rating that is required to comply with 625 ILCS 5/12-712
and 625 ICLS 5/12-713 on identification required to be displayed.



   (E)   Whenever a vehicle or combination of vehicles is operated in
violation of this section, the owner and/or operator of such vehicle shall be
deemed guilty of such violation and either the owner or operator may be
prosecuted for such violation.



(Ord. 93-04-40, passed 4-13-1993; Ord. 2014-12-56, passed 12-15-2014)



Cross-reference:



   Weight limits on certain streets, see Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. VI



§ 8-2-6  PERMITS FOR OVERWEIGHT AND/OR OVERDIMENSION VEHICLES.



   (A)   The village, with respect to any street or highway under its
jurisdiction, may upon application to the Village Engineering Department
through a format approved by the village and good cause being shown therefore
issue a permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles of a size exceeding the maximum specified in § 8-2-5
or a vehicle or combination or vehicles, that is non-divisible or carrying a
load that is non-divisible and exceeding the following limits (specified in
§ 8-2-5):



      (1)   Gross weights, axle weights or series of axle weights
that exceed the maximum limits set forth in 625 ILCS 5/15- 111(a);



      (2)   Vehicles specifically designed as tow trucks as defined
in 625 ILCS 5/15-111(a)(12) engaging in the tow of a disabled vehicle from
the original point of disablement to a point where repairs are to actually
occur, when the point of repair is more than 20 miles from the original point
of disablement.



   (B)   The applicant of the permit shall furnish the following
information within the permit application:



      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the owner or
lessee of the vehicle;



      (2)   Applicant's name;



      (3)   Type of permit requested (single trip, round trip,
multiple trip);



      (4)   Description and registration of the power unit;



      (5)   Description of load to be moved;



      (6)   Number of axles of the vehicle of combination of
vehicles;



      (7)   Gross weight of the vehicle and its load;



      (8)   Axle weights of all single, tandem or series of axles;



      (9)   Width, length and height of the vehicle and its load;



      (10)   Origin of the load within the state or state line if
the origin is outside of the State of Illinois;



      (11)   Roads within the village which are requested to be
traveled; and



      (12)   Container identification number of any intermodal
shipping container.



   (C)   The Village Engineer or their designee is authorized to
review, authorize, modify or reject all permit applications. Routes may be
modified prior to authorization as determined by the Village Engineer or
their designee.



   (D)   Upon authorization and payment of the permit fees, specified
in the fee schedule in division (M)(1) of this section, the Village Engineer
or their designee shall issue a permit allowing passage of the overweight
and/or over dimension vehicle over the authorized village roadways. The
permit shall contain:



      (1)   Permit number;



      (2)   Dates that the permit is valid;



      (3)   Type of permit (single trip, round trip);



      (4)   Description of the load to be moved;



      (5)   Authorized gross weight, axle weights, width, length and
height;



      (6)   The authorized routing over village streets including
the origin and destination point within the village;



      (7)   The fees paid;



      (8)   The date and name of the Village Engineer or his or her
designee; and



      (9)   Any general conditions that the permittee must comply
with that are consistent and reasonable for the protection of the general
public and village streets. A copy of all permits issued will be provided to
the Traffic Sergeant and/or Commercial Motor Vehicle Enforcement Officer of
the Carol Stream Police Department for information and compliance.



   (E)   Permits issued will authorize movement between specific dates
depending on the type of permit obtained. Any movement outside of the dates
listed on the permit shall be deemed to be unpermitted and will be subject to
legal size and weight laws. The Village Engineer or his or her designee
reserves the right to modify the number of calendar days each permit is
allowed to run concurrent with permits issued by other government agencies
issued for the same movement.



      (1)   Single trip – valid for seven calendar days;



      (2)   Round trip – valid for 14 calendar days; and



   (F)   Permits for vehicles that are oversized (height or length) or
overweight are only valid a half hour before sunrise until a half hour after
sunset, on any day for which a permit issued by the Illinois Department of
Transportation is valid.



   (G)   The permit, when issued, constitutes an agreement between the
permittee and the village that the move described in the application will
take place only as described. The permittee has the responsibility to report
any inaccuracies or errors on the part of the village or the permittee to the
Village Engineering Department, prior to moving any load. Undertaking the
move is prima facie evidence of acceptance of the permit as issued and that:



      (1)   The permittee is in compliance with all operation
requirements;



      (2)   All height, length and weight limitations specified in
the permit;



      (3)   All operation, registration and license requirements;



      (4)   All financial responsibilities, obligations and other
legal requirements; and



      (5)   The permitee assumes all responsibility for injury or
damage to persons or to public or private property, including his or her own,
or to the object being transported, caused directly or indirectly by the
transportation or movement of vehicles and objects under the permit. The
permittee agrees to hold the village harmless from all suits, claims,
damages, or proceedings of any kind and to indemnify the village for any
claim it may be required to pay arising from the movement.



   (H)   The routing prescribed in the permit constitutes the sole
extent of the authority granted by the permit for the use of roads within the
jurisdiction of the village. Any vehicle and/or load found to be operating on
village roadways not specified on its permit will be considered to be off
route and without a permit. Permits shall be in the drivers possession at all
times and shall be exhibited upon demand by any enforcement officer, police
officer or other authorized village official. Permits may be displayed
electronically so long as it is accessible to any of the above listed
authorized agents upon demand.



   (I)   Any vehicle(s) and/or load that is found to be divisible will
render the permit null and void. The entire gross weight and axle weights of
the vehicle(s) with the load will then be subject to legal weights as defined
in 625 ILCS 5/15-111. It is the duty of the applicant to verify the
non-divisibility of the vehicle(s) before applying for the permit. The permit
itself is prima facie evidence that the applicant confirmed the vehicle(s)
and/or load was non-divisible.



   (J)   If required, arrangement shall be made by the permittee to
have the proper utilities notified, property moved, bridge or highway
analysis performed and completed in advance of any permit movement.



   (K)   All movements under the permit shall be made in accordance
with all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations. The Village Engineer or their designee holds the right to change
any requirements or provisions of the permit or permit process as deemed
rationally related to the interests of the village.



   (L)   Permits are null and void if altered for the purpose of
deception. Permits issued under this section constitute the grant of a
privilege by the village and may be denied or suspended for such reasons as
the village may deem rationally related to its governmental interests.



   (M)   The village with respect to streets and highways under its
jurisdiction shall collect a fee as shown herein from applicants for the
issuance of a permit to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles,
and/or loads, which fit the categories shown. Any axle or gross weight
greater than the maximum weights set forth in this section is subject to
special assessment and investigation to determine appropriate fees.



      (1)   The fee schedules for all vehicles are as follows:



         (a)   Oversize Fee Schedule (Legal Weight Only)



 

CATEGORY
 
MAX WIDTH
 
MAX HEIGHT
 
MAX LENGTH
 
ESCORT
 
SINGLE TRIP
 
ROUND TRIP


S1
 
  14'
 
13'6"
 
  115'
 
No
 
$ 50.00
 
$ 80.00


S2
 
  18'
 
13'6"
 
  135'
 
Yes
 
$ 75.00
 
$120.00


S3
 
>18'
 
13'6"
 
>135'
 
Yes
 
$100.00
 
$160.00



 



         (b)   Overweight Vehicle Fee Schedule



 

CATEGORY
 
AXLES
 
MAX GROSS WEIGHT
 
SINGLE TRIP
 
ROUND TRIP




A1
 
2
 
    48000
 
$  50.00
 
$  80.00


A2
 
2
 
    54000
 
    55.00
 
    90.00


A3
 
2
 
>54000
 
    75.00
 
  115.00


A4
 
3
 
    60000
 
    50.00
 
    80.00


A5
 
3
 
    72000
 
    55.00
 
    90.00


A6
 
3
 
    80000
 
    60.00
 
1,000.00


A7
 
3
 
>80000
 
    80.00
 
  120.00


A8
 
4
 
    72000
 
    50.00
 
    80.00


A9
 
4
 
    80000
 
    55.00
 
    90.00


A10
 
4
 
>80000
 
    75.00
 
  115.00


A11
 
5
 
    88000
 
    50.00
 
    80.00


A12
 
5
 
  100000
 
    55.00
 
    90.00


A13
 
5
 
>100000
 
    75.00
 
  115.00


A14
 
6
 
  110000
 
    50.00
 
    80.00


A15
 
6
 
  120000
 
    55.00
 
    90.00


A16
 
6
 
  143000
 
    60.00
 
  100.00


A17
 
6
 
>143000
 
    75.00
 
  115.00


A18
 
7
 
  162000
 
    85.00
 
  120.00


A19
 
7
 
>162000
 
  115.00
 
  200.00


A20
 
8
 
  187000
 
    85.00
 
  120.00


A21
 
8
 
  200000
 
    95.00
 
  160.00


A22
 
8
 
>200000
 
  115.00
 
  200.00


A23
 
9+
 
  225000
 
  100.00
 
  175.00


A24
 
9+
 
>225000
 
  150.00
 
  225.00




 



   (N)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator to operate any
vehicle upon any street or highway in the village in violation of the
provisions of this section and the owner and operator may be prosecuted for
such violation.



   (O)   For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply:



      (1)   NON-DIVISIBLE. A vehicle and load will be considered
non-divisible when further separating or dismantling the vehicle or load:



         (a)   Would require more than eight work hours to
dismantle using appropriate equipment. (The applicant has the burden of proof
as to the number of work hours required to dismantle the load.)



         (b)   Will compromise or destroy the intended use of the
load only. A load can be either permanently mounted or temporarily secured
equipment. Any parts, fluids, or material necessary to the operation of only
the power unit portion of the vehicle shall be deemed non-divisible.



         (c)   Would prohibit the vehicle from hauling one
attachment that is necessary to the operation of the load. To be considered
non-divisible, the attachment must be securely mounted to the load in the
manner it is to be used and not carried as a separate object on the hauling
vehicle.



(Ord. 2018-12-50, passed 12-17-2018)



§ 8-2-7  VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.



   As provided under the authority of 625 ILCS 5/15-316, it shall be
unlawful to operate any vehicle upon any street where the operation of that
vehicle is prohibited by ordinance and where signs of such prohibition are
posted.



(Ord. 93-04-40, passed 4-13-1993)



§ 8-2-8  LIMITED PARKING ZONES.



   Appropriate signs shall be posted in all areas where parking is limited
or prohibited, indicating such limitations or prohibitions. When signs are
erected giving notice of such limitations or prohibitions, it shall be
unlawful to park any vehicle otherwise than as directed.



§ 8-2-9  PROHIBITED PARKING; ALLEYS.



   It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle within an alley, except for the
purpose of loading and unloading merchandise, and then in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width
of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person
shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to
block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.



§ 8-2-10  PROHIBITED PARKING; OVERNIGHT.



   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any street in the village
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day; except that,
emergency vehicles and physicians on emergency calls are hereby exempt from
these provisions.



§ 8-2-11  PROHIBITED PARKING; AFTER SNOWSTORM.



   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street in the
village at any time within 12 hours after a snowfall of one inch or more has
occurred, unless the snow has been plowed off or otherwise removed from the
street.



§ 8-2-12  PROHIBITED PARKING; PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property
without the consent of the owner of the property.



§ 8-2-13  PROHIBITED PARKING; UNPAVED SURFACES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle upon a
surface which is not paved in accordance with provisions of the ordinances of
the village. It shall also be unlawful for any person to allow a motor
vehicle to be parked on any property owned or under the control of such
person when such vehicle is parked upon a surface which is not paved in
accordance with the provisions of ordinances of the village. It shall not be
a violation of this section where a vehicle is parked contrary to the
provisions of this section upon a site at which construction is taking place
and suitable paved surfaces are not then available; nor shall it be a
violation of the provisions of this section where a vehicle is temporarily
parked upon a non-aged surface in accordance with the provisions of any other
section of the code of ordinances.



§ 8-2-14  PROHIBITED PARKING; FOR SALES OF VEHICLES AND MERCHANDISE.



   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the
purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle upon any street
from which vehicle merchandise is peddled or sold, unless the person selling
such goods has a license to make such sales.



§ 8-2-15  PROHIBITED PARKING; LOADING ZONES.



   During the times specified in this section, it shall be unlawful for a
driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle for a period of time longer
than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers, not to exceed
three minutes, and for the driver to stand any freight-carrying vehicle for a
period of time longer than is necessary to load, unload and deliver
materials, not to exceed 30 minutes, in any of the following places:



   (A)   In any public alley, during any hour of the day or night;



   (B)   At any place not to exceed 75 feet along the curb before the
entrance to any hospital or hotel at any time; and/or



   (C)   Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time
the theater is open for business.



§ 8-2-16  PROHIBITED PARKING; BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS.



   It shall be unlawful to stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus
in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when such stop or
stand has been officially designated and appropriately indicated by signs;
except that, the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein
for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading
passengers, when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab
waiting to enter or about to enter such zone.



§ 8-2-17  PARKING PROHIBITED; INTERSECTIONS.



   There shall be no parking within 100 feet of the intersection of an
arterial street and any other street in the village where posted.



(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990)



§ 8-2-18  STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED; NO SIGNS REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the law
or direction of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the
following places:



      (1)   On a sidewalk, except:



         (a)   Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; and



         (b)   In front of those residences that are prohibited
from street parking between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school
is in session.



      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;



      (3)   Within an intersection;



      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;



      (5)   On a crosswalk;



      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;



      (7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon,
stop sign, yield right-of-way sign or traffic control signal located at the
side of a roadway;



      (8)   Between the curb or edge of the pavement and the public
sidewalk or property line;



      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of railroad crossing;



      (10)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire
station within 75 feet of said entrance when posted;



      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;



      (12)   On a roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at
the edge or curb of a street;



      (13)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a
highway or in a tunnel;



      (14)   In a private parking lot, parking outside of the
designated parking places in such a manner as to block other vehicles from
exiting or entering parking stalls; or



      (15)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or
parking.



   (B)   Unless otherwise indicated, no sign shall be required to be
posted indicating parking is prohibited in those locations specified in
division (A) above.



   (C)   No person other than a police officer shall move a vehicle not
lawfully under his or her control into any area enumerated in division (A)
above or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful, or to start or cause
to be started the motor of any motor vehicle, or shift, or change or move the
levers, brake, starting device, gears or other mechanism of a parked motor
vehicle to a position other than in which it was left by the owner or driver
thereof, or attempt to do so.



   (D)   In a parking lot, parking outside of the designated parking
places in such a manner as to block other vehicles from exiting and entering
parking stalls.



(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990; Ord. 97-12-82, passed 11-17-1997; Ord.
99-01-04, passed 1-18-1999; Ord. 2003-10-69, passed 10-20-2003; Ord.
2009-12-66, passed 12-7-2009)



Cross-reference:



   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited; signs required, see Ch. 8,
Art. 6, Schd. III



§ 8-2-19  ISSUANCE OF PERMITS FOR SPECIAL PARKING PRIVILEGES FOR PERSONS
WITH DISABILITIES.



   Upon application of any person with disabilities or disabled veteran,
the village shall issue a card in the format furnished by the Illinois
Secretary of State. This card shall be the property of such person with
disabilities and may be used by that person to designate and identify a
vehicle not owning or displaying a disabled veteran’s license plate or
disabled person’s license plate when the vehicle is being used to transport
such person with disabilities and is thus entitled to enjoy the privileges
that would be afforded a disabled person’s licensed vehicle. Such cards
shall be issued only to persons with disabilities or disabled veterans who
are residents of the village, and the same shall be displayed along the right
border of the front windshield of the vehicle and shall allow the vehicle to
utilize special parking privileges for persons with disabilities when used to
transport such disabled person or disabled veteran. The card shall be issued
provided that any person making request for it must submit a statement
certified by a licensed physician to the effect that such person is a person
with disabilities as defined by 625 ILCS 5/1-159.1. Such cards shall be
provided at cost.



§ 8-2-20  PROHIBITED PARKING IN PARKING AREAS FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle which is not
bearing registration plates issued to a person with disabilities or disabled
veteran, pursuant to state statutes, or such devices as the village has
issued as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a person with
disabilities or disabled veteran, in any parking place specifically reserved,
by the posting of an official sign, for motor vehicles bearing such
registration plates or official village person with disabilities
identification cards.



   (B)   Every day a violation of this section shall occur shall be
deemed a separate offense. If the



official sign placed upon the location shall so indicate any vehicle not
permitted to be parked at that location may be towed without any pre-towing
hearing. Any person violating this section shall be fined $250 in addition to
any costs or charges connected with the removal or storage of that vehicle.
Furthermore, fines specified in this section shall be no less than those
fines specified in 625 ILCS 5/11-1301.3.



(Ord. 96-01-01, passed 1-15-1996; Ord. 2008-04-15, passed 4-21-2008)



§ 8-2-21  AUTHORITY TO ERECT SIGNS.



   (A)   Stop signs. The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized
and directed to place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, in
each and every street intersecting a through street designated in this
article, at or near the property line of the through street, appropriate
signs upon the street to bear the word “STOP” and to be located so as to
be clearly legible at a distance of at least 100 feet along the street
intersecting the through street. All such signs shall conform to such
standards as may be established by state statute. All such signs shall be
illuminated at night or be so placed as to be illuminated by street lights or
by the headlights of approaching vehicles.



   (B)   Other signs. The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized
and directed to erect and maintain appropriate signs for one-way streets and
alleys, load limits, prohibited parking, loading zones, bus and taxicab
stands, signs prohibiting construction traffic, and any other sign regulating
traffic and parking as deemed necessary by the corporate authorities,
required by state statute, or otherwise authorized in this code. No such
regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. In determining
at what locations signs shall be placed prohibiting construction traffic, the
Director of Public Works shall consider the damage to unfinished, new or
existing roads which would take place if construction traffic were permitted
to traverse the roads. Signs prohibiting the passage of construction traffic
shall not be in place for a period of more than one year without the
prohibition being acted upon by the Village Board. The Village Board intends
to delegate to the Director of Public Works its authority to prohibit
construction traffic whenever, in the opinion of the Director of Public
Works, the passage of such traffic would unduly damage the roadway.



§ 8-2-22  OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES UPON SIDEWALKS, UNPAVED PUBLIC
RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND CERTAIN PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle, including,
but not limited to, motorized bicycles, motorcycles, go-carts, snowmobiles,
automobiles or trucks within the village upon a sidewalk, upon the unpaved
portion of a public right-of-way or upon any public property other than that
portion devoted to roadway or parking use, or otherwise marked to allow the
entry of motor vehicles.



   (B)   Because the operation of any motor vehicle upon the areas
prohibited for such use in this section is extremely dangerous to persons and
property, the penalty upon conviction for violations of this section shall be
a minimum fine of $25 and a maximum fine of $750 for each violation.



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply where a motor
vehicle is operated on a sidewalk, upon the unpaved portion of a public
right-of-way or upon public property to avoid injury to a person or persons
and/or to avoid damage to property or for the pick-up or delivery of goods.
Public property, as defined in this section, shall apply to all real property
owned by the village, whether then used or not for a specific public purpose.



§ 8-2-23  UNNECESSARY NOISE; LOSS OF CONTROL IN OPERATION OF VEHICLES
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle in the
village so as to cause unnecessary noise by rapid acceleration or
deceleration of the vehicle, or by racing of the engine, or by squealing or
screeching of tires on the pavement.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle in the
village in such a manner so as to lose control of the motor vehicle.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to accelerate, decelerate or turn any
motor vehicle so as to cause the tires of the motor vehicle to disengage from
the surface upon which the motor vehicle is being operated.



§ 8-2-24  RIDING ON PART OF VEHICLE NOT INTENDED FOR PASSENGERS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to ride upon the fenders, running board or outside
step of any vehicle, or any portion of a vehicle not designed for passengers.



§ 8-2-25  FIREFIGHTERS AUTHORIZED TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.



   The Fire Department officer in command, or any firefighter designated
by such officer, may exercise the powers and authority of a Police Officer in
directing traffic at the scene of any fire or where the Fire Department has
responded to any emergency call for so long as the Fire Department equipment
is on the scene, in the absence of or in assisting the police.



§ 8-2-26  USE OF CROSSWALKS BY PEDESTRIANS.



   Where crosswalks are established for any block or blocks, pedestrians
shall cross a roadway only in such crosswalks.



§ 8-2-27  VISIBILITY OF TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND THE LIKE; CLEARVIEW AREAS.



   No sign, tree, bush or foliage of any kind, fence, mailbox or any other
natural or artificial object or grade of land shall be so placed, maintained,
allowed to remain or displayed upon either public or private property in such
a manner as to hide from view or interfere with the movement of traffic or
the visibility of any traffic control device, sign or signal.



ARTICLE 3:  TOWING PROVISIONS



Section



   8-3-1   Definitions



   8-3-2   Authorization for towing



   8-3-3   Pre-tow notice for abandoned vehicles



   8-3-4   Pre-tow hearing procedures



   8-3-5   Post-tow notice for hazardous and unlawful vehicles



   8-3-6   Post-tow hearing procedures



§ 8-3-1  DEFINITIONS.



   The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this article. Any term not defined herein shall have the
meaning ascribed to it in other ordinances of this village, and if not
defined in any other village ordinance, it shall have the meaning ascribed in
625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE.



      (1)   A vehicle parked or otherwise located on the public way,
and:



         (a)   In such a state of disrepair that it is incapable
of being driven; or



         (b)   That has been unmoved for a period of at least 24
hours and, from its condition, the period during which it has not been moved
or some other circumstance appears to have been, and will be presumed to have
been, abandoned by its owner.



      (2)   Vehicles parked in a public parking lot or on private
property without the consent of the lot owner, proprietor or agent of the
property, which person has requested that the vehicle be towed; or



      (3)   A vehicle defined as abandoned, or capable of being
towed, by any other ordinances of the village, and which does not fall into
the categories of “hazardous” or “unlawful” vehicles, and therefore
is not subject to an immediate tow.



   HAZARDOUS VEHICLE.



      (1)   A vehicle that has been involved in an accident and is
disabled or cannot be immediately moved by the owner or operator of the
vehicle;



      (2)   A vehicle that presents an immediate danger to the
health or welfare of the members of the public;



      (3)   A vehicle abandoned or disabled on a public street, way
or alley that is impeding the orderly flow of traffic or poses a potential
danger to pedestrians and other operators of vehicles; or



      (4)   A vehicle that must be moved to allow for proper village
snow removal from a public street, way or alley.



   OWNER. A person who holds legal title to the vehicle, or the right of
possession of the vehicle.



   UNLAWFUL VEHICLE.



      (1)   A vehicle that has been reported stolen or is the
subject of a search and seizure by the Police Department; or



      (2)   A vehicle parked in violation of state statutes or
ordinances of the village which prohibit parking at the location in question
or for the period of time for which the vehicle has been parked, and where
either the statute or the ordinance authorize the vehicle to be towed and the
signs posted at the general location note that fact.



   VEHICLE. Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a street, highway or any public way, except
devices moved by human power, devices used exclusively upon stationary rails
or tracks, or snowmobiles.



§ 8-3-2  AUTHORIZATION FOR TOWING.



   (A)   Generally. The towing of vehicles by the village, or by its
approved towing service operators on behalf of the village, shall be
authorized only by the Police Department and only under the circumstances
herein provided. Towed vehicles shall be impounded at facilities designated
by the Police Department until lawfully claimed or disposed of.



   (B)   Towing without notice; immediate tows. Hazardous or unlawful
vehicles may be towed without prior notice; except that, when an unlawful
vehicle is the only one that has been reported as stolen and is not towable
for some other specific reason, the owner should be, when practicable,
notified by telephone or other means and given the opportunity to claim or
move the vehicle, if he or she so wishes, to avoid incurring the expense of a
police-ordered tow; provided, however, that, the vehicle may be towed if the
owner permitted the tow to be made when the vehicle was reported stolen or at
any time thereafter, in the form provided. Within a working period of 24
hours after towing a vehicle pursuant to this article, a notice shall be sent
to or personally delivered to the owner of the vehicle, affording the
opportunity for a hearing. For the purpose of this article, a working period
of 24 hours shall not include Saturday, Sunday and holidays.



   (C)   Towing with prior notice; abandoned vehicles. Abandoned
vehicles may be towed after the mailing or delivery of prior notice and the
affording of an opportunity for a hearing as provided in §§ 8-3-3 and 8-3-4.



§ 8-3-3  PRE-TOW NOTICE FOR ABANDONED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Notice pursuant to this section shall be personally delivered
to the owner, or shall be forwarded by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, to the address of the owner of the vehicle as indicated in
the most current registration list of the Secretary of State. The notice
shall be in the form provided. In the event that an out-of-state vehicle is
proposed to be towed, inquiry by computer, telephone or letter shall be made
of the Secretary of State of the particular jurisdiction for the furnishing
of the most current registered name and address of the owner of the vehicle,
and notice shall be mailed as provided herein to the address furnished,
though in no case will the village be required to delay towing more than
seven days after the date of the mailing or personal delivery of the notice
if no request for a hearing has been received within that seven-day period.



   (B)   A notice of intent to tow sticker with the earliest date upon
which the tow may take place and the address and phone number of the Police
Department shall be placed on the vehicle.



§ 8-3-4  PRE-TOW HEARING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Opportunity for hearing. The owner or person entitled to
possession of a vehicle to be towed as an abandoned vehicle shall have seven
days after the date of mailing or personal delivery of the notice to request,
in writing, a pre-tow hearing. Subsequent to this seven-day period, the
vehicle may be towed, if the owner has not filed a written hearing request
within the seven-day period, and any hearing rights under the provisions of
this article will be deemed waived.



   (B)   Scheduling of pre-tow hearings. The pre-tow hearing shall be
scheduled for a date within 14 days of the mailing or personal delivery of
the pre-tow notice. The village shall not be required to delay towing longer
than such a 14-day period.



   (C)   Request for pre-tow hearings. Requests for a pre-tow hearing
are to be made in person to the office indicated on the notice. Requests for
hearing by persons who reside more than 50 miles from the village may be made
by mail. Forms for such requests shall be made available at the Police
Department. At the time of making the request, the owner will be provided a
hearing date and time by mail or in person, as the circumstances require.



   (D)   Appointment of Hearing Officer. The village shall choose an
officer or employee of the village to serve as Hearing Officer. In no case
shall the Hearing Officer be an individual who was involved in the initial
decision to tow the vehicle. The Hearing Officer shall have the authority to
require the presence of the enforcement officer who initiated the proposed
tow or any other village personnel.



   (E)   Nature of hearing. The hearing shall be informal in nature,
and the rules of evidence shall not apply. The hearing will not be
determinative of, or adjudicate, any citation relative to any vehicle. After
receiving all relevant evidence, the Hearing Officer shall make a written
decision based upon a preponderance of the evidence as to whether towing of
the vehicle is authorized by the laws of the state or the ordinances of the
village, with a specific statutory or ordinance section cited in the
decision. The owner shall be provided a copy of such pre-tow hearing decision.



   (F)   Decision to tow and rates to be charged. If the preponderance
of the evidence supports towing and compliance with the provisions of this
article, the Hearing Officer shall direct that the vehicle be towed, with any
towing and storage costs to then be imposed upon the owner thereof. The fees
to be charged for towing and storage services shall be no more than the
maximum rates set by the Chief of Police pursuant to the provisions of §
8-3-5. The owner of such vehicle, having had such a hearing, may avoid the
towing by immediately removing the vehicle from the improper location to a
proper, lawful location and correcting any unlawful condition of the vehicle.



   (G)   Decision not to tow.



      (1)   If the preponderance of the evidence fails to support
towing of the vehicle, the Hearing Officer shall direct that the vehicle
shall not be towed. The village shall furnish a copy of such decision to the
owner, who may place it inside the vehicle in a location plainly visible from
the outside, such as the dashboard or rear window. No vehicle about which
such a decision has been rendered shall be towed by the village unless the
circumstances under which the decision was rendered have changed.



      (2)   If, at some subsequent time, the village should wish to
tow the vehicle from the same location, it shall follow the same procedures
required for the towing of any other similarly situated vehicle.



   (H)   Reports and documents to be retained; contesting decisions.
Originals or copies of all notices, pre-tow hearing decisions, towing reports
and any associated police reports or documents shall be retained by the
Police Department for a period of at least five years after each hearing, or
after each tow if no hearing was requested or held. The village or the owner
may contest the decision of the Hearing Officer in any manner provided by law.



§ 8-3-5  POST-TOW NOTICE FOR HAZARDOUS AND UNLAWFUL VEHICLES.



   (A)   Mailing or delivery of notice. Notice pursuant to this section
shall be forwarded by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested,
to the address of the owner of the vehicle as indicated in the most current
registration list of the Secretary of State, unless the notice is personally
delivered to the owner, in which case, the date and time of the delivery and
the name of the police officer making the delivery shall be noted in the
Police Department records or reports. The notice shall be in the form
provided, and shall be mailed or delivered within 24 hours, Monday through
Friday, excluding holidays. In the event that the village has towed an
out-of-state, hazardous or unlawful vehicle, inquiry by computer, telephone
or letter shall be made of the Secretary of State of the particular
jurisdiction for the furnishing of the most current registered name and
address of the owner of the vehicle, and notice shall be mailed as provided
herein to the address furnished.



   (B)   Posting of signs showing hearing rights. All approved towing
service operators shall prominently post at least one sign, with dimensions
of at least 12 inches by 18 inches, indicating the opportunity and procedures
for a hearing to contest the validity of a towed vehicle. The sign shall be
placed in locations readily visible to the public transacting business at any
towing facility. If a towing service operator performs services for more than
one municipality, the information for contacting the various appropriate
municipal officers can be listed on one such sign.



   (C)   Requests for post-tow hearings. Requests for hearings may be
made in person at the office indicated on the notice within 15 days of the
mailing or personal delivery of the notification of tow, or release of the
vehicle, whichever occurs first; otherwise, the right to a hearing shall be
deemed waived. Requests for hearings by persons who reside more than 50 miles
from the village may be made in person or by mail received by the village
within the 15-day period.



   (D)   Release of motor vehicles. Before the owner or person entitled
to possession of any impounded vehicle shall be permitted to remove same, the
owner or other person entitled to possession shall furnish evidence of his or
her identity, ownership of the vehicle, or his or her right to possession,
sign a receipt for the vehicle, and pay the amount currently owed for towing
and storage fees to the towing service operator. The Police Chief is
authorized to promulgate regulations as to the documents or other proof
necessary to establish these facts.



   (E)   Establishment of maximum towing and storage rates.



      (1)   The owner shall pay fees to the towing service operator
for towing and storage on police-ordered tows at rates that do not exceed
maximum amounts to be administratively established by the Chief of Police and
which may be revised from time to time. The basic rates for such fees shall
be shown in the form and on the sign concerning vehicle release requirements.



      (2)   However, nothing in this section is intended to prevent
a competitive towing service operator from charging less than the established
maximum rates for police-ordered or any other tows. In arriving at the
maximum rates for various services, the Chief of Police shall consider such
matters as the prevalent market rates in the area for the different types of
vehicles, the types of storage and area requirements for categories such as
large trucks and commercial vehicles, and the relative difficulties and
amount of work required to perform various types of towing operations. For
particularly difficult or unusual towing jobs, such as large or serious
accidents, the Chief of Police is authorized to allow towing operators to
charge rates above those established for normal situations, which special
charges must be based upon the cost of services provided, taking into account
such matters as the man-hours and equipment time required for the job. A
towing service operator must fully itemize in writing the details of such a
billing at special rates for a particularly difficult or unusual tow, and
supply a copy of the itemized bill to the owner and to the Police Department.
Any such special rates charged must be customary in the towing industry in
the area for the nature and extent of the services provided. Every towing
service operator and the Police Department shall have available a copy of the
complete current rate schedule and any special rate policy established by the
Chief of Police, for vehicle owners to view upon request.



§ 8-3-6  POST-TOW HEARING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Opportunity for hearing. The owner of a vehicle towed as an
immediate tow, by or pursuant to the authority of the Police Department as
set forth herein, shall be provided the opportunity for a post-tow hearing to
determine the validity of such tow and any towing or storage charges. The
hearing will not be determinative of, or adjudicate, any citation issued
relative to any towed vehicle.



   (B)   Nature of the hearing and Hearing Officer. The nature of the
hearing and the appointment of the Hearing Officer shall be the same as set
forth above in §§ 8-3-4 and 8-3-5.



   (C)   Scheduling of post-tow hearings. Hearings shall take place as
follows.



      (1)   In those instances where the vehicle has been released
upon the deposit of the full payment currently owed for towing and storage
charges, and the owner has properly requested a hearing, the hearing shall
take place within 15 days after the release of such vehicle, unless the owner
requests a later date convenient to all parties.



      (2)   In those instances where the vehicle remains impounded,
the hearing shall take place, at the option of the owner:



         (a)   On the next day after an owner’s demand for such
hearing, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays; if such demand is made
after 3:00 p.m., or if the unavailability of a necessary witness or evidence
creates a particular difficulty in conducting the hearing on the next
calendar day, then a hearing shall be held on the second day following the
request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays; or



         (b)   If acceptable to the owner, within 15 days of such
request on the date convenient to all parties.



   (D)   Conduct of post-tow hearing. The Hearing Officer shall review
all evidence presented by the vehicle owner and the Police Department or
other village employees, and shall make a finding based upon the
preponderance of the evidence presented, as to the lawful authority for the
towing and storage of the vehicle. The village must establish such authority
by a preponderance of the evidence.



   (E)   Post-tow hearing decision. For each hearing, the Hearing
Officer shall complete a post-tow hearing decision and attach such decision
to the Police Department’s original vehicle towing report, and supply a
copy of the decision to the owner by personal delivery if the owner is
present, otherwise by mail. The decision and findings shall be substantially
as stated in the form for the post-tow hearing decision.



   (F)   Reports and documents to be retained; contesting decisions.
All originals or copies of the notices, post-tow hearing decisions, towing
reports and any associated police reports or documents shall be retained by
the Police Department for a period of at least five years after each hearing,
or after each tow if no hearing was requested or held. The village or the
owner may contest the decision of the Hearing Officer in any manner provided
by law.



   (G)   Towing services subject to ordinance. Notwithstanding any
other ordinance or statutory provisions to the contrary, any towing service
operator authorized to perform tows on behalf of the village must perform its
services subject to the provisions of this article. However, the towing
company shall have the right to recover the reason-able value of its services
for police-ordered tows, which are not paid by the vehicle owner, from the
village; provided, however, that, if a tow or the charge for a tow is found
by a court to be illegal and the towing service operator is required to
return the charge for the tow to the owner of the vehicle, the village shall
not be liable to reimburse the operator for the towing charges.



ARTICLE 4:  BICYCLES



Section



   8-4-1   Definition



   8-4-2   Registration required



   8-4-3   Application



   8-4-4   Equipment; condition



   8-4-5   Transfer of registration



   8-4-6   Compliance with general traffic rules and regulations



   8-4-7   Riding of bicycles on sidewalks



   8-4-8   Maximum speed



   8-4-9   Parking



§ 8-4-1  DEFINITION.



   For purposes of this article, the word OWNER shall include any minor
who has the use and control of a bicycle with the knowledge and consent of
any parent or guardian.



§ 8-4-2  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   No person who resides in the village shall ride a bicycle in the
village unless such bicycle shall be registered with the Police Department.



§ 8-4-3  APPLICATION.



   It shall be the duty of every owner of a bicycle residing in the
village to file an application for registration of such bicycle with the
Police Department upon a form provided by that Department, setting forth the
name and address of the owner, a description of the bicycle by name or make
and the serial number thereof.



§ 8-4-4  EQUIPMENT; CONDITION.



   All bicycles submitted for registration shall be equipped as provided
by state statute, and the Police Department shall refuse to register any
bicycle not so equipped or not found to be in a safe mechanical condition.



§ 8-4-5  TRANSFER OF REGISTRATION.



   Upon the transfer of the ownership of a registered bicycle, by sale or
otherwise, the owner thereof shall have it registered in the name of the new
owner.



§ 8-4-6  COMPLIANCE WITH GENERAL TRAFFIC RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   Every person operating a bicycle upon the streets of the village shall
be subject to the provisions of this article, this code and other traffic
ordinances of the village and the statutes of the state applicable to
bicycles and to the drivers of motor vehicles, except as to the special
regulations hereof, and except as to those provisions which, by their nature,
can have no application.



§ 8-4-7  RIDING OF BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS.



   Persons shall be allowed to ride bicycles upon village sidewalks. Such
bicycle riders will, in each instance, give the right-of-way to pedestrians
and the speed of such bicycles shall not exceed such speed as is reasonable
under the weather conditions, physical condition of the sidewalk and other
bicycle and pedestrian traffic. Where necessary, a person riding a bicycle on
a sidewalk may, because of one or more of the factors stated above, be
required to dismount and walk the bicycle. A failure to grant the
right-of-way to pedestrians or to ride in a manner or at a speed which is
inconsistent with conditions shall be a violation of the provisions of this
section.



§ 8-4-8  MAXIMUM SPEED.



   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable
and proper, having regard for the traffic and the use of the way, or so as to
endanger life or limb or injure the property of any person.



§ 8-4-9  PARKING.



   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street, other than off the
roadway, against the curb or in the racks provided by the village for the
parking of such bicycles.



ARTICLE 5:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Yield right-of-way intersections



   II.   Stop intersections designated



   III.   Speed limits on specific streets



   IV.   Turns



   V.   Traffic signals



   VI.   Weight limits



   VII.   Truck routes



   VIII.   Local weight restricted highways



SCHEDULE I. YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY INTERSECTIONS.



   The following intersections are designated as yield right-of-way
intersections, and traffic shall yield as follows:



 

Yield Street
 
Intersection with




Alamo Court
 
Dearborn Circle


Alton Court
 
Teton Circle


Apache Lane
 
Aztec Drive


Apache Lane
 
Indianwood Drive


Biloxi Court
 
Teton Circle


Bison Trail
 
Lance Lane


Boone Drive
 
Dearborn Circle


Bowie Drive
 
Dearborn Circle


Carson Court
 
Dearborn Circle


Cherokee Court
 
Aztec Drive


Cherokee Court
 
Indianwood Drive


Cimarron Drive
 
Iroquois Trail


Cochise Court
 
Silverleaf Blvd


Cochise Place
 
Aztec Drive


Cochise Place
 
Indianwood Drive


Colorado Court
 
Teton Circle


Country Glen Lane
 
Baybrook Lane


Country Glen Lane
 
Knollwood Drive


Crystal Shore Drive
 
Hyannis Circle (both intersections)


Dodge Court
 
Dearborn Circle


El Paso Lane
 
Eagle View Drive


Fawn Court
 
Erie Court


Hawk Lane
 
Cactus Trail


Heather Lane
 
Eagle View Drive


Horseshoe Court
 
Ridge Trail


Illini Drive
 
Arrowhead Trail (both intersections)


Kelly Drive
 
Forest/Glenlake


Lance Lane
 
New Britton Road


Magnolia Way
 
Sussex Road


Mohawk Drive
 
Tomahawk Court


Narrangansett Drive
 
Boa Trail (both intersections)


Oswego Drive
 
Iroquois Trail


Overlook Lane
 
Waco Drive


Park Hill Trail
 
Carriage Drive


Prairie Court
 
Iroquois Trail


Ridge Drive
 
Paddock Drive


Sand Creek Drive
 
Shining Waters Drive


Seminole Lane
 
Shawnee Drive


Shining Water Drive
 
Iroquois Trail


Silverleaf Boulevard
 
Illini Drive


Sioux Lane
 
Cochise Court


Stanford Lane
 
Trinity Drive


Summit Pass
 
Waco Drive


Tomahawk Court
 
Seminole Lane


Valley View Trail
 
Ridge Trail


Valley View Trail
 
Shenandoah Drive


Yuma Lane
 
Blackhawk Drive


Yuma Lane
 
Tomahawk Court




 



(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990; Ord. 90-09-83, passed 9-25-1990; Ord.
92-08-96, passed 8-25-1992; Ord 94-06-49, passed 6-14-1994; Ord. 95-05-25,
passed 5-15-1995; Ord. 97-11-80, passed 11-3-1997; Ord. 2003-09-55, passed
9-3-2003; Ord. 2003-11-77, passed 11-17-2003; Ord. 2004-06-34, passed
6-21-2004; Ord. 2008-12-72, passed 12-15-2008; Ord. 2011-10-35, passed
10-3-2011; Ord. 2017-11-64, passed 11-6-2017)



SCHEDULE II. STOP INTERSECTIONS DESIGNATED.



   The following intersections are designated as stop intersections, and
traffic shall stop as follows:



 

Stop Street
 
Intersection with




Adam Lane
 
Birchbark Trail


Adler Lane
 
Merbach Drive


Adobe Court
 
Inca Boulevard


Adobe Court
 
Mohican Road


Alabama Trail
 
Idaho Street


Alexandra Way
 
North Avenue (both intersections)


Alison Lane
 
Birchbark Trail


Amber Lane
 
President Street


Andrew Lane
 
Birchbark Trail


Andover Court
 
Concord Lane


Antelope Trail
 
Idaho Street


Antigo Trail
 
Spring Valley Drive


Appaloosa Court
 
Munson Drive


Appomattox Trail
 
Spring Valley Drive


Arapahoe Trail
 
Gary Avenue


Arapahoe Trail
 
Hiawatha Drive


Arlington Court
 
President Street


Armstrong Park Driveway
 
Illini Drive


Arrowhead Trail
 
Thunderbird Trail


Ash Court
 
Big Horn Trail


Aspen Court
 
Merbach Drive


Aztec Court
 
Thunderbird Trail


Aztec Drive
 
Mohican Road


Aztec Drive
 
Thunderbird Trail


Barton Place
 
Thunderbird Trail


Basswood Court
 
Merbach Drive


Baybrook Lane
 
Lies Road


Baybrook Lane
 
Woodhill Drive


Bear Paw Court
 
Birchbark Trail


Bedford Drive
 
Lies Road


Beech Court
 
Merbach Drive


Bennett Drive
 
North Avenue


Bennett Drive
 
Surrey Drive


Bennington Lane
 
Army Trail


Big Eagle Trail
 
Birchbark Trail


Big Eagle Trail
 
Morton Road


Big Horn Trail
 
Fair Oaks Road


Big Horn Trail
 
Spring Valley Drive


Birchbark Trail
 
County Farm Road


Birchbark Trail
 
Fair Oaks Road


Birchbark Trail
 
Kuhn Road


Birchbark Trail
 
Morton Road


Bison Trail
 
Birchbark Trail


Blackhawk Drive
 
Arapahoe Trail


Blackhawk Drive
 
Thunderbird Drive


Bluff Street
 
Elk Trail


Bluff Street
 
Hiawatha Drive


Boa Trail
 
Big Horn Trail


Boa Trail
 
Woodlake Drive


Boa Trail
 
Spring Valley Drive


Boone Drive
 
Elk Trail


Bowie Drive
 
Lies Road


Bradbury Circle
 
Merbach Drive


Brave Court
 
Spring Valley Drive


Brighton Drive
 
Buckingham Drive


Brighton Drive
 
Woodhill Drive


Bristol Drive
 
Thunderbird Trail


Brompton Court
 
President Street


Brookstone Drive
 
High Ridge Pass


Brookstone Drive
 
Lies Road


Brookstone Drive
 
Morton Road


Buckingham Court
 
Buckingham Drive


Buckingham Drive
 
Lies Road


Buckingham Drive
 
Woodhill Drive


Buckskin Lane
 
Birchbark Trail


Buckskin Lane
 
Evergreen Drive


Buffalo Circle
 
Evergreen Drive (both intersections)


Burke Drive
 
Kuhn Road


Burke Drive
 
Merbach Drive


Burning Trail
 
Birchbark Trail


Burning Trail
 
Evergreen Drive


Cactus Trail
 
Birchbark Trail


Canterbury Drive
 
Burke Drive


Canyon Trail
 
Idaho Street


Caribou Trail
 
Spring Valley Drive


Carlton Drive
 
St. Charles Road


Carol Court
 
Lies Road


Cedar Court
 
Merbach Drive


Center Avenue
 
Mission Street


Center Drive
 
Fullerton Avenue


Central Park Drive
 
Kuhn Road


Chalet Drive
 
Burke Drive


Chattanooga Trail
 
Spring Valley Drive


Chestnut Drive
 
Kuhn Road


Chetwood Drive
 
Woodhill Drive


Cheyenne Trail
 
Arrowhead Trail


Cheyenne Trail
 
Aztec Drive


Chippewa Trail
 
Aztec Drive


Christopher Lane
 
Tall Oaks Drive


Christopher Lane
 
Timber Lane


Cimarron Drive
 
Birchbark Trail


Clearwater Court
 
Idaho Street


Cliff Court
 
Canyon Trail


Cliff View Lane
 
Brookstone Drive


Cliff View Lane
 
High Ridge Pass


Cochise Court
 
Arrowhead Trail


Columbia Court
 
Idaho Street


Commanche Court
 
Aztec Drive


Commanche Lane
 
Arrowhead Trail


Commanche Lane
 
Aztec Drive


Commerce Drive
 
Kehoe Boulevard


Commerce Drive
 
St. Paul Boulevard


Commonwealth Road
 
St. Charles Road


Concord Court
 
Concord Lane


Concord Lane
 
North Avenue


Concord Lane
 
President Street


Country Glen Lane
 
Woodhill Drive


Creekwood Court
 
Munson Drive


Crystal Shore Drive
 
Woodlake Drive


Cypress Lane
 
Evergreen Drive (both intersections


Dakota Court
 
Teton Circle


Danbury Drive
 
Thunderbird Trail


Dancing Water Court
 
Idaho Street


David Lane
 
Birchbark Trail


Daybreak Lane
 
Elk Trail


Dearborn Circle
 
Idaho Street (both intersections)


Deerskin Trail
 
Canyon/Flint Trail


Deerskin Trail
 
Kuhn Road


Delaware Trail
 
Flint Trail


Della Court
 
Gary Avenue


Devon Court
 
Woodhill Drive


Dogwood Lane
 
Birchbark Trail


Dogwood Lane
 
Evergreen Drive


Dorchester Drive
 
Country Farm Road


Dorchester Drive
 
Lies Road


Doris Avenue
 
Gary Avenue


Dugout Trail
 
Birchbark Trail


Eagle View Drive
 
Arapahoe Trail


Eagle View Drive
 
Hiawatha Drive


East Drive
 
Mission Street


Easton Drive
 
Lies Road


Easy Street
 
St. Charles Road (both intersections)


Edgebrook Court
 
Hiawatha Drive


Edington Court
 
Woodhill Drive


Edington Lane
 
Woodhill Drive


El Paso Lane
 
Hiawatha Drive


Elk Trail
 
Idaho Street


Erie Court
 
Flint Trail


Esselen Circle
 
Teton Circle


Essex Drive
 
Thunderbird Trail


Evergreen Drive
 
Birchbark Trail (both intersections)


Executive Drive
 
Main Place


Fair Oaks Road
 
Army Trail


Fairfield Court
 
Concord Lane


Flame Court
 
President Street


Flame Drive
 
Concord Lane


Flint Trail
 
Idaho Street


Fountain View Drive
 
Goldenhill Street


Fountain View Road
 
Gary Avenue


Fountain View Road
 
Lies Road


Fox Court
 
Evergreen Drive


Fullerton Avenue
 
Schmale Road


Georgetown Drive
 
Big Horn Trail


Georgetown Drive
 
Spring Valley


Gerzeske Lane
 
Kehoe Boulevard


Glen Flora Drive
 
Hiawatha Drive


Greenway Trail
 
Gary Avenue


Greenway Trail
 
Hiawatha Drive


Gundersen Drive
 
Main Place


Hampton Court
 
Woodhill Drive


Harbor Point
 
Woodlake Drive


Harwich Drive
 
Woodlake Drive


Hawk Lane
 
Birchbark Trail


Heather Lane
 
Hiawatha Drive


Hemlock Lane
 
Birchbark Trail (both intersections)


Hiawatha Drive
 
Illini Drive


Hickory Lane
 
Birchbark Trail (both intersections)


High Ridge Pass
 
Birchbark Trail


High Ridge Pass
 
Lies Road


Hill Crest Drive
 
Brookstone Drive (all intersections with)


Hill Crest Drive
 
High Ridge Pass


Hoover Drive
 
Elk Trail


Hopi Court
 
Idaho Street


Horizon Circle
 
Bluff Street


Hunter Drive
 
Burke Drive


Hunter Drive
 
Merbach Drive


Huntington Drive
 
Buckingham Drive


Huntington Drive
 
Kuhn Road


Huron Court
 
Idaho Street


Hyannis Circle
 
Spring Valley Drive


Hyannis Circle
 
Woodlake Drive (both intersections)


Idaho Street
 
Lies Road


Illini Drive
 
Aztec Drive


Illini Drive
 
Hiawatha Drive


Inca Boulevard
 
Aztec Drive


Indianwood Drive
 
Illini Drive


Indianwood Drive
 
Thunderbird Trail


Iowa Court
 
Arapahoe Trail


Iris Avenue
 
Rose Avenue


Ironhawk Court
 
Idaho Street


Iroquois Trail
 
Birchbark Trail


Iroquois Trail
 
Pawnee Drive (both intersections)


Jason Court
 
Fair Oaks Road


Kalamazoo Court
 
Canyon Trail


Kamiah Court
 
Munson Trail


Kansas Street
 
Flint Trail


Kehoe Boulevard
 
Gary Avenue


Kehoe Boulevard
 
Schmale Road


Kelly Drive
 
County Farm Road


Kimberly Drive
 
Fullerton Avenue


Kimberly Drive
 
Kehoe Boulevard


Kimberly Drive
 
Lies Road


Kingsbridge Drive
 
Woodhill Drive (both intersections)


Knollwood Drive
 
Woodhill Drive


Kuhn Road
 
Birchbark Trail


Kuhn Road
 
Lies Road


Kuhn Road
 
Mohican Road


Kuhn Road
 
Thunderbird Trail


Lacrosse Street
 
Canyon Trail


Lance Lane
 
Birchbark Trail


Lenox Court
 
Concord Lane


Lies Road
 
Fair Oaks Road


Lies Road
 
Kuhn Road


Lies Road
 
Schmale Road


Lightning Trail
 
Evergreen Drive


Lilac Lane
 
Rose Avenue (all intersections with)


Lily Lane
 
Rose Avenue


Longmeadow Drive
 
Birchbark Trail


Main Place
 
Gundersen Drive


Main Place
 
St. Charles Road


Main Place (Northbound )
 
Thornhill Drive


Malibu Court
 
Flint Trail


Maple Ridge Court
 
Fair Oaks Road


Matthew Lane
 
Birchbark Trail


Mayfair Drive
 
Buckingham Drive


McNees Drive
 
Kuhn Road


Medford Drive
 
Thunderbird Trail


Merbach Drive
 
Army Trail


Merbach Drive
 
Lies Road


Mercedes Drive
 
Gary Avenue


Mesa Verde Court
 
Munson Drive


Mill Court
 
Woodhill Drive


Minnesota Court
 
Teton Circle


Mission Street
 
Kimberly Drive


Mission Street
 
Schmale Road


Moccasin Court
 
Canyon Trail


Mohawk Drive
 
Blackhawk Drive


Mohican Road
 
Kuhn Road


Morton Road
 
Birchbark Trail


Morton Road
 
Lies Road


Mountain Glen Way
 
High Ridge Pass


Municipal Center Parking Lot (both drives)
 
Hiawatha Drive


Munson Drive
 
County Farm Road


Munson Drive
 
Kuhn Road


Mystic Court
 
Woodlake Drive


Napa Street
 
Flint Trail


Napa Street
 
Niagara Street


Navajo Street
 
Canyon Trail


Nebraska Circle
 
Teton Circle


Nekoma Court
 
Pawnee Drive


New Britton Road
 
Rose Avenue


Newburg Court
 
Woodhill Drive


Nez Perce Court
 
Munson Drive


Niagara Street
 
Flint Trail


Oakwood Drive
 
Woodhill Drive


Oakwood Drive
 
Woodlake Drive


Ohio Court
 
Canyon Trail


Old Gary (S)
 
Goldenhill Street


Omaha Street
 
Flint Trail


Oriole Trail
 
Spring Valley Drive


Osage Circle
 
Pawnee Drive


Oswego Drive
 
Pawnee Drive


Ottawa Court
 
Flint Trail


Overlook Lane
 
Brookstone Drive


Oxford Drive
 
Big Horn Trail


Oxford Drive
 
Fair Oaks Road


Paddock Drive
 
County Farm Road


Paddock Drive
 
Morton Road


Palomino Street
 
Canyon Trail


Papoose Court
 
Flint Trail


Park Hill Trail
 
Gary Avenue


Parkside Drive
 
Burke Drive


Parkview Circle
 
Woodhill Drive


Parkview Circle
 
Woodlake Drive


Pawnee Drive
 
County Farm Road


Pawnee Drive
 
Morton Road


Pebblecreek Trail
 
Hiawatha Drive


Pembrook Court
 
President Street


Penfield Drive
 
Birchbark Trail


Pennsboro Court
 
Big Horn Trail


Petersburg Court
 
Big Horn Trail


Pheasant Trail
 
Spring Valley Drive (both intersections)


Phillips Court
 
Schmale Road


Plum Grove Court
 
Fair Oaks Road


Pocohantas Trail
 
Chippewa Trail


Pontiac Lane
 
Pawnee Drive


Portsmouth Court
 
Spring Valley Drive


President Court
 
President Street


President Street
 
North Avenue


President Street
 
St. Charles Road


Quail Run Court
 
Park Hill Trail


Quincy Court
 
Birchbark Trail


Randy Road
 
Schmale Road


Regency Lane
 
Buckingham Drive


Regency Lane
 
Woodhill Drive


Ridge Trail
 
Morton Road


Robin Drive
 
Spring Valley Drive (both intersections)


Rockport Drive
 
Bennington Drive


Rockport Drive
 
Woodlake Drive


Rocky Valley Way
 
Brookstone Drive


Rolling Oaks Drive
 
Fair Oaks Road


Rose Court
 
Rose Avenue


Rose Avenue
 
Lies Road (both intersections)


Royal Glen Lane
 
Baybrook Lane


Royal Glen Lane
 
Woodhill Drive


St. Paul Boulevard
 
Kimberly Drive


St. Paul Boulevard
 
Schmale Road


Saginaw Court
 
Canyon Trail


Sandcreek Drive
 
Birchbark Trail


Sandhurst Lane
 
Woodhill Drive


Santa Fe Court
 
Flint Trail


Sauk Court
 
Munson Drive


Schmale Road
 
Fullerton Avenue


Scott Court
 
Woodhill Drive


Seabury Circle
 
Woodlake Drive


Seminole Lane
 
Thunderbird Trail


Seneca Lane
 
Pawnee Drive


Sequoia Court
 
Munson Drive


Shaftsbury Street
 
Fountain View Drive


Shawnee Drive
 
Blackhawk Drive


Shelbourne Drive
 
Thunderbird Trail (both intersections)


Shenandoah Drive
 
Birchbark Trail


Shining Water Drive
 
Birchbark Trail


Shorewood Drive
 
Concord Lane


Silverleaf Boulevard
 
Illini Drive


Silverleaf Boulevard
 
Thunderbird Trail


Sioux Lane
 
Thunderbird Trail


Split Rail Drive
 
Lies Road


Split Rail Drive
 
Paddock Drive


Spring Valley Court
 
Spring Valley Drive


Spring Valley Drive
 
Army Trail


Spring Valley Drive
 
Lies Road


Spring Valley Drive
 
Robin Drive (northern intersection)


Springbrook Lane
 
Hiawatha Drive


Sunrise Court
 
Hiawatha Drive


Stanford Lane
 
Woodhill Drive


Stark Drive
 
Gary Avenue


Stark Drive
 
Old Gary Avenue


Stockbridge Drive
 
Birchbark Trail


Stonewood Circle
 
Merbach Drive


Stuart Drive
 
Birchbark Trail (both intersections)


Summit Pass
 
Rose Avenue


Sundance Court
 
Munson Drive


Surrey Drive
 
Shawnee Drive


Sussex Road
 
Rose Avenue


Sype Court
 
Bennett Drive


Tacoma Drive
 
Birchbark Trail


Tacoma Drive
 
Munson Drive


Tahoe Court
 
Munson Drive


Tall Oaks Drive
 
Fair Oaks Road


Teton Circle
 
Munson Drive (both intersections)


Teton Drive
 
Munson Drive


Texas Court
 
Teton Circle


Thornhill Drive
 
Main Place


Thunderbird Trail
 
Arrowhead Trail


Thunderbird Trail
 
County Farm Road


Thunderbird Trail
 
Kuhn Road


Tioga Court
 
Canyon Trail


Tomahawk Court
 
Arapahoe Trail


Tonto Court
 
Flint Trail


Topeka Court
 
Munson Drive


Tower Boulevard
 
Center Avenue


Tower Boulevard
 
Schmale Road


Town Center Parking Lot
 
Fountain View Drive


Trailside Court
 
Merbach Drive


Trevi Drive
 
Fountain View Drive


Trinity Drive
 
Woodhill Drive (both intersections)


Tubeway Drive
 
Gary Avenue


Ute Lane
 
Chippewa Trail


Vale Road
 
County Farm Road


Village Court
 
Gary Avenue


Village Drive
 
Kehoe Boulevard


Violet Street
 
Fair Oaks Road


Violet Street
 
Rose Avenue


Waco Drive
 
Birchbark Trail


Waco Drive
 
Brookstone Drive


Walnut Circle
 
Big Horn Trail (both intersections)


Wampum Court
 
Canyon Trail


Warwick Court
 
Buckingham Drive


Warwick Drive
 
Buckingham Drive


West Street
 
Geneva Road


Westgate Drive
 
St. Charles


Westward Trail
 
Birchbark Trail


Whisper Point
 
Bluff Street


Williamstown Drive
 
Birchbark Trail


Winchester Court
 
Birchbark Trail


Winding Glen Drive
 
Woodlake Drive


Woodcrest Court
 
Hiawatha Drive


Woodhill Drive
 
County Farms Road


Woodhill Drive
 
Kuhn Road


Woodhill Drive
 
Woodlake Drive


Woodlake Drive
 
Lies Road


Yardley Drive
 
Kuhn Road


Yardley Drive
 
Stonewood Circle


Yorkshire Lane
 
Birchbark Trail


Yuma Lane
 
Shawnee Drive


Yuma Lane
 
Thunderbird Trail




 



(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990; Ord. 90-11-93, passed 11-13-1990; Ord.
91-05-38, passed 5-14-1991; Ord. 91-10-71, passed 10-8-1991; Ord. 91-11-77,
passed 11-12-1991; Ord. 93-05-49, passed 5-25-1993; Ord. 94-08-71, passed
8-15-1994; Ord. 97-10-74, passed 10-20-1997; Ord. 97-11-80, passed 11-3-1997;
Ord. 2000-06-57, passed 6-5-2000; Ord. 2000-08-72, passed 8-21-2000; Ord.
2003-05-22, passed 5-5-2003; Ord. 2003-09-55, passed 9-3-2003; Ord.
2004-06-34, passed 6-21-2004; Ord. 2005-08-49, passed 8-15-2005; Ord.
2008-12-72, passed 12-15-2008; Ord. 2010-05-24, passed 5-3-2010; Ord.
2011-10-35, passed 10-3-2011)



SCHEDULE III. SPEED LIMITS ON SPECIFIC STREETS.



   On the basis of engineering or traffic investigations conducted by the
village, it has been and is determined that the speed limits be altered on
certain streets. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon
the following streets as a speed greater than indicated.



   (A)   Unless otherwise specified in divisions (B) through (E) below,
no vehicle may be driven upon any street under the jurisdiction of the
village at any speed greater than 25 mph.



   (B)   The speed limit on the following streets shall be 30 mph:



      Alexandra Way



      Birchbark Trail



      Commerce Drive



      Elk Trail



      Gundersen Drive



      Merbach Drive



      Mercedes Drive



      Munson Drive



      Navaho Drive



      President Street



      Thornhill Drive (from Schmale Road to eastern terminus)



      Tubeway Drive



   (C)   The speed limit on the following streets shall be 35 mph:



      Bonnie Lane



      Carol Street



      Center Avenue



      East Drive



      Fair Oaks Road



      Fullerton Avenue



      Kehoe Boulevard



      Kimberly Drive



      Kuhn Road



      Lies Road



      Main Place



      Mission Street



      Morton Road (from Lies Road to Birchbark Trail)



      Randy Road



      St. Paul Boulevard



      Village Court



      Village Drive



   (D)   The speed limit on the following streets shall be 40 mph:



Morton Road (from Birchbark Trail southerly to the village limits)



   (E)   The speed limit in school zones on school days when children
are present shall be 20 miles an hour as follows:



 

Street
 
Location




Aztec Drive
 
Between Ute Lane and 100 feet west of Ute Lane


Buckskin Lane
 
Between 200 feet north and 200 feet south of the pedestrian walkway


Chippewa Trail
 
Between Niagara Street and 100 feet west of Ute Lane


Cochise Court
 
Between 200 feet east and 200 feet west of the crosswalk at Sioux Lane


El Paso Lane
 
Between 350 feet east of Hiawatha Drive and 750 feet east of Hiawatha Drive


Elk Trail
 
Between Hoover Drive and Idaho Street


Evergreen Drive
 
Between 155 feet south of Fox Court and 235 feet north of Buffalo Circle


Georgetown Drive
 
From Spring Valley Drive to 400 feet west of Spring Valley Drive


Hiawatha Drive
 
Between 200 feet north and 400 feet south of Illini Drive


Idaho Street
 
Between 205 feet north of Dearborn Circle and 370 feet south of Elk Trail


Illini Drive
 
Between Hiawatha Drive and 200 feet west of Silverleaf Boulevard


Knollwood Drive
 
Between Woodhill Drive and 620 feet north of Woodhill Drive


Merbach Drive
 
From 100 feet north of Cloverdale School north property line to 100 feet
south of the south property line


Niagara Street
 
Between Chippewa Trail and Napa Street


Pocahontas Trail
 
Between Chippewa Trail and 150 feet south


Sioux Lane
 
Thunderbird Trail to Cochise Court


Spring Valley Drive
 
Between Portsmouth Court and Antigo Trail


Stonewood Circle
 
From 100 feet north of Cloverdale School north property line to 200 feet
south of the crosswalk at Stonewood and Yardley


Thunderbird Trail
 
Between 200 feet east and 200 feet west of Sioux Lane


Thunderbird Trail
 
Between Arrowhead Trail (west) and 200 feet east of the Carol Stream School
driveway


Ute Lane
 
Between Chippewa Trail and Aztec Drive


Woodhill Drive
 
100 feet west of Royal Glen Lane to 100 feet east of Knollwood Drive


Yardley Drive
 
200 feet west of Stonewood Circle to Stonewood Circle




 



(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990; Ord. 90-09-73, passed 9-11-1990; Ord.
90-11-93, passed 11-13-1990; Ord. 91-10-71, passed 10-8-1991; Ord. 96-08-58,
passed 8-19-1996; Ord. 98-11-80, passed 11-16-1998; Ord. 99-10-55, passed
10-4-1999; Ord. 2000-08-66, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2000-08-72, passed
8-21-2000; Ord. 2005-08-49, passed 8-15-2005; Ord. 2006-12-71, passed
12-4-2006; Ord. 2007-07-29, passed 7-16-2007; Ord. 2011-02-03, passed
2-7-2011; Ord. 2017-10-58, passed 10-2-2017)



SCHEDULE IV. TURNS.



   Signs indicating limitations upon turns within the village shall be
placed at the following locations:



 


Street

 

Turning Limitation





Aztec Drive (northbound)
 
No right turn onto Chippewa Trail from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.
to 4:30 p.m., on school days


Aztec Drive (southbound)
 
No left turn onto Chippewa Trail from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to
4:30 p.m., on school days


Birchbark Trail
 
No left turn onto Buckskin Lane from 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to
3:30 p.m., on school days


Birchbark Trail
 
No right turn onto Buckskin Lane from 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to
3:30 p.m., on school days


Buffalo Circle (north intersection with Evergreen Drive)
 
No left turn southbound on to Evergreen Drive, between 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
and 2:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m., on school days when school is in session


Chippewa Trail (westbound)
 
No left turn onto Pocahontas Trail from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.
to 4:30 p.m., on school days


Cochise Court (westbound)
 
No left turn onto Sioux Lane from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m. on school days


County Farm Road (northbound)
 
No left turn onto Pawnee Drive


County Farm Road (southbound)
 
No left turn onto Dorchester Drive


Dearborn Circle (south intersection with Idaho Street)
 
No left turn southbound onto Idaho Street from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and
2:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. on school days


Evergreen Drive
 
No left turn northbound into Evergreen School, between 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
and 2:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m., on school days when school is in session


Evergreen School

(South Driveway)
 
Right turn only on to Evergreen Drive, between 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and
2:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m., on school days when school is in session


Fox Court
 
No left turn southbound on to Evergreen Drive, between 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
and 2:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m., on school days when school is in session


Georgetown Drive
 
No left turn onto Spring Valley Drive from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00
p.m. to 3:00 p.m., on school days


Idaho Street
 
No left turn from north bound Idaho Street into Western Trails School north
parking lot entrance from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m.
on school days


Idaho Street
 
Right turn only from Western Trails School north parking lot driveway exit
from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., on school days


Lies Road (eastbound)
 
No right turn into Glenbard North eastern driveway


Lies Road (westbound)
 
No left turn into Glenbard North eastern driveway


Merbach Drive
 
Right turn only from Cloverdale School north driveway from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m., on school days


Pocahontas Trail (northbound)
 
No right turn onto Chippewa Trail from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.
to 4:30 p.m., on school days


Sioux Lane
 
Right turn only from Carol Stream School driveway from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
and 2:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m., on school days


Spring Trail School,

north and south driveways
 
No left turn onto Spring Valley Drive from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00
p.m. to 3:00 p.m., on school days


Thunderbird Trail
 
No right or left turn onto Sioux Lane from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00
p.m. to 4:30 p.m., on school days


Ute Lane (southbound)
 
No left turn onto Chippewa Trail from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to
4:30 p.m., on school days


Western Trails School
 
No right turn from Western Trails School north parking lot driveway exit from
8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m., on school days


Western Trails School
 
No left turn from Western Trails School south parking lot driveway exit from
8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. on school days


Woodhill Drive
 
No left or right turn onto Knollwood Drive from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and
2:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m., on school days


Woodhill Drive
 
Right turn only from Heritage Lakes School west driveway from 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m., on school days




 



(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990; Ord. 92-02-25, passed 2-25-1992; Ord.
92-01-11, passed 1-28-1992; Ord. 93-12-116, passed 12-14-1993; Ord.
2000-08-65, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2001-02-10, passed 2-20-2001; Ord.
2001-05-27, passed 5-21-2001; Ord. 2001-08-42, passed 8-6-2001; Ord.
2001-09-48, passed 9-17-2001; Ord. 2002-09-57, passed 9-16-2002; Ord.
2011-02-03, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. 2014- 03-11, passed 3-3-2014; Ord.
2016-04-19, passed 4-4-2016; Ord. 2017-09-56, passed 9-18-2017; Ord.
2019-03-10, passed 3-18-2019)



SCHEDULE V. TRAFFIC SIGNALS.



   Mechanized traffic signals shall be installed at the following
intersections:



      Army Trail Road and Country Farm Road



      Army Trail Road and Woodlake Drive



      Country Farm Road and Lies Road



      Country Farm Road and Birchbark Trail



      Gary Avenue and St. Charles Road



      Gary Avenue and North Avenue



      Gary Avenue and Thunderbird Trail



      Gary Avenue and Hiawatha Drive



      Gary Avenue and Elk Trail



      Gary Avenue and Lies Road



      Geneva Road and Schmale Road



      Geneva Road and President Street



      Lies Road and Kuhn Road



      North Avenue and Kuhn Road



      North Avenue and Schmale Road



      St. Charles Road and Schmale Road



      Schmale Road and Thornhill Drive



      Schmale Road and Gundersen Road



(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990; Ord. 99-12-69, passed 12-6-1999)



SCHEDULE VI. WEIGHT LIMITS.



   (A)   A weight limit of 10,000 pounds shall be placed on the
following streets:



 

Street
 
Location


Fair Oaks Road
 
Between Birchbark and Army Trail Road


Morton Road
 
Entire length within the village


Vale Road
 
Entire length within the village



 



   (B)   The Village Manager is authorized to grant variation from the
weight limit imposed in division (A) above to the following uses upon
application by the affected party:



      (1)   To garbage truck routes which could not otherwise
provide service; and



      (2)   To construction traffic; provided:



         (a)   Such traffic conforms to Subsection E-79-6, “Use
of Residential Streets as Construction Haul Roads”, Section B-Engineering,
Chapter 1 - Community Development of the Administrative Procedures Manual of
the Village of Carol Stream;



         (b)   There is no alternate route onto a higher
structural strength street;



         (c)   The shortest distance from an approved highway is
used; and



         (d)   Usage between March 1 and May 1 is limited to only
when necessary.



(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990; Ord. 90-11-93, passed 11-13-1990; Ord.
99-12-69, passed 12-6-1999; Ord. 2012-11-36, passed 11-19-2012; Ord.
2014-11-53, passed 11-3-2014)



SCHEDULE VII. TRUCK ROUTES.



   The following streets are designated as class II truck routes:



      Alexandra Way



      Carol Court



      Center Avenue



      Commerce Drive



      Delia Court



      East Drive



      Elk Trail Court



      Fullerton Avenue



      Gerzevske Lane



      Mercedes Drive



      Mission Street



      Randy Road



      St. Paul Boulevard



      Tower Boulevard



      Tubeway Drive



      Village Court



      Village Drive



      Westgate Drive



(Ord. 92-04-36, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2006-08-38, passed 8-7-2006)



SCHEDULE VIII. LOCAL WEIGHT RESTRICTED HIGHWAYS.



   (A)   Pursuant to the authority granted on 625 ILCS 5/15-316, all
village highways, except those listed in Schedule VI, or designated by
Schedule VII as Class II Truck Routes, shall be designated as local weight
restricted highways.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle 
which exceeds 26,000 pounds in actual weight, registered weight, manufacturer
suggested gross vehicle rating (GVWR), or the gross combined manufacturer
suggested weight rating (GCWR) on any village local weight restricted highway
or portion thereof.



   (C)   The prohibitions and weight limitations set forth herein shall
be designated by appropriate signs placed on such highways.



   (D)   The weight restrictions of this Schedule VIII shall not apply
to:



      (1)   Vehicles engaged in the delivery or picking up of a load
where access by a truck route is not available, in which case such vehicle
may be driven on a local restricted highway for not more than the minimum
distance necessary for such delivery or pick up.



      (2)   Tow trucks engaged in providing service to an inoperable
vehicle, accident or emergency where access by a truck route is not
available, in which case such vehicle may be driven on a local restricted
highway for not more than the minimum distance necessary to provide service
to the inoperable vehicle, accident or emergency.



      (3)   Emergency vehicles, school buses, public works vehicles,
garbage trucks, public utility vehicles or government owned vehicles,
traveling on a local weight restricted highway in connection with official
duties.



(Ord. 2017-10-61, passed 10-16-2017)



ARTICLE 6:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Parking prohibited; signs required



   II.   Twenty-four hour parking allowed



   III.   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited; signs required



SCHEDULE I. PARKING PROHIBITED; SIGNS REQUIRED.



   Parking, except in cases of emergency, shall be prohibited and the
appropriate signs shall be posted on the following streets in the village:



 

Street
 
Location




Alexandra Way
 
Gary Avenue (east to Gary Avenue (west))


Alton Court
 
Either side


Aztec Drive
 
Between Cochise Place and Thunderbird Trail


Bennett Drive
 
North and west sides, and both sides between North Avenue and Sype Drive


Biloxie Court
 
Either side


Blackhawk Drive
 
From a point 75 feet north of its intersection with Mohawk Drive, in front of
397, 403 and 411 Blackhawk Drive, to its intersection with Arapahoe Trail


Bonnie Lane
 
East and west sides from Kehoe Boulevard to Randy Road


Brighton Drive
 
North and south sides from Buckingham Drive to a point 50 feet west


Buckingham Drive
 
East and west sides from Lies Road to a point 150 feet north of Brighton Drive


Buckskin Lane
 
West side from Birchbark Trail to Evergreen Drive from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m.
and 2:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m., on school days


Carlton Court
 
West side from St. Charles Road to south end


Carol Court
 
East and west sides from Lies Road to south end


Center Avenue
 
East and west sides from Mission Drive to south end and Fullerton Avenue to
north end


Chippewa Trail
 
North side between Ute Lane and Niagra Street


Cochise Court
 
North side between Silverleaf Boulevard and Arrowhead Trail


Cochise Court
 
South side between Arrowhead Trail and Sioux Lane from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
and from 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days


Colorado Court
 
Either side


Commerce Avenue
 
East and west sides from Kehoe Boulevard to St. Paul Boulevard


Commercial/Industrial Streets
 
Within 10 feet of a driveway where signs are posted


Commonwealth Drive
 
East side from St. Charles Road to south end


Dakota Court
 
Either side


Doris Avenue
 
From a point 60 feet east of Gary Avenue to Farwell Avenue


East Drive
 
East and west sides from Mission Drive to south end


East Street
 
North, east and west sides for its entire length on the inside radius


Elk Trail
 
South side from Gary Avenue to the west property line of 160 Bluff Street


Elk Trail Court
 
South side from Gary Avenue to the first driveway east of Gary Avenue


Esselen Court
 
Either side


Evergreen Drive
 
On the west side between the north driveway at Evergreen School and Birchbark
Trail, between 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m., on school
days when school is in session


Executive Drive
 
North and south sides for 175 feet west of the intersection with Main Place


Executive Drive
 
North side from Main Place to west end


Fullerton Avenue
 
North and south side from Gary Avenue to Schmale Road


Gundersen Drive
 
North side for its entire length within the village. Except that parking for
not more than four continuous hours shall be permitted on the north side west
of Main Place; provided, however, that, even along the north side west of
Main Place, two no parking zones shall be established such that there shall
be no parking on the north side from a point 429 feet west of Main Place to a
point 445 feet west of Main Place and on either side from a point 985 feet
west of Main Place to a point 1,045 feet west of Main Place


Gundersen Drive
 
North and south sides 240 feet east and west of the center of the
intersection with Main Place


327 Gundersen Drive
 
From five feet west to five feet east of the service walkway to the building


Gundersen Drive
 
North side for its entire length within the village, north and south sides
from West Street to 240 feet east of Main Place


Gundersen Drive
 
On the south side from a point 15 feet east and 15 feet west of any entrance
or exit to the parking lot located at 350 and 450 Gundersen Drive


Idaho Street
 
On the west side between Clearwater Court and the Western Trails School north
driveway, on school days from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 4:00
p.m.


Illini Drive
 
For a distance of 75 feet between Lots 568 and 569, in Carol Stream Unit #5,
commonly known as the entrance to St. Luke Park


Kehoe Boulevard
 
South side from Gary Avenue to Schmale Road


Kimberly Drive
 
East side from Fullerton Avenue to Lies Road


Kimberly Drive
 
West side from Fullerton Avenue to a point 413 feet north and from a point
730 feet north of Fullerton Avenue to Lies Road


Knollwood Drive
 
On the east side between Woodhill Drive and Countryside Lane from 7:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m. when school is in session on school days


Main Place
 
East and west sides from St. Charles Road to south end


Minnesota Circle
 
No parking shall be permitted, except for the north side, where parking shall
be allowed for a distance of approximately 1,000 feet westerly from Teton
Circle


Mission Drive
 
North and south sides from Schmale Road to Kimberly Drive


Mohican Road
 
North side between Kuhn Road and Pocahontas Trail


Navaho Drive
 
North and south sides from Schmale Road to west end


Nebraska Circle
 
Either side


North Avenue
 
North side from Gary Avenue east to Schmale Road and on the south side from
Gary Avenue east to Fireside Drive and again from the centerline of Concord
Lane 64 feet west to 60 feet east


North Avenue
 
On the north side from 1,473 feet west of Kuhn Road east to Schmale Road and
on the south side from 1,473 feet east to Fireside Drive and again from the
centerline of Concord Lane 64 feet west of 60 feet east.


Old Gary Avenue
 
East and west sides from the north end to the south end


Pocahontas Trail
 
On the east side on school days from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.


President Street
 
Both sides from North Avenue to St. Charles Road


President Street
 
West side from St. Charles Road to Geneva Road


Randy Road
 
10 feet each side of both driveways at 465 Randy Road and 110 feet east of
the eastern most driveway


Randy Road
 
On the north side 30 feet each side of the driveway opposite 444 Randy Road


Randy Road
 
From 10 feet east of the driveway at 445 Randy Road to 10 feet west of the
driveway at 383 Randy Road


Randy Road
 
From 40 feet east of the driveway at 381 Randy Road to 10 feet west of the
loading dock at 373 Randy Road


Randy Road
 
From 10 feet east of the driveway at 373 Randy Road to 10 feet west of the
driveway at 361 Randy Road


Randy Road
 
South side from Gerzevske Lane to Schmale Road


Randy Road
 
Entire north curve between Gerzevske Lane and Randy Road


Randy Road
 
10 feet each side of the west driveway at 475 Randy Road


Schmale Road
 
East side within the village, north of the intersection with North Avenue
(Rt. 64)


Sioux Lane
 
West side along Carol Stream School from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and from 2:00
p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days


St. Paul Boulevard
 
North side from Kimberly Drive to Schmale Road


St. Paul Boulevard
 
South side from Kimberly Drive to Schmale Road


Stark Drive
 
North and south sides from Gary Avenue to Old Gary Avenue


Stonewood Circle (east side)
 
Adjacent to Cloverdale School property line


Sype Drive
 
North and west sides


Teton Circle
 
From Munson Drive to the south edge of Building 10 as platted on the
west-south-east; and from the south edge of Building 10 northward to Munson
Drive on the west side


Texas Court
 
Either side


Thornhill Drive
 
Either side from its intersection with Schmale Road to the western entrance
to what is commonly known as the Colony Park Apartment Complex


Thornhill Drive
 
North and south sides for the entire length west of Schmale Road


Thornhill Drive
 
North and south sides for the entire length west of Schmale Road


Tubeway Drive
 
North side from Gary Avenue to Westgate Drive


Ute Lane
 
On the west side on school days from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.


Village Court
 
North and south sides from Village Drive to Gary Avenue


Village Drive
 
East and west sides for its entire length between Kehoe Boulevard and Village
Court


Westgate Drive
 
West side from St. Charles Road to Tubeway Drive


Woodhill Drive
 
On the north side within 100 feet of the crosswalk at Baybrook between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on school days when school is in session


Arterial streets (except in cases of emergency)
 
Army, Geneva, Fair Oaks, Garu, North, St. Charles, Schmale, County Farm,
Kuhn, Morton, Lies, Fullerton Avenue, Kehoe Boulevard


Through streets (north and east sides)
 
Birchbark from County Farm Road to Fair Oaks Road; Birchbark Drive on the
south side between Kuhn Road and County Farm Road


Through streets (north and east sides)
 
Munson, Flint, Deerskin, Evergreen, Iroquois, Main, Arapahoe, Aztec, Illini,
Spring Valley, Idaho, Canyon, Elk, Bluff, Pawnee, Big Horn, Thornhill,
Arrowhead, Thunderbird, Hiawatha


Thunderbird Trail
 
On the south side between Kuhn Road and Aztec Drive




 



(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990; Ord. 90-09-73, passed 9-11-1990; Ord.
90-10-88, passed 10-9-1990; Ord. 92-01-02, passed 1-14-1992; Ord. 92-02-25,
passed 2-25-1992; Ord. 92-04-37, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 92-05-63, passed
5-26-1992; Ord. 94-01-03, passed 1-11-1994; Ord. 94-11-89, passed 11-7-1994;
Ord. 96-10-69, passed 10-7-1996; Ord. 97-05-34, passed 5-19-1997; Ord.
97-11-80, passed 11-3-1997; Ord. 2000-01-05, passed 1-17-2000; Ord.
2000-08-66, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2001-05-27, passed 5-21-2001; Ord.
2001-08-42, passed 8-6-2001; Ord. 2001-09-48, passed 9-17-2001; Ord.
2002-08-45, passed 8-5-2002; Ord. 2002-09-57, passed 9-16-2002; Ord.
2002-12-74, passed 12-16-2002; Ord. 2003-10-68, passed 10-20-2003; Ord.
2004-01-07, passed 1-19-2004; Ord. 2005-12-63, passed 12-5-2005; Ord.
2006-11-58, passed 11-6-2006; Ord. 2007-10-37A, passed 10-15-2007; Ord.
2011-02-03, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. 2011-08-26, passed 8-1-2011; Ord.
2014-07-30, passed 7-7-2014; Ord. 2014-07-31, passed 7-7-2014; Ord.
2016-04-19, passed 4-4-2016; Ord. 2017-07-32, passed 7-17-2017; Ord.
2017-07-33, passed 7-17-2017; Ord. 2017-11-63, passed 11-6-2017; Ord.
2018-02-05, passed 2-20-2018; Ord. 2018-03-09, passed 3-5-2018; Ord.
2018-09-33, passed 9-4-2018; Ord. 2018-12-46, passed 12-17-2018)



SCHEDULE II. TWENTY-FOUR HOUR PARKING ALLOWED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle, other
than a commercial vehicle, camper, recreational vehicle or trailer, on the
residential streets listed below for a period of 24 hours. The terms and
provisions of this section shall not operate to prohibit the parking of a
vehicle that is privately owned for personal use and which is registered as a
recreational vehicle and has a gross weight that is less than 6,000 pounds.



   (B)   Twenty-four hour parking shall be allowed, subject to the
provisions in division (A) above, on the following sections of streets:



 

Street
 
Location


Munson Drive
 
South side between Kuhn Road and County Farm Road, except after a snowfall of
1 inch has occurred, unless the snow has been plowed off or otherwise removed
from the street


Teton Circle (The Park Unit 2)
 
From Munson Drive on the east side southward to the south edge of Building 10
as platted to the west edge of the Park Unit 2, except after a snowfall of 1
inch has occurred, unless the snow has been plowed off or otherwise removed
from the street, and further provided that such 24-hour parking shall only
take place from 2:00 a.m. Saturday to 5:00 a.m. Sunday


Teton Circle (The Park Unit 3)
 
On the northeast side from the east edge of the Park Unit 3 to Munson Drive,
except after a snowfall of 1 inch has occurred, unless the snow has been
plowed off or otherwise removed from the street, and further provided that
such 24-hour parking shall only take place from 2:00 a.m. Saturday to 5:00
a.m. Monday



 



(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990)



SCHEDULE III. STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED; SIGNS REQUIRED.



   Parking, stopping or parking, except in cases of emergency shall be
prohibited and the appropriate signs shall be posted on the following streets
in the village:



 

Street
 
Location




Aleut Trail
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Alison Lane
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Armstrong Park
 
Adjoining Illini Drive, on south side (Hiawatha Drive to Arrowhead Trail)


Armstrong Park
 
Adjoining Napa Street, on north and west sides (Niagara Street to north
property line of 792 Napa Street)


Aztec Drive
 
From the intersection of Mohican Road to the intersection of Ute Lane between
7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Bedford Drive
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Birchbark Trail
 
From the intersection of Kuhn Road to the intersection of Matthew Lane
between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Brighton Drive
 
From 51 feet west of Buckingham Drive to Woodhill Drive between 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Buckingham Court
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Buckingham Drive
 
East side from Brighton Drive to Warwick Drive


Buckingham Drive
 
From the intersection of Warwick Drive to the intersection of Woodhill Drive
between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Buckingham Drive
 
West side from 151 feet north of Brighton Drive between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00
a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Buckskin Lane
 
Both sides of the street, 20 feet north and 20 feet south of the mid block
pedestrian crosswalk located between Birchbark Trail and Evergreen Drive


Buffalo Circle (north intersection with Evergreen Drive)
 
On the north side between Evergreen Drive through the property address
located at 760 Buffalo Circle, between 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.
to 3:30 p.m., on school days when school is in session


Buffalo Circle (south intersection with Evergreen Drive)
 
On the north side between Evergreen Drive through the property address
located at 705 Buffalo Circle, between 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.
to 3:30 p.m., on school days when school is in session


Burke Drive
 
From the intersection of Chalet Drive to the intersection of Kuhn Road
between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Cambridge Park
 
Adjoining Woodhill Drive, on north side (Kuhn Road to County Farm Road)


Canterbury Drive
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Canyon Trail
 
East side from Deerskin Trail to Moccasin Court between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00
a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Chalet Drive
 
From the intersection of Burke Drive to the intersection of Parkside Drive
between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Chatham Drive
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Chestnut Drive
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Carlton Drive
 
East and west sides from the intersection with St. Charles to a point 190
feet south


Chetwood Drive
 
From the intersection of Brighton Drive to the intersection of Woodhill Drive
between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Chetwood Drive
 
From Brighton Drive to a point 425 feet west and north on Chetwood Drive from
7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. when school is in session, on school days


Chippewa Trail
 
From the intersection of Aztec Drive to the intersection of Ute Lane between
7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Chippewa Trail
 
South side between 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., on school days


Chippewa Trail
 
South side from a point 200 feet west of the lane to Niagra Street on school
days between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.


Cliff Court
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on school days when school is in session


Community Park
 
Adjoining President Street, on west side (St. Charles Road to Gundersen Drive)


Country Glen Lane
 
From the intersection of Woodhill Drive to the intersection of Baybrook Lane
between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Creekcourt Court
 
Only authorized vehicles registered with the Police Department and owned by
residents of Creekwood Court may park on their street during the hours of
6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.; provided, they are otherwise legally authorized to
do so (these parking restrictions do not apply on the following days:
Thanksgiving, Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, New Year’s Eve and New Years
Day)


Dearborn Circle
 
Between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. between Idaho
Street and 986 Dearborn Circle on the north side, on school days


Deerskin Trail
 
North and south sides


Delaware Trail
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Devon Court
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Dorchester Drive
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Edington Lane
 
From the intersection of Huntington Drive to the intersection of Woodhill
Drive between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school
days


El Paso Lane
 
From Hiawatha to the east side of 246 El Paso Lane between the hours of 2:30
p.m. and 3:00 p.m., on school days


El Paso Lane
 
20 feet east and 20 feet west of the driveway at 283 El Paso Lane (Jay Stream
School)


Erie Court
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Evergreen Drive
 
On the east side between the north intersection of Buffalo Circle and
Birchbark Trail; on the west side between the north parking lot entrance to
Evergreen School and the south intersection of Buffalo Circle


Evergreen Drive
 
On the east side between the north and south intersections of Buffalo Circle,
between 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m., on school days
when school is in session


Fawn Court
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Flint Trail
 
East side from Deerskin Trail to Niagra Street between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00
a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Fountain View Road
 
On both sides


Fox Court
 
On the north side between Evergreen Drive through the property address
located at 711 Fox Court, between 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to
3:30 p.m., on school days when school is in session


Fullerton Avenue
 
North side, east of Kimberly to Schmale Road


Georgetown Drive
 
Both sides of the street, 20 feet east and 20 feet west of the school
crosswalk located west of Spring Valley Drive


Georgetown Drive
 
South and east side between Big Horn Trail and Spring Valley Drive from 8:00
a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m., on school days.


Hampe Park
 
Adjoining Adler Lane, on west side (McCormick Street to north property line
of 1192 Adler Lane)


Hampton Drive
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Hiawatha Drive
 
East side from El Paso Lane to Springbrook Lane


Hiawatha Drive
 
North and south sides from the intersection with Gary Avenue to a point 230
feet west


Hiawatha Drive
 
South side, between Gary and Eagleview


Hopi Court
 
Between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., on school days


Horseshoe Court
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Hunter Drive
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Huntington Court
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Huntington Drive
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Huron Court
 
Between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. between Idaho and
824 Huron on the west side, on school days


Idaho Street
 
West side of street, from 50 feet north of Western Trails School north
property lot exit, to 50 feet south of Western Trails School south parking
lot entrance


Idaho Street
 
East side from Hopi Court to the northern intersection of Dearborn Circle


Idaho Trail
 
East side from Lies Road to 150 feet north of Lies Road


Iron Hawk Court
 
Between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., on school days


Jan Smith Park
 
Adjoining Burke Drive, on north side (Kuhn Road to Canterbury Drive)


Jan Smith Park
 
Adjoining Canterbury Drive, on east side (Burke Drive to east property line
of 563 Canterbury Drive)


Jirsa Park
 
Adjoining Lilac Lane, on south side (Rose Avenue to east property line of
1314 Lilac Lane)


Jirsa Park
 
Adjoining Rose Avenue, on west side (Lies Road to east property line of 1356
Rose Avenue)


Kehoe Boulevard
 
North side from Gary Avenue to Schmale Road


Kent Park
 
Adjoining Woodhill Drive, on south side (County Farm Road to Woodlake Drive)


Kimberly Drive
 
East and west sides between Kehoe Boulevard and Fullerton Avenue


Kingsport Ridge Basin
 
Adjoining Allison Lane, on west side (Matthew Lane to Chestnut Drive


Knollwood Drive
 
Both sides of the street, 20 feet north and 20 feet south of the mid block
pedestrian crosswalk located north of Woodhill Drive


Knollwood Drive
 
East side from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., on school days


Larch Drive
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Linden Drive
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Longmeadow Drive
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Matthew Lane
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Mayfair Drive
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Merbach Basins
 
Adjoining Merbach Drive, on west side (Lies Road to Army Trail)


Merbach Drive
 
East side from Bradbury Circle (north) to Cedar Court


Merbach Drive
 
East side from Lies Road to Hunter Drive


Merbach Drive
 
Right turn only from Cloverdale School (all driveways) between 8:00 a.m.
and  9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. and  4:00 p.m., on school days


Mercedes Drive
 
North side from Gary Avenue to 250 east and south side from Gary Avenue to
600 feet east.


Napa Court
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Navajo Street
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Niagra Street
 
From the intersection of Flint Trail north along its entire length between
7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Ohio Court
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Omaha Court
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Ottawa Court
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Paddock Drive
 
From the intersection of County Farm Road to the intersection of Morton Road
between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Palomino Street
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Papoose Court
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Park Hill Trail
 
From Gary Avenue west for a length of 190 feet on the south side and 175 feet
on the north side


Parkside Court
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Parkside Drive
 
From the intersection of Burke Drive to the intersection of Parkside Court
between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Penny Court
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Pocahontas Trail
 
Between Chippewa and Mohican on school days between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.


Princeton Court
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Provincetown Drive
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Regency Lane
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Renaissance Drive
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Royal Glen Lane
 
From the intersection of Baybrook Lane east along its entire length between
7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


St. Paul Boulevard
 
South side from Kimberly Drive to Schmale Road


Sandhurst Court
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Sandhurst Lane
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Santa Fe Court
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Sauk Lane
 
West side from Munson Drive to the cul-de-sac curb


Shelburne Basin
 
Adjoining Shelburne, on north side (Thunderbird Trail to east property line
of 322 Shelburne Drive)


Shenandoah Drive
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Sioux Lane
 
Between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on east side when school is in session, on
school days


Somerset Court
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Somerset Drive
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Sorrel Court
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Split Rail Drive
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Spring Valley Drive
 
Between Army Trail Road and Georgetown Drive


Spring Valley Drive
 
On both sides between Army Trail Road and Appomattox Trail from 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m., on school days.


Stonewood Circle
 
North side between Merbach Drive and Kildare Court from 8:00 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days


Sundance Park
 
Adjoining Yardley Drive, on north side (Kuhn Road to east property line of
525 Yardley Drive)


Tama Court
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Tamarac Drive
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Thunderbird Trail
 
North side from Sioux Lane west to Arrowhead Trail


Thunderbird Trail
 
South side between Arrowhead Trail (west) and 442 Thunderbird Trail from 8:00
a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days


Tioga Court
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Tonto Court
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Tower Boulevard
 
North side from Center Avenue to Schmale Road, and south side for 10 feet on
each side of all driveways


Trinity Drive
 
From the intersection of Woodhill Drive to the intersection of Trinity Court
between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Ute Lane
 
Between Chippewa and Aztec between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.


Walter Park
 
Adjoining Brookstone Drive, on south side (High Ridge Pass to west property
line of 1170 Brookstone Drive)


Walter Park
 
Adjoining High Ridge Pass, on east side (Lies Road to 933 High Ridge Pass)


Wampum Court
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., when school is in session, on school days


Warwick Court
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Warwick Drive
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Williamstown Drive
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Willow Drive
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Woodhill Drive
 
From the intersection of Buckingham and Kingsbridge Drives to the
intersection of County Farm Road between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school
is in session, on school days


Woodhill Drive
 
South side from Woodlake Drive to County Farm Road


Yardley Drive
 
From the intersection of Kuhn Road to a point 422 feet east of Kuhn Road
between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days


Yellowstone Street
 
Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days




 



(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990; Ord. 91-06-48, passed 6-25-1991; Ord.
91-11-81, passed 11-26-1991; Ord. 92-04-37, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 93-01-05,
passed 1-12-1993; Ord. 93-01-07, passed 1-26-1993; Ord. 93-07-62, passed
7-13-1993; Ord. 96-08-58, passed 8-19-1996; Ord. 98-11-74, passed 11-2-1998;
Ord. 99-05-28, passed 5-3-1999; Ord. 99-09-52, passed 9-20-1999; Ord.
2000-08-66, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2000-10-81, passed 10-16-2000; Ord.
2001-02-10, passed 2-20-2001; Ord. 2001-05-27, passed 5-27-2001; Ord.
2001-08-42, passed 8-6-2001; Ord. 2001-08-45, passed 8-20-2001; Ord.
2001-10-51, passed 10-1-2001; Ord. 2002-09-57, passed 9-16-2002; Ord.
2003-05-23, passed 5-5-2003; Ord. 2003-05-34, passed 5-19-2003; Ord.
2004-01-07, passed 1-19-2004; Ord. 2006-11-60, passed 11-20-2006; Ord.
2006-12-75, passed 12-18-2006; Ord. 2011-02-03, passed 2-7-2011; Ord.
2011-08-25, passed 8-1-2011; Ord. 2017-07-33, passed 7-17-2017; Ord.
2017-09-56, passed 9-18-2017; Ord. 2017-10-58, passed 10-2-2017; Ord.
2018-01-01, passed 1-16-2018; Ord. 2018-02-05, passed 2-20-18)



ARTICLE 7:  MOTORIZED SKATEBOARDS



Section



   8-7-1   Operation of a motorized skateboard or scooter



   8-7-2   Parental responsibility for violations by minors



   8-7-3   Operation of personal assistive mobility devices



   8-7-4   Penalty



§ 8-7-1  OPERATION OF MOTORIZED SKATEBOARD OR SCOOTER.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate or be in
control of a motorized skateboard, a snow vehicle, go-ped, go-cart, minibike,
motorized scooter or any similar engine-powered vehicle or device upon any
public or private street, highway, parking lot, sidewalk, school ground, bike
path or any public property within the village, except as may be authorized
by the village in areas other than streets, highways or sidewalks.



   (B)   Operation of a motorized skateboard may be permitted on
private property with the permission of the property owner.



   (C)   Permission can be given verbally if the owner is present, or
in writing if the owner is absent.



   (D)   For the purpose of this section, a MOTORIZED SKATEBOARD,
SCOOTER or GO-PED is defined as a board or other horizontal surface having
wheels, which are operated by some type of motor, and generally designed to
hold one person.



(Ord. 2003-12-84, passed 12-1-2003)



§ 8-7-2  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATIONS BY MINORS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of a person
under the age of 17 years to suffer or permit such a person under the age of
17 years to violate any provision of this article.



   (B)   The commission of such an act by a minor who is living with
the minor’s parents or guardian shall raise the presumption that the parent
or guardian has suffered or permitted the minor to commit such an act.



   (C)   It shall be an affirmative defense for the parent or guardian
to prove that the parent or guardian attempted to restrain the minor from
committing the act as prohibited in this article, but the attempt, although
exercised with due care, was unsuccessful.



(Ord. 2003-12-84, passed 12-1-2003)



§ 8-7-3  OPERATION OF PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.



   (A)   Personal assistive motorized devices, such as motorized wheel
chairs, power chairs or scooters specifically designed for people with
limited mobility, shall be prohibited on any public right-of-way, including,
but not limited to, streets, parking lots, sidewalks, bike paths or other
areas open to the public, except when utilized by an individual or
individuals described as follows:



      (1)   Those who have limited mobility, including, but not
limited to, the elderly and disabled;



      (2)   The United States Postal Service to deliver United
States mail; or



      (3)   Government entities for public safety purposes.



   (B)   (1)   When utilized by individuals pursuant to this
section, personal assisted motorized devices may be operated on public
sidewalks, when utilized in a generally safe manner in such a way that their
use does not impede pedestrian traffic.



      (2)   The speed of any such device may not exceed ten mph.



   (C)   This section does not apply to motorized wheelchairs, as
defined in the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-148.3.



(Ord. 2003-12-84, passed 12-1-2003)



§ 8-7-4  PENALTY.



   Any police officer observing a violation of this article may, as an
alternative to arresting the offender, issue a “hang-on ticket”, as
provided in Ch. 15, Art. 4, of this code, pursuant to which the person cited
may pay the sum of $25 within the time stated on the ticket as a compromise
or settlement to avoid the prosecution of an ordinance violation in the
Circuit Court.



(Ord. 2003-12-84, passed 12-1-2003)



ARTICLE 8:  VEHICLE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT



Section



   8-8-1   Definitions



   8-8-2   Acts subjecting vehicle to seizure and impound;
administrative and public safety fee



   8-8-3   Seizure and impound procedures



   8-8-4   Release of motor vehicle; posting of bond



   8-8-5   Notice of seizure and impound



   8-8-6   Administrative hearings



   8-8-7   Collection of unpaid administrative and public safety fee



   8-8-8   Release of motor vehicle not allowed



   8-8-9   Multiple owners



   8-8-10   Failure to claim vehicle



§ 8-8-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning.



   BUSINESS DAY. Any day in which the office of the Village Clerk of the
Village of Carol Stream is open to the public for a minimum of seven hours.



   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled,
including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, vans, motorcycles and
motor scooters, and shall include every vehicle defined by § 1-146 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code.



   OWNER. A person who holds legal title of a vehicle, or in the event a
vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease
thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated
in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of such vehicle is
entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor
shall be deemed the owner. Any person may, with the owner’s express
permission, perform any act that the owner is authorized to perform.



(Ord. 2010-01-02, passed 1-19-2010; Ord. 2012-02-02, passed 2-6-2012)



§ 8-8-2  ACTS SUBJECTING VEHICLE TO SEIZURE AND IMPOUND; ADMINISTRATIVE AND
PUBLIC SAFETY FEE.



   (A)   A motor vehicle that is driven, used or operated, by a person
who is reasonably charged or could be charged with any of the following
violations shall declared a public nuisance and be subject to seizure and
impound by the village. It shall not be necessary for criminal charges to be
filed, prosecuted and/or proven in order to demonstrate that one or more of
the following violations has/have been committed:



      (1)   Driving a motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol,
other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound(s), or a combination thereof, as
prohibited in § 5/11-501(a) of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS
5/11-501(a);



      (2)   Driving a motor vehicle while driver’s license, permit
or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked, regardless
of whether the revocation or suspension was of an Illinois driver’s license
or the driver’s license from another state, except that vehicles shall not
be subject to seizure or impound if a driver’s license is suspended for
unpaid citations (parking or moving) or due to a failure to comply with
emission testing;



      (3)   Driving a motor vehicle without ever having been issued
a valid driver’s license;



      (4)   Driving a motor vehicle when the driver’s license has
been expired for more than one year, or the driver’s permit, restricted
driver’s permit or other driving privilege has expired, regardless of
whether such expired license, permit, restricted driver’s permit or other
driving privilege was previously issued by the State of Illinois or another
state;



      (5)   Firearms offenses:



         (a)   Unlawful use of weapons, 720 ILCS 5/24-1;



         (b)   Unlawful use or possession of weapons by felons or
persons in the custody of the department of corrections facilities, 720 ILCS
5/24-1.1;



         (c)   Aggravated discharge of a firearm, 720 ILCS
5/24-1.2;



         (d)   Aggravated discharge of a machine gun or a firearm
equipped with a device designed or used for silencing the report of a
firearm, 720 ILCS 5/11-1.2-5;



         (e)   Reckless discharge of a firearm, 720 ILCS 5/24-1.5;



         (f)   Aggravated unlawful use of a weapon, 720 ILCS
5/24-1.6; and



         (g)   Unlawful use or possession of ammunition, 720 ILCS
5/24-3.1.



      (6)   Drug offenses:



         (a)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the
commission of, or the attempt to commit, a felony or in violation of the
Cannabis Control Act; and



         (b)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while
soliciting, possessing or possess cannabis or a controlled substance, as
defined by the Cannabis Control Act or the Illinois Controlled Substance Act.



      (7)   Operation of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a
warrant has been issued by a Circuit Clerk in Illinois for failing to answer
charges that the driver violated §§ 6-101, 6-303 or 11-501 of this code;



      (8)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission
of, or in the attempt to commit, an offense in the violation of Art. 16 or
16A of the Criminal Code of 1961; and



      (9)   Any offense for which a motor vehicle can be seized and
forfeited pursuant to § 36-1 of the Illinois Criminal Code, 620 ILCS 5/36-1.



   (B)   No vehicle shall be seized and impounded pursuant to divisions
(A)(3) and (A)(4) above, if the driver was driving pursuant to certain
exceptions to the licensing requirements, as allowed in the exemption
provision, 720 ILCS 5/6-102, of the Illinois Vehicle Code.



   (C)   In the event a motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant
to this article, the owner of the motor vehicle shall be liable to the
village for an administrative and public safety fee of $500, in order to
cover the administrative and processing costs incurred by the village
associated with the investigation, arrest and detention of the offender and
the removal, impound and release of the vehicle, including ensuring that the
motor vehicle is properly removed from the scene of the incident and the
vehicle, personal property enclosed therein, is secured and safeguarded, and
any passengers in the vehicle, including children are assisted. All owners of
a motor vehicle shall be jointly and severally liable for the administrative
and public safety fee.



   (D)   Upon demonstration that it has the right to possession of a
seized motor vehicle, a lessor, whether a rental agency or otherwise, or
lienholder of a motor vehicle shall have the right to pay the administrative
and public safety fee and be issued a release from the Carol Stream Police
Department authorizing it to gain possession of the vehicle.



   (E)   The administrative and public safety fee is separate and
distinct from, and in addition to, any fees or costs owed by the owner to a
private towing company for the towing and storage of the vehicle.



(Ord. 2010-01-02, passed 1-19-2010; Ord. 2012-02-02, passed 2-6-2012)



§ 8-8-3  SEIZURE AND IMPOUND PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Whenever a police officer has reason to believe that a motor
vehicle is subject to seizure and impound pursuant to § 8-8-2, the police
officer shall order that the vehicle be seized and impounded. The Carol
Stream Police Department shall utilize the services of a private towing
company. If towed, the motor vehicle must be impounded and stored in a secure
facility owned, leased or operated by the private towing company.



   (B)   The police officer shall, at the time the vehicle is towed,
notify or make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner, lessee or person
identifying himself or herself as the owner of the vehicle, or any person who
is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the offense of the
following:



      (1)   The seizure and impound of the vehicle;



      (2)   The owner’s right to retrieve the vehicle by payment
of the administrative and public safety fee to the village and towing and
storage fees and costs to the private towing company;



      (3)   The availability of posting a bond in the full amount of
the administrative and public safety fee;



      (4)   The date, time and place of the initial hearing before
an Administrative Hearing Officer to determine whether or not there was
probable cause for the seizure and impound; and



      (5)   The vehicle will remain impounded pending the
administrative hearing unless the owner or lessee posts a bond in an amount
equal to the administrative and public safety fee.



   (C)   If a properly licensed person authorized by the owner or the
operator of the motor vehicle is present and capable to provide for the
lawful immediate removal of the motor vehicle, and said motor vehicle is not
required to be held as evidence in regard to the violation, subject to
forfeiture pursuant to 720 ILCS 5/36-1, or otherwise subject to impound
pursuant to state law, the police officer shall allow that individual to
promptly remove the motor vehicle without it being subject to seizure and
impound. The police officer shall not be under any duty or requirement to:



      (1)   Inform the person being arrested that he or she may
contact another person to remove the vehicle from the scene of the incident;



      (2)   Allow a driver being arrested to make or send a
telephone call, electronic message or other attempt to contact a person to
drive the vehicle from the scene of the arrest; and



      (3)   Initiate such call, message or contact another person on
behalf of the arrestee.



   (D)   Upon the arrest of a driver for violations referenced in §
8-8-2, the vehicle shall not be removed from the scene by any owner, or
another person authorized by the owner, if the police officer determines that
the vehicle should not be released due to the applicability of § 8-8-8.



   (E)   The imposition of the administrative and public safety fee
shall not apply if the vehicle driven by a person arrested in connection with
the offenses identified in § 8-8-2, was stolen at that time and the theft
was reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after the
theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered.



(Ord. 2010-01-02, passed 1-19-2010; Ord. 2012-02-02, passed 2-6-2012)



§ 8-8-4  RELEASE OF MOTOR VEHICLE; POSTING OF BOND.



   (A)   (1)   The owner of a motor vehicle that is seized and
impounded pursuant to this article may regain possession of the vehicle by
first:



         (a)   Paying to the village the $500 administrative and
public safety fee; or



         (b)   Posting a bond in the full amount of the
administrative and public safety fee.



      (2)   The fee or bond shall be paid at the Carol Stream Police
Department. The fee or bond shall only be paid with cash, credit card,
cashier’s or certified check, or other type of payment acceptable to the
village that has the legal effect of being equivalent to the aforementioned
methods of payment.



   (B)   Upon payment of the fee or bond, the Department shall provide
the owner with a document authorizing the release of the vehicle from the
private towing company. No release shall be granted unless proof of insurance
is provided. The owner may present the Department-issued document authorizing
release to the private towing company and, upon payment of any fees and costs
to company for towing and storage of the vehicle, shall regain possession of
the vehicle.



(Ord. 2010-01-02, passed 1-19-2010; Ord. 2012-02-02, passed 2-6-2012)



§ 8-8-5  NOTICE OF SEIZURE AND IMPOUND.



   (A)   The village shall, within ten days after a vehicle is seized
and impounded pursuant to this article, send a written notice by first class
mail to the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle and any lienholder of
record. The notice shall be served upon the owner, lessee and lienholder of
record by personal service or first class mail to the addresses registered
with the Secretary of State.



   (B)   The notice shall:



      (1)   State that the motor vehicle was seized and impounded;



      (2)   Contain all pertinent facts relating to the date, time
and reason for the seizure and impound;



      (3)   Specify the procedures by which possession of the
vehicle may be regained;



      (4)   State that the failure to regain possession of the
vehicle, pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall result in the
vehicle being disposed of pursuant to law; and



      (5)   Provide the date and time of the scheduled initial
hearing date, which shall not be more than 45 days after the impound of the
vehicle.



(Ord. 2010-01-02, passed 1-19-2010; Ord. 2012-02-02, passed 2-6-2012)



§ 8-8-6  ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS.



   (A)   The administrative hearing shall be conducted by a Hearing
Officer who shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of
Illinois for at least three years.



   (B)   Administrative hearing procedures shall be as follows.



      (1)   On the date of the initial hearing, the owner, any
lessee and any lienholder of record shall appear and either admit or deny
probable cause for the seizure and impound of the vehicle. If an admission is
entered, or if the owner, any lessee and any lienholder of record fail to
appear, the case shall be disposed of at that time, with an order/default
order in favor of the village, which order/default order shall require the
payment to the village of the $500 administrative fee and towing and storage
costs to the applicable tow company, and the continued impound of the motor
vehicle until the owner of record, any lessee or lienholder of record pays to
the village the $500 administrative fee and towing and storage costs to the
applicable towing company. If the owner of record, any lessee or any
lienholder of record enters a denial, an evidentiary hearing shall be
scheduled.



      (2)   All parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
present testimony and evidence at the hearing. Continuances of the hearing
date must be made in person before the Hearing Officer and may be granted
upon a showing of good cause. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at
the hearing, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible, subject to the
discretion of the Hearing Officer.



      (3)   The original or a legible copy of the charging document
signed by the village officer certifying to the correctness of the
information contained therein shall be prima facie evidence of the facts
specified therein.



      (4)   If the Hearing Officer determines by a preponderance of
evidence that the seizure and impound was proper, the Hearing Officer shall
enter a final order finding the owner of the vehicle liable to the village
for the administrative and public safety fee in the amount of $500. In the
event a bond was posted, it will be retained by the village as final payment
of the administrative and public safety fee. If the Hearing Officer
determines by a preponderance of evidence that the seizure and impound was
not proper, the Hearing Officer shall enter a final order for the return of
the vehicle or the bond. A finding that the seizure and impound was not
proper shall not have any bearing on whether the owner is obligated to pay
the towing and storage fees and costs, and the owner must pay all fees and
costs owed to the private towing company.



      (5)   The decision by the Hearing Officer on the issue of
whether the seizure and impound was proper, shall constitute a final
determination for purposes of judicial review and shall be subject to review
pursuant to the Illinois Administrative Review Act, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.,
as now or hereafter amended. A party must exhaust its administrative remedies
prior to seeking judicial review.



   (C)   Any owner, lessee or lienholder may waive, in writing, his,
her or their right to a hearing.



(Ord. 2010-01-02, passed 1-19-2010; Ord. 2012-02-02, passed 2-6-2012)



§ 8-8-7  COLLECTION OF UNPAID ADMINISTRATIVE AND PUBLIC SAFETY FEE.



   (A)   If an administrative and public safety fee is imposed pursuant
to this article, the fee shall constitute a debt due and owing the Village of
Carol Stream. The village may collect on the debt using all means permitted
by law, including, without limitation, obtaining a judgment on the debt and
enforcing such judgment against the owner, or disposing of vehicle as
unclaimed vehicle.



   (B)   The village may commence legal proceedings to collect an
unpaid administrative and public safety fee, or take actions to dispose of
the impounded vehicle:



      (1)   Thirty-five days after a determination was made at the
requested hearing that the seizure and impound was proper, and no petition
was filed in the Circuit Court seeking judicial review of the Administrative
Hearing Officer’s determination or other review;



      (2)   Thirty days after a final order is rendered by a judge
of the Circuit Court whenever a petition seeking judicial review was filed by
a party; or



      (3)   Fifteen days after the notice referenced in § 8-8-6,
was mailed and the administrative hearing was waived in writing.



(Ord. 2010-01-02, passed 1-19-2010; Ord. 2012-02-02, passed 2-6-2012)



§ 8-8-8  RELEASE OF MOTOR VEHICLE NOT ALLOWED.



   (A)   The provisions of this article authorizing an owner, or other
party, to regain possession of a motor vehicle are not applicable when
vehicle or asset forfeiture proceedings have been instituted under state or
federal drug asset forfeiture laws or 720 ILCS 5/36-1 et seq. or 720 ILCS
5/36.5. In such case, the village shall not release, or dispose of, the
vehicle to any person, except as consistent with those proceedings.



   (B)   In the event the Carol Stream Police Department determines
that the vehicle seized and impounded pursuant to this article should not be
released to its owner or other persons, or disposed of as an unclaimed
vehicle, due to the need to retain the vehicle as part of a continuing
criminal investigation, or as evidence in a crime, then the village shall
notify the owner that the vehicle will be retained and not released, except
as required by law.



(Ord. 2010-01-02, passed 1-19-2010; Ord. 2012-02-02, passed 2-6-2012)



§ 8-8-9  MULTIPLE OWNERS.



   Whenever in this article the word “owner” is used, it shall apply
to all owners. This article presumes that all owners have equal rights to a
seized and impounded vehicle. In instances of multiple owners of a vehicle,
the village shall not have any duty or responsibility to inquire or determine
whether all owners concur with, or object to, any action taken, or omissions,
by any one owner in relation to the vehicle seized and impounded.



(Ord. 2010-01-02, passed 1-19-2010; Ord. 2012-02-02, passed 2-6-2012)



§ 8-8-10  FAILURE TO CLAIM VEHICLE.



   Any motor vehicle that is not reclaimed within 30 days after the
expiration of the time during which the owner may seek judicial review of the
Hearing Officers decision or, if judicial review is sought, the time at which
a final judgment is rendered in favor of the village; or the time a final
administrative decision is rendered against any owner, lessee or lienholder
of record who fails to appear at the hearing, may be disposed of as abandoned
and unclaimed as provided by law; provided that, where proceedings have been
instituted under state or federal forfeiture laws, the village may not
dispose of the vehicle, except as consistent with the forfeiture proceedings.



(Ord. 2010-01-02, passed 1-19-2010; Ord. 2012-02-02, passed 2-6-2012)



ARTICLE 9:  AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEMS



Section



   8-9-1   Definitions



   8-9-2   Establishment of systems



   8-9-3   Authorization to enter into agreements



   8-9-4   Administrator



   8-9-5   Violation notice



   8-9-6   Technician’s determination



   8-9-7   Hearing opportunity



   8-9-8   Determination of liability



   8-9-9   Determination notice



   8-9-10   Setting aside final determination



   8-9-11   Suspension notice



   8-9-12   Challenging accuracy of notice and/or report



   8-9-13   Non-residents may contest notices



   8-9-14   Penalty



§ 8-9-1  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this article, words or terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context or usage clearly indicates that another meaning
is intended.



   ADMINISTRATOR. The Village’s Traffic Control Administrator.



   AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW VIOLATION. A violation described in 625 ILCS
5/11-208.6 of the Code or a violation of any municipal ordinance involving
the operation of a motor vehicle.



   AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCE-MENT SYSTEM. A device with one or more
motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a red light signal to
produce recorded images of motor vehicles entering an intersection against a
red light signal in violation of 625 ILCS 5/11-306 of the Code or a similar
provision of a village ordinance.



   CERTIFIED REPORT. A report concerning five or more unpaid fines or
penalties for automated traffic law violations made by the village to the
Secretary in accordance with 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5 of the Code or a municipal
ordinance.



   CODE. The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.



   DETERMINATION NOTICE. A notice of final determination of automated
traffic law violation liability issued pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 of the
Code and pursuant to the provisions of this article.



   RECORDED IMAGES. Images showing the time, date and location of an
automated traffic law violation recorded by an automated traffic law
enforcement system on:



      (1)   Two or more photographs;



      (2)   Two or more microphotographs;



      (3)   Two or more electronic images; or



      (4)   A video recording showing the motor vehicle and, on at
least one image or portion of the recording, clearly identifying the
registration plate number of the motor vehicle.



   SECRETARY. The Illinois Secretary of State.



   SUSPENSION NOTICE. A notice of impending driver’s license suspension
issued pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 of the Code and pursuant to the
provisions of this article.



   SYSTEM. Individually, an automated traffic law enforcement system or,
collectively, automated traffic law enforcement systems established in the
village pursuant to this article.



   VILLAGE. The Village of Carol Stream, DuPage County, Illinois.



   VIOLATION NOTICE. An automated traffic law violation notice issued
pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.6 of the Code and
pursuant to the provisions of this article.



(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)



§ 8-9-2  ESTABLISHMENT OF SYSTEMS.



   The village hereby determines to establish systems at intersections
located within the corporate limits of the village that are mutually selected
by Redflex Traffic Systems, Inc., and the municipality and approved by the
Village Board by motion.



(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)



§ 8-9-3  AUTHORIZATION TO ENTER INTO AGREEMENTS.



   The village is authorized to enter into agreements, substantially in
the forms attached hereto as Group Exhibit A and incorporated herein by
reference (collectively, the “agreements”), with Redflex Traffic Systems,
Inc. (“Redflex”) for the design and implementation of the system(s) and
for services related to the system(s). The agreements shall be subject to
final modification by the attorneys for the village and Redflex. The Mayor is
hereby authorized and directed to execute the agreements, once finalized,
thereby binding the village to their terms. The Village Clerk is authorized
and directed to attest to the Mayor’s signature, as necessary.



(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)



§ 8-9-4  ADMINISTRATOR.



   There is hereby established the office of Administrator, which shall be
filled by appointment of the Mayor. The Administrator or his or her designee
shall be authorized to adopt, distribute and process violation notices and
other notices required by 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 of the Code or a municipal
ordinance, collect money paid as fines and penalties for automated traffic
law violations and operate an administrative adjudication system for
automated traffic law violations. The Administrator is also authorized to
make a certified report to the Secretary pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5 of
the Code, and any such certified report shall contain the information
required under 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5(c) of the Code.



(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)



§ 8-9-5  VIOLATION NOTICE.



   A violation notice, the contents of which shall comply with the
requirements of 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.6 of the Code, as
amended, shall be served by mail to the address of the registered owner of a
vehicle cited for an automated traffic law violation as recorded with the
Secretary within 30 days after the Secretary notifies the village of the
identity of the owner of the vehicle, but in no event later than 90 days
after the violation. Service of a violation notice shall be deemed complete
as of the date of deposit in the United States mail. The original or a
facsimile of a violation notice or, in the case of a violation notice
produced by a computerized device, a printed record generated by the device
showing the facts entered on the violation notice, shall be retained by the
Administrator, and shall be a record kept in the ordinary course of business.
A violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance with this article
and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 of the Code, a copy of the violation notice or the
computer generated record shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima
facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the violation notice.
The violation notice, copy or computer generated record shall be admissible
in any subsequent administrative or legal proceedings.



(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)



§ 8-9-6  TECHNICIAN’S DETERMINATION.



   Before a citation may be issued for any automated traffic law
violation, a determination must be made by a technician employed or
contracted by the village that, based on inspection of recorded images
generated by the system, the motor vehicle was being operated in violation of
625 ILCS 5/11-208.6 of the Code or an ordinance of the village. If the
technician determines that the vehicle entered the intersection as part of a
funeral procession or in order to yield the right-of-way to an emergency
vehicle, a citation shall not be issued.



(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)



§ 8-9-7  HEARING OPPORTUNITY.



   The registered owner of the vehicle cited in a violation notice shall
have the opportunity for a hearing in which said owner may contest the merits
of the alleged violation. The lessee of a vehicle cited in a violation notice
likewise shall be afforded the opportunity for a hearing of the same kind
afforded the registered owner. The formal or technical rules of evidence
shall not apply at any such hearing. Such hearings shall be recorded, and the
person conducting the hearing on behalf of the Administrator shall be
empowered to administer oaths and to secure by subpoena both the attendance
and testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant books and papers.
Persons appearing at such a hearing may be represented by counsel at their
own expense.



(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)



§ 8-9-8  DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY.



   (A)   A final determination of automated traffic law violation
liability shall occur following failure to pay the fine or penalty after a
Hearing Officer’s determination of violation liability.



   (B)   The village finds that a person chosen as a Hearing Officer
for any administrative adjudication undertaken by the village, who is
otherwise qualified, shall have fulfilled the education and training
standards required if that individual, at the time of his or her appointment,
has served for at least ten years in the position of a State’s Attorney or
Assistant State’s Attorney in the State of Illinois.



   (C)   Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the
alleged violation in the time and manner specified in a prior mailed notice,
the Hearing Officer’s determination of violation liability shall become
final:



      (1)   Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that
determination; or



      (2)   Upon expiration of the period for filing such a petition
without a filing having been made.



(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. 2009-10-58, passed 10-19-2009)



§ 8-9-9  DETERMINATION NOTICE.



   A determination notice, the contents of which shall comply with the
requirements of 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 of the Code, as amended, shall be sent
following a final determination of automated traffic law violation liability
and the conclusion of judicial review procedures taken under 625 ILCS
5/11-208.3 of the Code. A determination notice shall be sent by first class
United States mail, postage prepaid, to the address of the registered owner
of the cited vehicle as recorded with the Secretary or, if any notice to that
address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a
United States Post Office approved database or, under 625 ILCS 5/11-1306 of
the Code, to the lessee of the cited vehicle at the last address known to the
lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of the lease or, if any notice to
that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded
in a United States Post Office database. Service of the determination notice
shall be deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.



(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)



§ 8-9-10  SETTING ASIDE FINAL DETERMINATION.



   (A)   A person owing an unpaid fine or penalty for automated traffic
law violation penalty may file a petition to set aside a final determination
of such liability within 21 days after service by the village of a
determination notice. Such a petition shall be filed by sending the same,
together with any documentation in support thereof, to the Administrator by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal delivery to the
Administrator.



   (B)   The grounds for such a petition shall be limited to:



      (1)   The person not having been the owner or lessee of the
cited vehicle on the date the violation notice was issued;



      (2)   The person having already paid the fine or penalty for
the violation in question; and



      (3)   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for
a hearing.



   (C)   A hearing on such a petition shall be held within 30 days
after the filing of same. In the event that such a petition is granted upon a
showing of just cause, and the subject determination of automated traffic law
violation liability is thereby set aside, the registered owner shall be
provided with a hearing on the merits for that violation.



(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)



§ 8-9-11  SUSPENSION NOTICE.



   A suspension notice, the contents of which shall comply with the
requirements of 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5 and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 of the Code, as
amended, shall be sent to the person liable for any fine or penalty that
remains due and owing on five or more unpaid automated traffic law
violations. The suspension notice shall be sent by first class United States
mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the Secretary or, if any
notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known
address recorded in a United States Post Office approved database. Service of
a suspension notice shall be deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the
United States mail.



(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)



§ 8-9-12  CHALLENGING ACCURACY OF NOTICE AND/OR REPORT.



   (A)   If the Administrator provides a suspension notice to a vehicle
owner and subsequently makes a certified report to the Secretary, the subject
vehicle owner may challenge the accuracy of the certified report in writing.



   (B)   To do so, the vehicle owner must submit to the Administrator a
written statement under oath, together with any supporting documentation,
establishing one of the following grounds for challenging the accuracy of the
certified report:



      (1)   The person was not the owner or lessee of the subject
vehicle or vehicles receiving five or more automated traffic law violations
on the date or dates such violation notices were issued; or



      (2)   The person already paid the fines or penalties for the
five or more automated traffic law violations indicated on the certified
report.



   (C)   Such statement and supporting documentation must be sent to
the Administrator by certified mail, return receipt requested, or
hand-delivered to the Administrator within five days after the person
receives notice from the Secretary that the person’s driver’s license
will be suspended at the end of a specified period of time unless the
Secretary is presented with a notice from the village certifying that the
fines or penalties due and owing have been paid or that the inclusion of the
person’s name on the certified report was in error.



(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)



§ 8-9-13  NON-RESIDENTS MAY CONTEST NOTICES.



   Non-residents of the village who receive violation notices may contest
the merits of the alleged automated traffic law violation without attending a
hearing by sending a signed statement, under oath, together with any
supporting documentation, to the Administrator via certified mail, return
receipt requested, within 21 days after service of the violation notice. Such
a statement shall set forth the reasons why a finding of liability should not
be entered. The Administrator shall rule on such a statement within ten days
after receipt of same, and shall inform the non-resident of his or her
decision within ten days thereafter.



(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)



§ 8-9-14  PENALTY.



   Unless the driver of the motor vehicle cited for an automated traffic
law violation received a uniform traffic citation from a police officer at
the time of the violation, the owner of the motor vehicle is subject to a
penalty of $100 per violation. In the event that such penalty is not paid
within 21 days after service of a violation notice, the penalty shall
increase to $200.



(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)



CHAPTER 9: HEALTH REGULATIONS



      Article



         1.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE



         1.1.   SOLID WASTE COLLECTORS



         2.   WEEDS



         3.   REGULATION OF DOGS AND ANIMALS



         4.   TREES



         5.   FEEDING OF WILD ANIMALS PROHIBITED



ARTICLE 1:  GARBAGE AND REFUSE



Section



   9-1-1   Definitions



   9-1-2   Disposal of garbage



   9-1-3   Disposal of refuse



   9-1-4   Residential collections



   9-1-5   Multi-family, commercial, business and industrial collections



   9-1-6   Containers



   9-1-7   Placement of containers



   9-1-8   Throwing, depositing of garbage and refuse prohibited



   9-1-9   Uncovered garbage



   9-1-10   Accumulation of refuse



   9-1-11   Deposit on streets



   9-1-12   Open burning prohibited



   9-1-13   Removal of garbage and refuse; lien



   9-1-14   Nuisance declared



   9-1-15   Penalty for violation of Ch. 9



Cross-reference:



   Solid waste collectors, see Ch. 9, Art. 1.1



§ 9-1-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose interpretation and enforcement of this article, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



   GARBAGE. Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food, and wastes from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.



   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Items which have post-consumer use or value
including, but not limited to, the following: paper (newspaper, Kraft paper
and mixed paper), glass, steel and bi-metal cans, aluminum, HDPE plastics
(milk, water and laundry detergent bottles) and PET plastics (soda bottles).



   REFUSE. Combustible refuse, including but not limited to paper,
cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, wood furniture, bedding;
non-combustible refuse, including, but not limited to, metals, tin cans,
metal furniture, glass, crockery, other mineral waste, street rubbish and
ashes, residue from fires used for cooking and for heating buildings. REFUSE
shall not include earth and wastes from building operations, nor shall it
include solid wastes resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing
operations such as food processing wastes, boiler house cinders, lumber,
scraps and shavings.



   YARD WASTE. Accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree
limbs and other materials accumulated as the result of the maintenance of
lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees.



(Ord. 91-03-23, passed 3-26-1991)



§ 9-1-2  DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE.



   All garbage shall be securely wrapped in paper or plastic and placed in
containers, as specified herein, for collection by private scavengers in
accordance with the provisions of this article. Garbage may also be disposed
of by finely grinding and shredding in a garbage disposal unit leading
through pipes to a sanitary sewer.



§ 9-1-3  DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.



   Refuse shall be disposed of by placing such refuse in containers, as
specified herein, for collection by private scavengers in accordance with the
provisions of this article.



§ 9-1-4  RESIDENTIAL COLLECTIONS.



   (A)   General. Those persons owning or occupying single-family
residential units, condominium units and multi-family units are required to
provide garbage and refuse collection only from an entity which is franchised
to provide such services by the village. Collection must take place at least
once in every seven-day period; provided, however, that, any multi-family
unit, which received its garbage and refuse collection under a written
contract, which was in force on 12-1-2007, with a provider which did not
possess a village franchise, may continue to receive that service for the
term of the contract only and not including later negotiated extensions. In
addition, the owner or occupants of multi-family apartments shall only be
required to utilize an entity that possesses a village franchise if that
entity agrees to provide services at a cost equal to or less than
alternative, equivalent proposals submitted by other service providers.



   (B)   Recycling. Single-family residential units, condominium units
and multi-family units are required to provide recycling services only from
an entity which is franchised to provide such services by the village. With
regards to multi-family units, the exceptions provided for in division (A)
herein shall also apply to recycling services.



   (C)   Title to containers. All recycling bins shall remain the
property of the village and shall not be removed from the property on which
the dwelling unit is located. Any damage to or loss of a recycling bin shall
be reported to the village’s Public Works Department by the primary user of
the recycling bin or by the person responsible for the damage or loss within
24 hours of the damage or loss. The cost to repair or replace a recycling bin
damaged or lost shall be borne by the person responsible for such damage or
loss.



   (D)   Pick up without contract prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
any person, firm or corporation  to collect, obtain, possess or pick up any
recyclable item placed in or adjacent to village recycling bins placed for
collection in front of a residence as part of the village’s curbside
recycling program or from any container on village property, unless such
person, firm or corporation has a contract with the village for the
collection of recyclable materials.



   (E)   Duty to pay for refuse collection. Any person occupying a
place of abode for residential purposes shall be required to dispose of solid
waste generated through the approved municipal solid waste franchise system
and shall pay the rates and charges agreed to by the village in a franchise
agreement.



   (F)   Responsibility for collection. Any place of abode or any
premises occupied for residential purposes shall be prima facie evidence that
waste is being produced and accumulated on such premises, and it shall be the
duty of the designated representatives of the village, in the absence of
satisfactory proof to the County Health Officer or village representatives
that other adequate means of waste disposal or removal have been provided, to
inspect the premises and remove therefrom any and all waste found thereon,
for which removal as established by the required fees shall be paid by the
occupant(s), owner(s) or person(s) in possession of said premises, with said
occupant(s), owner(s) and person(s) in possession being jointly and severably
liable for the payment of the required fees.



(Ord. 91-03-23, passed 3-26-1991; Ord. 2005-09-52, passed 9-19-2005; Ord.
2007-12-51, passed 12-17-2007)



§ 9-1-5  MULTI-FAMILY, COMMERCIAL, BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL COLLECTIONS.



   (A)   Multi-family, commercial business and industrial collection
standards.  Collections shall be made by private scavengers from
multi-family, commercial, business and industrial establishments at least
once every seven day period.  Every person owning or in possession, charge
or control of any such establishment shall be required to provide and at all
times keep in a suitable place, readily accessible to the garbage collector,
garbage containers capable of holding all garbage and refuse which would
ordinarily accumulate on such premises between the times of successive
collections.  Such containers shall be enclosed on three sides and the
garbage containers shall not be visible from the street or adjacent
properties.



   (B)   Hours of collection for non- residential properties. 
Non-residential solid waste collection service in all areas of the village
shall be limited to Monday through Friday from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
Collection service in non- residential areas of the village may be extended
to Saturdays between 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. during those weeks which contain
a nationally observed holiday.



(Ord. 2009-10-57, passed 10-19-2009; Ord. 2014-02-08, passed 2-18-2014; Ord.
2016-07-32, passed 7-18-2016)



§ 9-1-6  CONTAINERS.



   All containers used for the deposit of garbage and refuse shall be of
galvanized or non-corrodible metal or plastic, rodent and insect proof,
waterproof and of a suitable gauge and construction to ensure durability,
equipped with a cover and handles so that they may be lifted, wheeled or
carried by one person. Durable plastic bags, securely fastened, may also be
used. No such container shall have a capacity of less than five gallons, nor
more than 30 gallons, unless such container is designed and equipped to be
hydraulically lifted by a waste disposal vehicle, in which case these
specially designed containers may have a capacity of 90 gallons.



§ 9-1-7  PLACEMENT OF CONTAINERS.



   All containers for recycling, garbage and refuse shall be placed by
residents at the curb line of the premises served not earlier than 6:00 p.m.
on the day before the scheduled collection, and shall be removed on or before
midnight of the day on which the collection is made.  Thereafter, containers
shall be situated or located so as to be hidden from view of the street and
shall not be placed so as to constitute a nuisance to adjacent property or to
the occupants thereof.  Any employee of the village vested with police
powers in the enforcement of code compliance and issuance of citations for
ordinance violations in accordance with § 2-7-13, and who observes a
violation of this section, may issue a "hang-on ticket" as provided in
Chapter 15, Article 4 of this Code pursuant to which the person cited may pay
the sum of $25 within the time stated on the ticket as a compromise or
settlement to avoid the prosecution of an ordinance violation in the Circuit
Court.



(Ord. 2008-02-02, passed 2-4-2008; Ord. 2014-02-08, passed 2-18-2014)



§ 9-1-8  THROWING, DEPOSITING OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to throw or deposit garbage, refuse and yard waste
on any public or private property within the village, including retention/
detention basins and creeks, whether occupied or unoccupied; except that, the
owner or person in control of the property may maintain private receptacles
for garbage and refuse which are waste products resulting from the occupancy
of the property itself. Such receptacles shall comply with the provisions of
this article or other ordinances of the village and shall be placed and
maintained in such a manner so that the garbage and refuse deposited within
such receptacles shall not be carried, deposited or wind blown upon any
street, sidewalk or other public place, or upon any private property.



§ 9-1-9  UNCOVERED GARBAGE.



   It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the
village any garbage or other material subject to decay, other than yard
waste, except in a tightly covered, waterproof container.



§ 9-1-10  ACCUMULATION OF REFUSE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to place or permit to accumulate any
dust, ashes or refuse, or any material anywhere in the village, except in a
covered container so that it cannot be wind blown, except that which may be
placed in a compost pile as specified in division (B) of this section.



   (B)   Compostable materials such as grass trimmings, wood waste,
leaves, weeds and other garden refuse may be placed in a compost pile;
provided, it is placed in such a way so the material will not be wind blown.
The following additional materials, namely shrubbery, vines, fruits,
vegetables, egg shells, coffee grounds, houseplant materials and cut flowers
may only be placed in an institutional compost pile as part of a school
sponsored source reduction educational project.



   (C)   Compost piles shall be no more than five feet in height and
shall not have a maximum ground or base area of more than 100 square feet.



(Ord. 2000-01-06, passed 1-17-2000)



§ 9-1-11  DEPOSIT ON STREETS.



   It shall be unlawful to deposit or permit any garbage or refuse to fall
from any vehicle on any public street, alley or public place in the village;
provided that, this section shall not be construed to prohibit placing
garbage or refuse in a container complying with the provisions of this
article preparatory to having such material collected and disposed of in the
manner provided herein.



§ 9-1-12  OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED.



   No person, firm or corporation shall burn or set fire to, or allow to
be burned or set fire to, any garbage, hay, grass, leaves or any combustible
material whatsoever within the village. This provision shall apply only to
open outdoor burning.



§ 9-1-13  REMOVAL OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE; LIEN.



   Whenever the owner of property, after reasonable notice, refuses or
neglects to remove garbage and refuse found upon such property, the village
may remove or see to the removal of such garbage and refuse and may collect
from such owner the reasonable cost of such removal. In the event that the
village removes or sees to the removal of such garbage and refuse, it shall
file a lien to recover the reasonable cost of that removal within 60 days
after such cost and expense is incurred. The filing of such lien shall be in
accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-20-13.



§ 9-1-14  NUISANCE DECLARED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or bury garbage within the
village or to permit same to accumulate in any manner within the village so
as to create a nuisance or attract flies, vermin or rats.



§ 9-1-15  PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF CH. 9.



   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a code violation, punishable by a fine of not less
than $200 or more than $750 for each separate offense.  Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall constitute a
separate offense.  In addition to a fine, the court may impose a period of
conditional discharge as defined in 730 ILCS 5/5-1-4 or court supervision as
defined in 730 ILCS 5/5-1-21 of the Criminal Code for a period of up to six
months, an order of restitution, an order to perform community service, an
order to complete an education program and/or any other appropriate penalties
or conditions authorized in any section of this code or ordinance or any
conditions for conditional discharge set forth in 730 ILCS 5/5-6-3 or for
court supervision in 730 ILCS 5/5-6-3.1 as the foregoing are amended from
time to time.



(Ord. 2014-02-08, passed 2-18-2014)



ARTICLE 1.1:  SOLID WASTE COLLECTORS



Section



   9-1.1-1   Definitions



   9-1.1-2   Exclusive franchise



   9-1.1-3   Removal of garbage, refuse, recyclables and yard waste
without franchise prohibited



   9-1.1-4   Penalty for violation of Art. 1.1



Cross-reference:



   Garbage and refuse generally, see Ch. 9, Art. 1



§ 9-1.1-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARBAGE. Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food, and wastes from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.



   RECYCLABLES. At a minimum, brown paper bags, corrugated boxes, frozen
food packages, magazines and catalogues, mixed paper, newspapers, paperboard,
telephone books, wet strength carrier stock, aerosol cans, aluminum cans,
aluminum foil, aseptic packaging and gable top containers, formed steel
containers, glass bottles and jars, HDPE (#2) plastic containers, PET (#1)
plastic containers, plastic six- and 12-pack rings, polystyrene (#6), steel
cans, steel paint cans and lids, and any other items which the intermediate
processing facility in the village or similar facility may add to its list of
items accepted at the facility.



   REFUSE. Combustible refuse, including but not limited to paper,
cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, wood furniture, bedding;
non-combustible refuse, including, but not limited to, tin cans, metal
furniture, glass, crockery, other mineral waste, street rubbish and ashes,
residue from fires used for cooking and for heating buildings. REFUSE shall
not include earth and waste from building operations, nor shall it include
solid waste resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing operations
such as food processing wastes, boiler house cinders, lumber, scraps and
shavings.



   SOLID WASTE COLLECTORS. Any person, firm or corporation who provides
collection or removal services of garbage, refuse, recyclables or yard waste.



   YARD WASTE. Accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree
limbs and other materials accumulated as the result of the maintenance of
lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees.



(Ord. 96-05-33, passed 5-6-1996)



§ 9-1.1-2  EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE.



   The village may, in its discretion, grant an exclusive franchise to a
solid waste collector, granting the sole right to collect garbage, refuse,
recyclables and yard waste for single-family detached and attached dwellings
or multi-family dwellings or to such classes of dwellings as shall be
specified in the franchise.



(Ord. 96-05-33, passed 5-6-1996)



§ 9-1.1-3  REMOVAL OF GARBAGE, REFUSE, RECYCLABLES AND YARD WASTE WITHOUT
FRANCHISE PROHIBITED.



   No person, firm or corporation shall provide garbage, refuse,
recyclables or yard waste collection or removal services from single-family
detached or attached residences or from multiple-family residential complexes
without first acquiring a franchise from the village. In the event that the
village has elected to grant an exclusive franchise pursuant to § 9-1.1-2,
no other person, firm or corporation shall be granted a permit for collection
of removal services for dwellings covered by the exclusive franchise. No
property owner shall enter into a contract or otherwise permit a solid waste
collector without a franchise to provide collection or removal services for
property within the village.



(Ord. 96-05-33, passed 5-6-1996)



§ 9-1.1-4  PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF ART. 1.1.



   Any person, firm or corporation providing garbage, refuse, recyclables
and yard waste collection or removal services without a franchise or any
property owner who contracts with or otherwise pays a solid waste collector
who does not hold a franchise for removal of garbage, refuse, recyclables or
yard wastes from his or her property shall be in violation of this article
and shall be subject to the penalties set forth in § 9-1-15 of this code.



(Ord. 96-05-33, passed 5-6-1996)



ARTICLE 2:  WEEDS



Section



   9-2-1   Definition



   9-2-2   Nuisance prohibited



   9-2-3   Notice to abate



   9-2-4   Abatement by village



   9-2-5   Lien against property



Cross-reference:



   Fees, see § 6-13-19



§ 9-2-1  DEFINITION.



   The term WEEDS, as used in this article, shall mean and include any
annual or perennial herbaceous plant, of volunteer growth, which is not
cultivated or specifically grown for human food; any high or rank growth that
may conceal filthy deposits or constitute a fire hazard when dry, or any
non-cultivated plant which reaches a height of eight inches.



§ 9-2-2  NUISANCE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for anyone owning property in the village to
permit weeds upon such property to grow to a height exceeding eight inches
anywhere in the village within 500 feet of a residential, industrial or
commercial building, or where the growth of weeds presents a safety hazard or
a hazard to the flow of traffic. Any weed exceeding such height is hereby
declared to be a nuisance.



§ 9-2-3  NOTICE TO ABATE.



   (A)   Where any weed has grown to a height exceeding eight inches
within the village within 500 feet of a residential, industrial or commercial
building, or where the growth of weeds presents a safety hazard or a hazard
to the flow of traffic, the owners of the real estate upon which the weeds
have been permitted or allowed to grow shall be sent a notice stating that if
the weeds are not cut within ten days after the notice, the village will
provide for the cutting of the weeds and will place a lien upon the real
estate affected.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Community Development Department
to serve or cause to be served, by mail or otherwise, a notice upon the owner
of any premises on which weeds or plants are permitted to grow in violation
of the provisions of this article, and to demand the abatement of the
nuisance within three days.



(Ord. 98-03-21, passed 3-16-1998; Ord. 2014-02-08, passed 2-18-2014)



§ 9-2-4  ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE.



   If the violation is not abated within the three-day period, the
village, through its duly appointed agent, shall enter upon the property
where such weeds are growing and shall proceed to destroy the weeds thereon
causing the violation.  Any expense incurred by the village in so doing
shall be a charge against the owner or person in control and such charge may
be recovered in an appropriate action of law.



(Ord. 2014-02-08, passed 2-18-2014)



§ 9-2-5  LIEN AGAINST PROPERTY.



   (A)   Any costs incurred by the village, or its duly appointed
officers or agents, in removing weeds from any property, shall be a lien upon
the real estate so affected, and such lien shall be superior to all other
liens and encumbrances, except tax liens; provided that, within 60 days after
such cost and expense is incurred, the village, or person performing the
service by authority of the village, in its or his or her own name, files
notice of lien in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of DuPage County.



   (B)   The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out the
following:



      (1)   A description of the real estate sufficient for
identification thereof;



      (2)   The amount of money representing the costs and expenses
incurred or payable for the service; and



      (3)   The date or dates when such costs and expenses were
incurred by the village or one acting under its direction and authority.



   (C)   Upon payment of the costs and expenses by the owner of or
persons interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the
lien shall be released by the village or person in whose name the lien has
been filed and the release shall be filed of record as in the case of filing
notice of lien.



ARTICLE 3:  REGULATION OF DOGS AND ANIMALS



Section



   9-3-1   License required



   9-3-2   Rabies inoculation required



   9-3-3   Registration; license fee; term of license



   9-3-4   License issued



   9-3-5   Tag and collar



   9-3-6   Licenses not transferable or refundable



   9-3-7   Records



   9-3-8   Dogs at large; leash requirements



   9-3-9   Impounding; redemption



   9-3-10   Animal bites



   9-3-11   Regulation of dangerous and vicious animals



   9-3-12   Limitation of animals



   9-3-13   Nuisances



   9-3-14   Control of defecation



   9-3-15   Provisions not applicable



   9-3-16   Humane treatment of birds and animals



   9-3-17   Birds



   9-3-18   Prohibitions; exceptions



   9-3-19   Horses, riding of



Cross-reference:



   Injury to animals, see § 14-1-2



§ 9-3-1  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person within the village to own, keep,
harbor or have custody of any dog over six months of age without first
obtaining a license from the village as herein provided.



§ 9-3-2  RABIES INOCULATION REQUIRED.



   Every owner or keeper of a dog within the corporate limits shall cause
such dog to be inoculated by the County Rabies Inspector, or by his or her
deputy, or a licensed veterinarian, with a prophylactic serum to prevent
rabies either annually or tri-annually depending upon the type of serum used.



§ 9-3-3  REGISTRATION; LICENSE FEE; TERM OF LICENSE.



   (A)   All dogs kept in the village shall be registered with the
Clerk as to sex, breed, color, name and name and address of the owner of such
dog. A certificate of inoculation against rabies, issued by the County Rabies
Inspector, or by his or her deputy, or by a licensed veterinarian, shall be
submitted to the Clerk for inspection at the time registration is made.



   (B)   The annual license fee shall be $3 for a male dog and a spayed
female dog, and $5 for a female dog.



   (C)   If the owner or keeper of any dog comes into possession of the
same after the expiration of six months of the license year, he or she shall
pay one-half of the annual fee provided herein for the remainder of the year.



   (D)   Each license shall expire on December 31 following the year
for which such license is issued.



§ 9-3-4  LICENSE ISSUED.



   Upon payment of the license fee and evidence of a certificate of
inoculation as required in § 9-3-3, the Clerk shall issue to the owner a
metallic tag bearing the legend “Carol Stream Dog Tag”, as well as the
license number and the year issued marked thereon. Any owner of a licensed
dog whose license tag has been lost may obtain a replacement tag upon the
payment of $1 to the Clerk.



§ 9-3-5  TAG AND COLLAR.



   Every owner of a dog within the village shall keep such license tag
securely attached to a collar or harness fastened around the neck or body of
such dog at all times when the dog is off the premises of the licensed owner.



§ 9-3-6  LICENSES NOT TRANSFERABLE OR REFUNDABLE.



   Dog licenses shall not be transferable from one dog to another and no
refunds shall be made on any dog license fee because of death of the dog or
the owner’s leaving the village before expiration of the license period.



§ 9-3-7  RECORDS.



   The Clerk shall forward to the Chief of the Police Department a copy of
all dog licenses issued. The Chief of Police shall keep, or cause to be kept,
a careful record of each registration and license issued for identifying
lost, stolen or impounded dogs.



§ 9-3-8  DOGS AT LARGE; LEASH REQUIREMENTS.



   No dog shall be permitted to run at large in the village, except upon
the premises of the owner of such dog, or upon other premises by authority of
the owner or occupant of such premises; provided, however, that, the area in
which the dog is permitted to run at large must be totally enclosed by a
fence of an adequate height to prevent the dog from escaping from the
enclosed area, or the dog must be restrained by a secure collar and leash or
chain which must be attached to a run line or to an anchor, so that the dog
may not move beyond the premises or the dog must be in the actual charge,
custody or control of some responsible person. Any dog taken outside of such
an enclosed yard shall be equipped with a secure collar and restrained upon a
secure leash of not more than six feet in length. Where a dog has been found
to be a dangerous or vicious animal, the provisions of this code which apply
to such animals shall be applicable.



(Ord. 91-02-15, passed 2-26-1991)



§ 9-3-9  IMPOUNDING; REDEMPTION.



   (A)   Licensed dogs.



      (1)   When any licensed dog shall be impounded, the Police
Department shall cause notice to be given in person or by telephone upon the
registered owner of any licensed dog impounded.



      (2)   If such dog is without a collar or harness with the
current license attached, it shall be deemed a licensed dog, for the purpose
of this section, if satisfactory proof is given to the Police Department by
the owner or keeper that such dog is licensed and that a collar, or harness
with a current license tag attached thereto, was placed on such dog, but had
subsequently been lost or taken from such animal.



      (3)   A licensed dog may be redeemed by the registered owner
or agent upon payment to the village of a fine of the sum of $10 for
violation of § 9-3-8, in addition to any fees charged by the DuPage County
Animal Control for the cost of keeping such dog while impounded.



   (B)   Unlicensed dogs. An unlicensed dog may be redeemed as provided
in division (A) of this section; however, the owner or agent of such dog
shall further be required to purchase the annual license fee provided in §
9-3-3.



§ 9-3-10  ANIMAL BITES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog or
other animal when notified that such dog or animal has bitten or scratched
any person, or has otherwise injured any person so as to cause an abrasion of
the skin, or any dog or other animal suspected of having rabies, to sell or
give away such dog or animal or to permit or allow such dog or animal to be
taken away beyond the limits of the county, but it shall be the duty of such
owner, upon receiving notice of the character aforesaid, to immediately place
such dog or animal in a duly licensed veterinary hospital where such dog or
animal shall be confined for a period of at least ten days for observation,
or deliver, or cause to be delivered, any such dog or animal to the Police
Department for such placement. In case such dog or animal is delivered to a
veterinary hospital, notice of the name and location of such hospital shall
be immediately furnished to the Police Department by the owner of such dog or
animal, and upon receipt of such dog or animal, the veterinary hospital shall
submit to the Police Department a certificate stating that such dog or animal
either shows no symptoms of rabies or does show symptoms of rabies. If, at
the expiration of the ten days of confinement in such veterinary hospital,
the veterinary hospital shall submit to the Police Department a second
certificate stating that the dog or animal does not have rabies, the dog or
animal may then be released by the Police Department.



   (B)   If such dog or animal should die during the interval of
observation, the intact brain shall forthwith be delivered to the laboratory
of the State Department of Public Health.



   (C)   If, however, evidence is presented that such dog or animal has
been inoculated against rabies within the time prescribed by law prior to the
biting, such dog or animal shall be confined in the house of its owner or in
a manner that will prohibit such dog or animal from biting any person for a
period of ten days, unless in the judgment of the Police Department or a
licensed veterinarian, circumstances are such that the dog or animal should
be confined elsewhere. Such dog or animal so confined shall be examined by a
licensed veterinarian on the first, fifth and tenth day during confinement.
If, at the expiration of the ten day confinement, the veterinarian shall
submit a certificate stating that the dog or animal does not have rabies, the
dog or animal may then be released by the Police Department.



   (D)   Any expense incurred in the handling of any dog or other
animal under this section shall be borne by the owner.



§ 9-3-11  REGULATION OF DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS.



   (A)   The owner of a dangerous, vicious or ferocious dog which may
cause annoyance or reason-able fear of bodily injury to a person by attacking
such person, shall keep the same confined in a secure enclosure or on a leash
controlled by the owner or keeper of such dog at all times, and shall not
permit such dog to be at large within the village.



   (B)   If any dangerous dog, when it is necessary for the protection
of any person or property, cannot safely be taken up and impounded, such dog
may be slain by any police officer of the village; provided, however, that in
all cases where any dog so slain has bitten any person or caused an abrasion
of the skin of any such person, it shall be the duty of the Police Department
slaying such dog to immediately deliver the carcass and brain of such dog to
the State Department of Public Health.



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall supersede any other
provisions contained within the village code; provided, however, that, the
provisions relating to animal pens shall be in addition to any other
provisions contained within the village code.



   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ANIMAL. Any warm or cold blooded non-human mammal, bird or
reptile, the keeping of which is not prohibited by § 9-3-18 of the village
code.



      DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any individual animal which, if a dog, when
unmuzzled and unleashed, or in case of another animal when  unrestrained in
a vicious or terrorizing manner, approaches any person in an apparent
attitude of attack, whether or not the animal completes its attack, or on
more than one occasion causes property damage anywhere within the village or
within one and one-half miles of the boundaries of the village other than the
owners.



      OWNER. Any person, partnership, corporation, or any other entity
owning, keeping, harboring or having care, custody or possession of an animal
whether temporary or permanent.



      VICIOUS ANIMAL.



         (a)   1.   Any individual animal that when unprovoked
inflicts physical injury on a human being or other animal either on public or
private property;



            2.   Any individual animal with an observable
propensity, tendency or disposition to attack without provocation, to cause
injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human being or other animals;



            3.   Any individual animal which attacks a human
being or other animal without provocation;



            4.   Any individual animal which has been found to
be a “dangerous animal” on two separate occasions;



            5.   Any individual animal owned or harbored
primarily or in part for the purpose of animal fights;



            6.   Any individual animal which, upon the
complaint or complaints of citizens or upon an observation of an official of
the village, based upon its temperament when put into contact with human
beings, or other animals, is reasonably believed to be an animal with vicious
tendencies:



            7.   Any individual animal which has been found to
be a vicious animal in another jurisdiction; and



            8.   A VICIOUS ANIMAL shall be one which exhibits
the actions provided within this section within the village or within one and
one-half miles of the boundaries of the village.



         (b)   Each act specified in divisions (a)1. through
(a)7. of this definition shall itself be sufficient to bring the act within
the definition of VICIOUS ANIMAL, and each such occurrence shall be a
separate event upon which an offense can be based.



         (c)   An animal shall not be found to be a dangerous or
VICIOUS ANIMAL if the behavior of the animal is exhibited only when it is
teased, tormented, abused or assaulted or when a trespass, tort or crime
occurs on the premises where the animals located at the time the action takes
place or where the animal is protecting or defending a human being within the
immediate vicinity from an attack or assault. Nor shall it apply to dogs
while utilized by any police department or any law enforcement official in
the performance of police work.



   (E)   The owner of an animal believed to be a dangerous or VICIOUS
ANIMAL shall be served a written notice by the village that it wishes to
classify such animal as dangerous or VICIOUS ANIMAL, the notice shall contain
the restrictions and requirements to be imposed upon the owner. The owner can
accept the classification of the animal, or within seven days after the
receipt of such notice may request a hearing before an official of the
village or at the election of the Village President, a person selected by the
Village President to serve as a Hearing Officer to determine whether the
animal should be classified as a dangerous or vicious animal. At such
hearing, the official or Hearing Officer shall receive the evidence presented
by the village as well as other evidence as to the reasons why the animal
should be declared a dangerous or vicious animal. At that hearing either
party may present any competent evidence including the testimony of a person
experienced in the handling and temperament of animals. The official or
Hearing Officer shall within ten days after the hearing issue a written
decision and order. That order shall not be further appealed to any other
person or body within the village, but either the corporate authorities of
the village or the owner of the animal may seek whatever judicial review is
available of that decision.



   (F)   It shall be a violation of this code, punishable by a fine,
for a person to own an animal within the jurisdiction stated in this code,
which exhibits the characteristics of a dangerous animal. If the official or
Hearing Officer should find that a person is the owner of such an animal, he
or she shall assess the owner of that animal the amount of not less than $100
for a first offense and $250 for a second offense. Each instance in which an
animal shall exhibit the characteristics of a dangerous animal shall be
deemed a separate offense. A person so assessed shall have the option of
paying to the village the sum assessed or requiring the village to seek a
judicial determination that a violation of this code has occurred. Upon such
a judicial determination that the offense of owning an animal which exhibits
the characteristics of dangerous animal has occurred, the offense shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $300, nor more than $750, for each
offense proven to have occurred.



   (G)   If the official or Hearing Officer should find that a person
is the owner of a vicious animal, he or she has an incidence to the privilege
of ownership or possession of the vicious animal, (which may be regulated
through the power of the village to license and regulate the ownership or
keeping of animals), may require one or more of the following, which is found
to be reasonable necessary to protect the public safety and welfare:



      (1)   The placement in a prominent location on the property of
the owner of a clearly visible warning sign in specified size indicating that
there is a vicious animal on the premises and if a pen is required, a sign
may be required to be posted on that pen;



      (2)   A requirement that the animal, in order to go beyond the
premises of the owner, must be securely muzzled and restrained by a chain or
leash or its power to attack otherwise restrained and under the physical
restraint of a person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner which will not
cause injury to the animal or interfere with its vision or aspiration but
shall prevent it from biting any human or other animal;



      (3)   Presentation to the village of a photograph, which, at
the request of the village, may be taken by a village photographer, of the
animal along with a requirement that the animal be permanently required to
wear a collar or other means of identification through which it can be
determined that the animal in question has been classified as a vicious
animal;



      (4)   The construction of a pen at a fixed location on the
property of the owner which pen may be required to be at least six feet in
height forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young
children and suitable to confine a vicious animal in conjunction with other
measures which may be taken by the owner such as tethering of a vicious
animal. Such pen shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed with
secure sides, and bottom, and may be required to have a top and to be
embedded into the ground and shall be designed to prevent the animal from
escaping. The construction of a pen shall conform to the requirements of a
dog run contained in § 6-12-12 of the village code;



      (5)   A requirement that if the animal is allowed to go out of
doors on the property of the owner that it will always be tied in place with
either a chain or a leash having a tensile strength of at least 300 pounds;



      (6)   The owner of a vicious animal may be allowed to take the
vicious animal out of doors when not within a pen or on a runline if it is
necessary for the owner to obtain veterinary care for the vicious animal or
to comply with the order of a court of competent jurisdiction. In such case,
the vicious animal must be securely muzzled and restrained with a chain or
leash having a tensile strength of at least 300 pounds and not exceeding five
feet in length; and the vicious animal shall during all such times be under
the direct control and supervision of the owner or keeper specifically chosen
by the owner;



      (7)   To undertake any other reasonable restrictions and
requirements which will make the ownership or keeping of a vicious animal
consistent with the health and safety of the citizens of the village;



      (8)   The owner of a vicious animal may be required to present
to the village a certificate of insurance indicating that the owner has then
in force a liability or a homeowner’s insurance policy providing that the
insurance company will indemnify or pay on behalf of the owner any damages or
personal injuries caused by the vicious animal. Such insurance policy shall
contain such coverage in an amount of not less than $100,000 and shall be
issued by an insurance company approved by the Village Attorney, who shall
consider the financial capabilities of the company, and shall, thereafter, be
kept in full force; and



      (9)   At intervals of no more often than one year, the
official or Hearing Officer may receive a petition from the owner affected
seeking to modify the conditions imposed.



   (H)   It shall be a violation of this code for a person to own or
keep a vicious animal or, after an animal is found to be a vicious animal, to
fail to take the corrective measures which are ordered as an incident of the
power to license and regulate acts possessed by the village. Upon a judicial
determination that a violation of this code has occurred, the offense shall
be punishable by a fine of not less than $400, nor more than $2,500, for each
offense proven to have occurred.



   (I)   No owner or keeper of a vicious animal shall sell or give away
any vicious animal unless the person receiving the animal is given a written
notice that the animal has been found to be a vicious animal.



   (J)   If an animal is believed to be a vicious animal or is found to
be a vicious animal and is not being kept under the restrictions and
requirements previously imposed, the individual animal in question my be
immediately seized and impounded. If an animal is seized and impounded, and
the owner of the animal can be determined, a post-seizure hearing will be
held within ten days by an official of the village or the Hearing Officer
appointed by the Village President. At that hearing, it shall be determined
if the animal seized poses an imminent threat to human beings or domestic
animals or a continuing threat to property or whether the owner of the animal
is unable or unwilling to take the precautions necessary to prevent the
animal from posing the threat or to follow the restrictions and requirements
previously ordered. Within seven days after the hearing, the village official
or Hearing Officer shall render a written decision. That decision may be
appealed to the Village Board and thereafter in such manner as such manner
decisions may be destroyed, require the animal to be permanently removed from
the village, or such other action as may be deemed adequate to alleviate the
imminent threat. If a determination is made that the animal does not pose an
imminent threat, or has not violated the provisions of previously imposed
restrictions and requirements, then the village shall pay all expenses,
including shelter, food, veterinary expenses. But if the determination is
that the actions of the animal do pose an imminent threat, or that a
violation of the  previously imposed restriction and requirements have taken
place, then the owner shall pay such expenses. When an animal is impounded,
pursuant to this section, at the owner’s request and expense, such
impoundment may, at the election of the village, be at a veterinary and/or
licensed kennel of the owner’s choosing.



§ 9-3-12  LIMITATION OF ANIMALS.



   No person shall permit more than three dogs, excluding puppies under
four months of age, nor more than four cats or other domestic animals to be
or remain in or about any premises, building or lot within the village under
his or her control at any one time, except in veterinary hospitals, pet
shops, kennels or dog pounds. The payment of a license or licenses on dogs
shall not be construed to allow the keeping of more than the number of dogs
as herein provided.



§ 9-3-13  NUISANCES.



   (A)   It is hereby prohibited and it shall be deemed to be a public
nuisance for any person to cause or permit any animal, listed below, owned or
kept by him or her to do the following:



      (1)   To permit a dog to be at large as provided in this
article;



      (2)   To suffer or permit such dog to disturb the peace and
quiet of the neighborhood by barking, making other loud or unusual noises, or
by running through or across cultivated gardens or fields;



      (3)   To defecate or urinate upon any public place, or upon
any premises not owned or controlled by the person owning or keeping the dog
or cat; provided, however, that shall any such defecation be completely and
promptly removed by the owner or keeper of such dog or cat, the terms of this
section shall not be found applicable;



      (4)   To use property under such person’s ownership or
control in a manner to allow dog or cat defecation to accumulate so as to
constitute a nuisance in fact; and/or



      (5)   To bring or cause to be brought into any shop, store or
retail place of business wherein the public is invited to do business with
the management thereof, during such hours as the public is invited, or to
bring or cause to be brought into any public building at any time any dog,
unless such dog is under control and is brought for the purposes of
conducting business or inquiry wherein the physical presence of the dog is
required.



   (B)   The provisions of division (A)(5) of this section shall not
apply to blind persons led by guide dogs.



(Ord. 92-05-51, passed 5-12-1992)



§ 9-3-14  CONTROL OF DEFECATION.



   (A)   Device for removing excrement. It shall be unlawful for any
person to cause or permit a dog or cat under his or her ownership or control
to be on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by such
person unless such person shall have in his or her immediate possession a
device for the complete removal of any excrement which might be deposited by
such a dog or cat upon the aforesaid public or private property.



   (B)   Removal of excrement. It shall be unlawful for any person who
owns or controls a dog or cat which deposits excrement upon any property,
public or private, not owned or possessed by such person to fail to promptly
remove such excrement to a proper receptacle located upon property owned or
possessed by such person.



   (C)   Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section
shall be deemed to be guilty of an offense and shall be punished by a fine of
not less than $20 for the first offense, $30 for the second offense, $60 for
the third offense and $120 for the fourth offense and for each offense
thereafter. If a person shall be found to have violated division (B) of this
section by not promptly removing such excrement, then each day after the day
upon which the person was notified to remove such excrement by a village
official shall be deemed a separate offense and subject to the progressive
penalties contained herein.



(Ord. 92-05-51, passed 5-12-1992)



§ 9-3-15  PROVISIONS NOT APPLICABLE.



   The provisions of this article relating to registration and licensing
of dogs shall not apply to dogs of non-residents remaining temporarily in or
passing through the village; provided that, such dogs are licensed by some
other jurisdiction and provided the owner or keeper of the dog complies with
all other provisions of this article.



§ 9-3-16  HUMANE TREATMENT OF BIRDS AND ANIMALS.



   Owners or keepers of dogs, birds and other animals shall provide same
with sufficient good and wholesome food and water, proper shelter and
protection from weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and
with humane care and treatment. No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat,
torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse or abandon any dog, bird or
other animal.



§ 9-3-17  BIRDS.



   No person shall kill or wound, or attempt to kill or wound, any game or
songbird, or take or destroy the eggs or young of any such bird.



§ 9-3-18  PROHIBITIONS; EXCEPTIONS.



   No animal, with the exception of domesticated cats, dogs, small aquatic
animals, small birds and a type of small domesticated animal commonly kept as
a household pet in a small indoor cage, shall be kept within the corporate
limits; provided, however, that, farm animals may be kept, but only on land
zoned as an agricultural and used for such purpose. For purposes of this
section, FARM ANIMALS shall mean and include cattle, hogs, pigs, sheep, goats
or horses, or any chickens, geese, pigeons or other poultry, or any animal
which is principally raised for the sale of a product made by or from the
animal; and KEPT shall mean and include owned, harbored, raised, cared for or
possessed, whether on a temporary or long-term basis.



(Ord. 99-02-14, passed 2-16-1999)



§ 9-3-19  HORSES, RIDING OF.



   It shall be unlawful to ride a horse or other animal within the village
on any public property other than dedicated street pavements within the
village.



ARTICLE 4: TREES




Section



   9-4-1    Purpose and intent



   9-4-2    Public nuisances prohibited



   9-4-3    Inspection of public nuisance



   9-4-4    Abatement



   9-4-5    Penalty



§ 9-4-1  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   Purpose.  It is the purpose of this article to promote the
health, safety and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the
maintenance and removal of trees within the village.



   (B)   Intent.  This article is intended to promote:



      (1)   The maintenance and survival of desirable trees within
the village; and



      (2)   The protection of village residents from personal injury
and property damage, and the protection of Carol Stream from property damage,
caused or threatened by the improper maintenance or removal of trees located
within the village.



(Ord. 2014-02-08, passed 2-18-2014)



§ 9-4-2  PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Nuisances declared.  The following are hereby declared public
nuisances under this section:



      (1)   Any dead tree;



      (2)   Any tree, whether on public or private property, that
harbors insects or diseases which reasonably may be expected to harm any
other tree, such as Dutch elm disease, oak wilt, emerald ash borer, gypsy
moth, Asian longhorned beetle and any other insect or disease deemed a public
nuisance by the Village Manager or his or her designee;



      (3)   Any tree, or portion thereof, whether on public or
private property, that is substantially dead or in deteriorated or unstable
condition and which presents a hazard to persons or property;



      (4)   Any tree, whether on public or private property, that
overhangs and because of its deteriorated condition may fall onto another’s
private property or onto the public right-of-way and constitutes a danger to
the health, safety or welfare of the public;



      (5)   Any tree, whether on public or private property, that
obstructs or interferes with the free and safe passage of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.



   (B)   Unlawful to maintain public nuisance.  It shall be unlawful
for the owner of any lot or parcel of land, or a tenant upon the land, in the
village to permit or maintain on any such lot or parcel of land a public
nuisance as identified in division (A) of this section.  It shall be the
duty of such owners or tenants to promptly abate any such public nuisance in
accordance with the provisions of § 9-4-4.



   (C)   Boundary trees.  A BOUNDARY TREE is hereby defined as a tree
that has any portion of its trunk column located on a property line between
private property and village property or village right-of-way.  A boundary
tree generally is, by operation of law, co-owned by the village and the owner
of the abutting private property.  It shall be the duty of the village to
promptly abate any public nuisance pertaining to a boundary tree.  The
Village Manager, or his or her duly authorized representative, shall serve or
cause to be served upon the person that is the owner or tenant of the lot or
parcel of land on which any portion of such boundary tree is located, a
written notice of the village's intention to abate such public nuisance in
compliance with the provisions of this article.



(Ord. 2014-02-08, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 2014-08-40, passed 8-18-14)



§ 9-4-3  INSPECTION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   In order to carry out the purposes of this article and to implement the
enforcement thereof, the Village Manager, or his or her duly authorized
representative, is hereby authorized and empowered to request permission from
the owner or tenant of the lot or parcel of land at all reasonable hours to
inspect any tree or deadwood situated thereon.  The Village Manager, or his
or her duly authorized representative, is hereby authorized and empowered to
seek from any court of competent jurisdiction an order permitting a search of
private property in the event that the village has a reasonable basis to
believe that a public nuisance exists on the property or that the ordinances
of the village are being otherwise violated.  Either with permission or
pursuant to a court order, the Village Manager, or his or her duly authorized
representative, may remove specimens from such tree for the purpose of
laboratory or other analysis, or to determine whether such tree is infested
or is otherwise a nuisance because it is dead or substantially dead, and may
serve as a breeding place for a fatal tree disease. It shall be unlawful for
any person to hinder the Village Manager, or his or her duly authorized
representative, in the performance of any of his or her duties provided for
under the provisions of this article.



(Ord. 2014-02-08, passed 2-18-2014)



§ 9-4-4  ABATEMENT.



   (A)   If a laboratory or other analysis of specimens removed from
any tree by the Village Manager, or his or her duly authorized
representative, determines that such tree is a public nuisance pursuant to
this article, or if the Village Manager determines that any dead or
substantially dead tree, or deadwood, is a public nuisance as provided in
this article, the Village Manager shall serve or cause to be served upon the
person that is the owner or tenant of the lot or parcel of land on which such
tree or deadwood is located, a written notice requiring such owner or tenant
to comply with the provisions of this article.



   (B)   If the person upon whom such notice is served fails, neglects
or refuses to remove and destroy such tree or deadwood, or treat for the
purpose of eradication of a destructive pest within ten calendar days or
within any additional reasonable time as permitted in writing by the Village
Manager, or his or her duly authorized representative, after service of such
notice, the Village Manager, or his or her duly authorized representative,
may proceed to abate the nuisance in accordance with the non-summary
abatement provisions of Chapter 14, Article 3 of the Carol Stream Municipal
Code.



   (C)   Whenever, in the opinion of an officer of the village
possessing police powers, the maintenance or continuation of a tree is
determined to be a public nuisance pursuant to this article, and such
nuisance creates an imminent threat of serious injury to persons or serious
damage to persons or real property, such officer shall proceed with an
initial summary abatement of the nuisance in accordance with § 14-3-11 of
the Carol Stream Municipal Code.



(Ord. 2014-02-08, passed 2-18-2014)



§ 9-4-5  PENALTY.



   If the person so served and notified does not abate the public nuisance
within the specified reasonable time, the corporate authorities may proceed
to abate the nuisance in any or all manner allowable by law, including,
without limiting the generality thereof, the following:



   (A)   Seeking to impose a monetary penalty as defined by § 1-1-9 of
this code by instituting an ordinance enforcement action.



   (B)   Seeking to enjoin the continuation of the nuisance by the
filing of a lawsuit in a court of competent jurisdiction.



ARTICLE 5: FEEDING OF WILD ANIMALS PROHIBITED



Section



   9-5-1   Purpose



   9-5-2   Definitions



   9-5-3   Prohibitions



   9-5-4   Violation and enforcement



§ 9-5-1  PURPOSE.



   The intent of this article is to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the community and its wildlife by prohibiting the feeding of wild
animals and waterfowl on public and private property in the village.  The
feeding waterfowl and other wild animals increases the potential for damage
to public parks and private property.  It also elevates the potential for
the spread of disease in people and companion animals.  In addition, it is
the intent of this article to protect the welfare of the waterfowl and wild
animals themselves.  Wildlife studies have shown that feeding waterfowl and
other wild animals can interrupt their normal migration patterns, can make
them more aggressive in demanding food, cause nutritional problems, expose
them to danger by eliminating their natural fear of predators, and promote
the spread of diseases and disease-carrying parasites.



(Ord. 2017-06-23, passed 6-5-2017)



§ 9-5-2  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:



   BIRD FEEDER.  A container, receptacle or apparatus designed for the
feeding of songbirds or other backyard birds.



   FEED.  To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any
edible material which can be utilized for consumption by wild animals. 
Feeding does not include baiting for the legal taking of fish and/or game.



   PERSON.  Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.



   WATERFOWL.  Wildfowl of the order Anseriformes, especially members of
the family Anatidae which includes any bird that swims, frequents the water,
or lives about rivers, lakes, or other bodies of water, including but not
limited to ducks, geese, swan and gulls.



   WILD ANIMAL.  Any animal, which is not normally domesticated in this
state, including but not limited to coyotes, deer, feral cats, foxes,
groundhogs, squirrels, chipmunks, mice, rats, rabbits, opossums, raccoons,
skunks, and waterfowl.



(Ord. 2017-06-23, passed 6-5-2017)



§ 9-5-3  PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No person shall purposely or knowingly, feed or in any manner
provide access to food to any wild animal or waterfowl within the corporate
limits of the village, on lands either publicly or privately owned.  Feeding
does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.



   (B)   Feeding of songbirds and other backyard birds, not including
waterfowl, shall be permitted outdoors at such times and in such a manner
that:



      (1)   The feeding does not create an unreasonable disturbance
with wildlife;



      (2)   Any feed must be placed within a bird feeder with a
maximum volume of not more than one cubic foot, placed at least four feet
above ground.



      (3)   Bird feeders are placed where wildlife other than
songbirds and backyard birds are unable to eat from them and do not become an
attractant for wild animals.



(Ord. 2017-06-23, passed 6-5-2017)



§ 9-5-4  VIOLATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   Any violation of the prohibitions in § 9-5-3 shall be subject to a
fine of $25 and for the first violation of § 9-5-3, and not less than $100
or more than $750 for the second and each subsequent violation.  Each
ongoing day of the violation(s) shall constitute a separate offense.  In
addition to the financial penalties so provided, the violator shall be
subject to an injunctive order to cease the violation and conduct any
required clean-up.



(Ord. 2017-06-23, passed 6-5-2017)



CHAPTER 10: BUSINESS LICENSING AND REGULATION



      Article



         1.   ADMINISTRATION



         2.   AMUSEMENTS



         3.   ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS



         4.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



         5.   RAFFLES



         6.   SCAVENGERS



         7.   SECONDHAND SALES



         8.   VENDING MACHINES



         9.   TOBACCO PRODUCTS



         10.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



         11.   PYROTECHNIC FIREWORKS DISPLAY



         12.   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSE



         13.   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS



ARTICLE 1: ADMINISTRATION



Section



   10-1-1   License required; subjects of licensing authority



   10-1-2   Registration of businesses required



   10-1-3   Applications



   10-1-4   Investigation



   10-1-5   Approval; disapproval



   10-1-6   License term; expiration; renewal



   10-1-7   Licenses not assignable; unlawful use



   10-1-8   Building and premises; zoning



   10-1-9   Location



   10-1-10   Nuisances prohibited



   10-1-11   Evidence of county health certificate required



   10-1-12   Penalty; enforcement



   10-1-13   Suspension, revocation of license or permit



   10-1-14   Appeal



   10-1-15   License to be posted; destruction; removal of license



   10-1-16   Business vehicles



   10-1-17   Adoption by reference



   10-1-18   License fees



   10-1-19   Fee schedule



§ 10-1-1  LICENSE REQUIRED; SUBJECTS OF LICENSING AUTHORITY.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall conduct, engage in,
maintain, operate, carry on or manage any business, occupation, activity or
establishment, either by himself, herself or itself, or through an agent,
employee or partner, for which a license is required by this code or by any
village ordinance, without first having obtained a license for such business,
occupation, activity or establishment.



   (B)   Whenever a license or permit is required for the maintenance,
operation or conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business
or engaging in any activity or occupation, any person, firm or corporation
shall have violated the requirements of this code, if, by himself, herself or
itself, or through an agent, employee or partner, he, she or it is held forth
as being engaged in the business, activity or occupation, or if he, she or it
solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively, or if he, she or it
performs or attempts to perform any part of such business, activity or
occupation in the village.



§ 10-1-2  REGISTRATION OF BUSINESSES REQUIRED.



   (A)   All businesses operating within the village, for which a
business license is not specifically required by this code, shall register
with the Village Clerk, upon forms provided for that purpose. For the
protection of the health, welfare and safety of the community, registration
of businesses is hereby required in order to assist the village in
determining the name of the owner and/or operator of such business, the
address of the person in charge of conducting such business, the type of
business being conducted and whether the business is in compliance with the
Zoning Code and other ordinances of the village and state statutes.



   (B)   Such information is required by the village for a number of
reasons, including the ability to give notice in the case of emergencies,
planning Fire Department strategies and planning periodic inspections.



   (C)   For the clerical cost of maintaining a list of businesses
within the village, a nominal fee, as required in the fee schedule at §
10-1-19, shall be charged to the applicant at the time of registration.



§ 10-1-3  APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Applications for all licenses, permits and registrations shall
be made to the Village Clerk in writing on a form provided for that purpose,
except as otherwise provided.



   (B)   If the applicant is an individual (sole proprietorship), the
application shall contain his or her name, residence address and residential
telephone number. If the applicant is a partnership or other non-corporate
business entity, the application shall contain the name and residential
address and residential telephone number of each partner, principal or member
thereof. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall contain the
name, residential address and residential telephone number of each principal
officer and the registered agent thereof.



   (C)   Each application shall also contain:



      (1)   A designation of the type or kind of license or permit
desired;



      (2)   The location or proposed location of the place of
business, occupation or activity;



      (3)   The applicable fee to be paid as provided in § 10-1-19;



      (4)   The number of the certificate of registration required
under the Retailer’s Occupation Tax Act, being 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.,
Service Occupation Tax Act, being 35 ILCS 15/1 et seq.  and/or Use Tax Act,
being 35 ILCS 105/1 et seq., if applicable;



      (5)   If the applicant is an industrial business, an
application for industrial pre-treatment; and



      (6)   Such additional information as may be needed for the
proper guidance of village officials in the evaluation of such application,
including proof of any insurance policy or bond required by this code.



§ 10-1-4  INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Where this code authorizes or necessitates an investigation or
inspection by any department or official of the village before the issuance
of a license, permit or registration, and requires the approval by such
department or official regarding the proper location or condition of the
premises in which the business, occupation or activity for which a license is
applied is to be managed, conducted, operated or carried on, or regarding the
condition and nature of the equipment and methods intended to be used by the
applicant in such business, occupation or activity, then the license
application shall be transmitted to the appropriate official or department
with such information necessary for the required investigation or inspection.



   (B)   The designated official or department shall make all necessary
investigations and inspections, and the results thereof shall be reported in
writing to the Village Manager.



§ 10-1-5  APPROVAL; DISAPPROVAL.



   (A)   After due consideration of the information contained within
the application and related investigative reports, the Village Manager shall
determine whether the application is satisfactory. If satisfactory, the
license, permit or registration shall be signed by the Village President,
attested by the Village Clerk, and then issued to the applicant.



   (B)   If, after due consideration of the information contained
within the application and related investigative and inspection reports, the
Village Manager shall determine that matters concerning the application are
unsatisfactory, he or she shall disapprove the application, indicating the
reasons therefor. Thereupon, the Clerk shall notify the applicant that the
application has not been approved and that no license or permit will be
issued.



§ 10-1-6  LICENSE TERM; EXPIRATION; RENEWAL.



   (A)   Each license shall indicate its term. All annual licenses,
permits and registrations shall be operative and the license, permit or
registration year for the village shall commence on January 1 of each year.
No license shall be granted for a period longer than one year. Except where
otherwise provided herein, every license shall expire on December 31
following the date of issuance.



   (B)   The Clerk shall endeavor to notify each annual licensee of the
expiration of time of the license held by the licensee at least 21 days prior
to such expiration date; provided, however, that a failure to make such
notification or the licensee’s failure to receive it, shall not exclude the
licensee from the obligation to obtain a new license or a renewal.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided herein, each license may be
renewed upon proper application and payment of the required fee. The
requirements and procedures for granting and issuing a license renewal shall
be the same as the requirements and procedures for granting a new license.



§ 10-1-7  LICENSES NOT ASSIGNABLE; UNLAWFUL USE.



   (A)   No license, permit or registration may be assigned, sold,
loaned, transferred, used as collateral or otherwise encumbered. No person,
firm or corporation shall use or display any license certificate, tag, badge
or sticker which has been improperly acquired.



   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall alter, deface, forge or
counterfeit any license, permit, registration, certificate, plate, tag, badge
or sticker issued by the village.



§ 10-1-8  BUILDING AND PREMISES; ZONING.



   (A)   No license, permit or registration shall be issued for the
conduct of any business, purpose or activity if the premises and building to
be used for the purpose do not fully comply with all applicable ordinances
and regulations of the village or any other governmental body.



   (B)   No license, permit or registration shall be issued for the
conduct of any business or performance of any act which would constitute a
violation of the Zoning Code.



§ 10-1-9  LOCATION.



   (A)   No license, permit or registration for the operation of a
business establishment or activity in the village shall be construed to
permit its operation in more than one location in the village; a separate
license, permit or registration shall be required for each location. For the
purpose of this code, the existence of a single location shall be evidenced
by the fact that all buildings containing the principal or accessory uses
shall be connected or shall be located on the same lot or parcel; shall be
operated and managed by the same person or owner; and shall be an
establishment with the same classification.



   (B)   The location of any licensed or registered business or
occupation, other than the sale of alcoholic liquors, or the location of any
permitted act, may be changed; provided that, the village shall be given
sufficient notice of such intended change in location to determine that the
operation for which the license is required conforms with all applicable
ordinances and regulations of the village at its new location.



§ 10-1-10  NUISANCES PROHIBITED.



   No business or establishment, whether or not licensed or registered,
shall be so conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance in fact; and no
building, vehicle, structure, yard, lot, premises or part thereof, shall be
used, kept, maintained or operated in connection with a business or
establishment so as to occasion any nuisance, or so as to be dangerous to
life or detrimental to health. Any charge of conducting or operating a
nuisance may be made under this chapter or under the provisions of the code
prohibiting nuisances generally.



§ 10-1-11  EVIDENCE OF COUNTY HEALTH CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.



   Prior to the issuance of a business license or registration of a
business, all food related businesses shall provide evidence of the necessary
health certificates issued by the DuPage County Health Department.



§ 10-1-12  PENALTY; ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Unless otherwise expressly provided, any person, firm or
corporation convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter shall be
fined not less than $50, and not more than $750; except that, the third and
all subsequent convictions within any 12-month period shall be deemed to be
misdemeanors, and the person, firm or corporation guilty thereof may be fined
not less than $50, and not more than $750, and imprisoned for a period not
exceeding six months.



   (B)   Whenever a person, firm or corporation shall neglect or refuse
to procure any license, permit or registration required by this code, or
otherwise violates the terms of this chapter, the Village President is
authorized to cause appropriate legal action and proceedings to be instituted
to enforce these provisions.



   (C)   The village shall take all necessary and appropriate action to
compel compliance with the regulatory provisions of this chapter. When
necessary and expedient, the Chief of Police may be called upon to assist in
such enforcement, and it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to perform
such enforcement acts as may be required of him or her. All village employees
duly authorized and acting as license inspectors shall be conservators of the
peace with police powers for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
code and other village ordinances relating to the licensing of business and
occupations and their regulations.



§ 10-1-13  SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT.



   (A)   When the conduct or operation of any business, occupation,
activity or establishment, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall constitute a
nuisance in fact and a clear and present danger to the public health, safety
or general welfare, or where the holder of any license shall have refused to
allow an inspection of his or her premises or has refused to furnish a sample
of his or her goods for testing, the Village President shall be authorized to
summarily order the cessation of business and the closing of the premises
until the danger no longer exists.



   (B)   Within eight days after a license or permit is suspended, the
Village President shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether
or not the license or permit should be revoked.



   (C)   Licenses and permits issued by the village, unless otherwise
provided, may be revoked by the Village President after notice and hearing,
as provided in this section, for any of the following causes:



      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement
contained in the application for the license or permit;



      (2)   Any violation by the licensee or permittee of provisions
of this code or other ordinances of the village relating to the license or
permit, the subject matter of the license or permit or the premises occupied;



      (3)   Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or
of a misdemeanor where such conviction indicates his or her inability to
operate a safe, honest and legitimate business operation within the village;



      (4)   Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine,
penalty or charge owed to the village;



      (5)   Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling or any
interference with a fully authorized village officer or employee while in the
reasonable performance of his or her duties in making inspections;



      (6)   Any violation of health or safety standards established
by the DuPage County Health Department, or the sale of any unwholesome or
polluted food or drink, or the maintenance of a place of business in an
unclean and unsanitary manner so as to endanger public health or safety; and



      (7)   Such revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude
prosecution and imposition of any other penalties provided for the violation
of other applicable provisions of this code or other ordinances of the
village.



   (D)   Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license or permit
shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the
complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be sent by
certified mail (return receipt requested) to the licensee or permittee at his
or her last known address, at least five days prior to the date set for the
hearing. If the licensee shall request a continuance in the date of the
hearing, the ten-day suspension shall be in effect until two days after the
final hearing date.



   (E)   At the hearing, the Village Prosecutor shall present the
complaint and shall represent the village. The licensee or permittee shall be
permitted counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and
cross-examine witnesses. The Village President shall preside and shall render
the decision.



   (F)   A stenographic or electronically recorded record of the
hearing shall be kept. The village shall pay the cost of attendance fees of
the reporter and the costs of the transcript, if such transcript shall be
ordered by the village. The licensee or permittee shall pay the cost of any
transcript ordered by him or her.



   (G)   Within a reasonable time after the conclusion of the hearing,
but not later than 30 days after such conclusion, the Village President shall
file a written decision in which he or she has summarized the evidence and
has stated the reasons for his or her decision.



§ 10-1-14  APPEAL.



   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Village President in regard
to the denial of an application for a business license, as provided in this
code, or in connection with the revocation of a license or permit, or the
closing of an establishment dangerous to the public, as provided in this
code, shall have the right to appeal to the corporate authorities. Such
appeal shall be taken by filing with the Village Clerk, within ten days after
notice of a denial of an application or a revocation of a license or permit,
a written statement under oath setting forth specifically the grounds for
appeal. The corporate authorities shall thereupon set the time and place for
a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the
applicant or licensee or permittee in the same manner as provided in §
10-1-13. The decision of the corporate authorities on such appeal shall be
final.



§ 10-1-15  LICENSE TO BE POSTED; DESTRUCTION; REMOVAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of any person conducting a permitted
business in the village to keep his or her license, permit or registration
displayed at all times in a prominent place on the premises, machine or
vehicle used for such business.



   (B)   No person shall destroy, obliterate, take, remove or carry
away without the consent of the owner any license, certificate, plate or
sticker which has been issued by the village, except when such license,
certificate, plate or sticker has been discontinued or the licensed premises
have been abandoned. Nothing herein shall prevent the Village President or
his or her duly authorized representative from removing any license,
certificate, plate or sticker from the possession of a former licensee, his
or her premises, any vehicle or any machine when such license has been
revoked under the provisions of this code.



§ 10-1-16  BUSINESS VEHICLES.



   Whenever the number of vehicles used is the basis, in whole or in part,
for a license fee, the village shall furnish the licensee with a tag or
sticker for each vehicle covered by the license, and such tag or sticker
shall be posted or affixed in a conspicuous place on each such vehicle.



§ 10-1-17  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   Whenever within this chapter any regulation or public record is adopted
and incorporated by reference, the manner of their adoption and incorporation
shall have complied with the provisions of the state law allowing such
incorporation and adoption.



§ 10-1-18  LICENSE FEES.



   (A)   License, permit and registration fees under the terms of this
chapter, for the businesses, occupations, activities and uses set forth,
shall be as provided in the fee schedule which is a part of this chapter at
§ 10-1-19. License, permit and registration fees shall be paid annually
unless otherwise provided, and proof of any bond or liability insurance
policy required by this chapter shall be provided with the license fee.



   (B)   No refund shall be given in the event that a license is
voluntarily terminated or revoked.



§ 10-1-19  FEE SCHEDULE.



 

 
License Fee




Article 1: Registration of Businesses
 
$25 per year ($12.50 after June 30)


Article 2: Amusements


 
 
License Fee


(A) Automatic amusement devices, including pool tables and game rooms


   (1) Owner of game room
 
$100 per year


   (2) Class a - 20 amusement devices or more
 
$500 per year


   (3) Class b - 6 to 19 amusement devices
 
$200 per year


   (4) Class c - 2 to 5 amusement devices
 
$75 per year


   (5) Items (1) to (4) above, after June 30
 
1/2 of annual fee


In addition to the annual license fee for amusement devices, an annual
amusement tax is hereby imposed upon any amusement device, pool table,
jukebox or children’s coin-operated rides, as follows:


   (6) Each amusement device
 
$55 per year


   (7) Each pool table
 
$40 per year


   (8) Each jukebox or other similar machine or mechanism designed to
produce or reproduce music
 
$25 per year


   (9) Transfer fee:  In the event that the device upon which an
amusement tax was imposed is to be permanently withdrawn from the village,
another machine may be permanently substituted in its place, upon application
and payment of the transfer fee
 
$5 each


(B) Automatic coin-operated children’s rides
 
$15 per year


(C) Public places of amusement:


   (1) Carnivals and menageries
 
$20 per day


   (2) Temporary places of amusement


      (a) Per day
 
$20


      (b) Per year
 
$100


Bankers and Brokers, Other Than Insurance and Real Estate


(A) Bankers
 
$50 per year


 
 
License Fee


Article 3: Electrical Contractors (if not registered in another municipality)
 
$25 per year


Going Out of Business Sale


(A) Initial period (60 days)
 
$25


(B) Renewal (30 days)
 
$25


Article 4: Peddlers and Solicitors


(A) Commercial solicitation


   (1) Non-refundable application fee
 
$25/applicant

$25 administrative processing charge in addition to the current cost of a
fingerprint check


   (2) Permit fee


      (a) Per day
 
$10 per person


      (b) Per week
 
$30 per person


      (c) Per month
 
$50 per person


      (d) Per year
 
$150 per person


(B) Religious or charitable solicitation
 
No fee


(C) Illinois licensed insurance agent/broker
 
No fee


Article 5: Raffles


(A) Class a, per raffle
 
$10


(B) Class b, per raffle
 
$20


(C) Class c, per raffle
 
$50


(D) Class d, per raffle
 
$100


Article 6: Scavengers
 
$750 per year


Article 7: Secondhand Dealers
 
$25 per year


Article 8: Vending Machines
 
$15 per year


Article 9: Tobacco License
 
$100 per year


 
 
License Fee


Article 11: Pyrotechnic Fireworks Display
 
$100 per event, to be paid upon application; a separate permit shall be
required for each event


Article 13: Massage Establishment License
 
$500/year plus $150 per criminal background check




 



(Ord. 98-03-22, passed 3-16-1998; Ord. 2003-12-78, passed 12-1-2003; Ord.
2004-05-31, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 2005-01-01, passed 1-3-2005; Ord.
2008-02-05, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. 2010-03-09, passed 3-15-2010; Ord.
2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)



ARTICLE 2: AMUSEMENTS



Section



   10-2-1   Definitions



   10-2-2   License required



   10-2-3   Applications; generally



   10-2-4   Applications; game rooms



   10-2-5   Applications; carnivals



   10-2-6   Investigation fee; carnivals



   10-2-7   Worker permit required



   10-2-8   Inspection accessibility



   10-2-9   Carnival permit revocation



   10-2-10   Carnival workers living on premises



   10-6-11   Investigation fee; game rooms



   10-2-12   Regulations; amusements



   10-2-13   Regulations; game rooms



   10-2-14   Inspections



   10-2-15   Bond required for golf ranges



Cross-reference:



   Gross receipt tax for certain exhibitions, see § 5-6-2



   Raffles, see Ch. 10, Art. 5



§ 10-2-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AMUSEMENT.



      (1)   Any amusement park, arcade, golf driving range, golf
course, miniature or otherwise, public skating rink (ice or roller),
“go-kart” tracks, public dance hall, pool or billiards hall, bowling
alley or shooting gallery;



      (2)   Any theater, indoor or outdoor, displaying film,
television or live dramatic performances;



      (3)   Any concert, athletic contest or exhibition, public
picnic, circus, carnival, flower, animal or dog show; and



      (4)   Any other location or event where, for the purpose of
pleasure, persons engage in or observe a game, physical activity or
performance.



   AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any machine, game, table or device which is designed,
intended, displayed or kept as an amusement game, test of skill or
entertainment, and may be operated by the public upon the insertion of coin,
slug, token, plate, disc or the use of which is made available for any
valuable consideration; it is operated by the manipulation of buttons, dials,
balls, wheels, trigger devices or electrical impulses, whether or not
registering a score, offering a prize or offering free replays. AMUSEMENT
DEVICE shall include, but not be limited to, devices commonly known as
pinball machines, marble machines, video games, electronic games, skill ball
and all games, operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name
they may be indicated.



   AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT MACHINE. Any mechanical amusement machine or
device, the operation of which is governed or controlled by the deposit of a
coin or token, including, without being limited to, any such coin controlled
instrument or device capable of producing any vocal or instrumental sounds,
including jukeboxes, and any coin-operated mechanical or electronic machine
or similar types of machines which are intended for and generally used by
children and referred to as a “children’s ride”.



   GAME ROOM. Any business establishment having two or more amusement
devices, whether or not operated as a principal use.



   OPERATOR. Any person or entity which leases or operates a business
establishment which is or has contained within it a game room, or any other
amusement.



   OWNER. Any person or entity who owns a building or a portion of a
building which is utilized for a game room, or which houses an amusement.



   YOUTH LOCK IN. Any event hosted by a game room operator after 11:00
p.m. for the sole benefit of youths under 21 years of age.



(Ord. 99-04-27, passed 4-19-1999)



§ 10-2-2  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall own, promote, operate, conduct, control,
manage, produce, present, sponsor or permit, for gain or profit, any
amusement without first having obtained a license as provided herein.



   (B)   No person shall install, keep, maintain or use, or permit the
installation, keeping, maintenance or use upon his or her premises of any
automatic amusement machine or amusement device for which a license has not
been issued.



   (C)   No person shall own or operate a game room without first
having obtained a license to do so, nor shall he or she own or operate a game
room which does not comply with the provisions of this code.



§ 10-2-3  APPLICATIONS; GENERALLY.



   (A)   An application for an amusement license or an automatic
amusement machine license shall be made in conformity with the general
requirements of this code relating to applications for licenses. Such
application shall be signed by the owner or lessee of the property in his or
her own proper person or in his or her name by his or her duly authorized
agent, verified by oath or affidavit.



   (B)   The application shall set forth a description of the property
used or intended for use as a public place of amusement, indicating the
seating capacity and the floor area or ground area of the place, and such
other information as the village may require.



   (C)   Each application and all information required to be furnished
in connection therewith, or a copy thereof, shall be referred to the Chief of
Police and any other appropriate village official. Each official shall
certify to the Village Manager whether or not the applicant is qualified to
receive the license applied for and whether or not the place complies in
every respect with the applicable provisions of this code relating to his or
her department.



   (D)   The application shall also contain a statement that the
applicant is aware of an amusement tax and athletic contests tax provided for
within this code, and a statement that the applicant agrees to make payments
of such tax as therein provided.



§ 10-2-4  APPLICATIONS; GAME ROOMS.



   In addition to the requirements set forth above, applications for a
license to conduct a game room shall contain the following information:



   (A)   The name and address of the applicant’s business or, if a
proposed business, the name and address of the proposed game room;



   (B)   If applicable, the date of the filing of the “assumed
name” of the business with the County Clerk;



   (C)   A drawing of the proposed layout of the premises drawn to
scale and showing the location of amusement devices, aisles, counters and
other significant details;



   (D)   In case of co-partnership, the date of the formation of the
partnership; in the case of an Illinois corporation, the date of its
incorporation; or in the case before incorporation, the state where it was
incorporated and the date of its becoming qualified under the Illinois
Business Corporation Act, being 805 ILCS 5/1.05 et seq.,  to transact
business in the state;



   (E)   If the applicant is an owner, the name and address of the
proposed operator;



   (F)   If the applicant is an operator, the name and address of the
proposed owner;



   (G)   Whether the applicant is an owner or operator of any other
game room within the state and, if so, the name and address of such other
operation;



   (H)   If the game room is not to operate as the principal business
at the location, a statement as to the type of business which will be the
principal business at the location in question;



   (I)   Whether the applicant is delinquent in the payment of any
retailer’s occupation tax and, if so, the reasons therefor;



   (J)   Whether the applicant has made an application in another
municipality for a liquor license or a game room license and whether such
application has been denied and if so, the reasons therefor;



   (K)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a gambling
offense or felony and, if so, the particulars thereof; and



   (L)   The applicant’s name, sex, date of birth, Social Security
number, position and percentage of ownership in the business; the name, sex,
date of birth, Social Security number, position and percentage of ownership
in the property if an owner, or in the business if an operator of every sole
owner, partner, corporate officer, director, manager and any person who owns
5% or more of the shares of the applicant business entity or parent
corporations of the applicant business entity. Where the applicant is a
corporation or partnership, the answers to each question relating to this
application shall be given with regard to any person who owns or controls an
interest of more than 5% within the partnership or corporation.



§ 10-2-5 APPLICATIONS; CARNIVALS.



   (A)   An application for an amusement license for a carnival shall
be made in conformity with the general requirements of this code relating to
applications for licenses no less than 90 days in advance of the requested
event. Such application shall be signed by the owner or lessee of the
property in his or her own proper person or in his or her name by his or her
duly authorized agent, verified by oath or affidavit.



   (B)   The application shall set forth a description of the property
used or intended for use as a carnival, indicating ground area of the place,
proposed layout of the premises and such other information as the village may
require.



   (C)   The application shall identify by legal name, date of birth,
address and Social Security number of all employees who will work on the
premises during the carnival. All registered employees shall also submit
their fingerprints for the purpose of a criminal history check at the time of
application.



   (D)   Each application and all information required to be furnished
in connection therewith, or a copy thereof, shall be referred to the Chief of
Police and any other appropriate village official. Each village official
shall certify to the Village Manager whether or not the applicant is
qualified to receive the license applied for and whether or not the place
complies in every respect with the applicable provisions of this code
relating to his or her department.



   (E)   The application shall also contain a statement that the
applicant is aware of an amusement tax and athletic contests tax provided for
within this code, and a statement that the applicant agrees to make payments
of such tax as therein provided.



(Ord. 2002-06-35, passed 6-17-2002)



§ 10-2-6  INVESTIGATION FEE; CARNIVALS.



   There shall be filed with each application for a license to operate a
carnival, a non-refundable investigation and permit fee of $500, and $25
per-employee administrative processing fee, in addition to the cost of a
criminal background and fingerprint check.



(Ord. 2002-06-35, passed 6-17-2002; Ord. 2012-02-03, passed 2-6-2012)



§ 10-2-7  WORKER PERMIT REQUIRED.



   All carnival workers must be qualified and receive a Village of Carol
Stream carnival worker permit and wear the photo identification prominently
when working at the carnival. No carnival employee without a village carnival
worker permit will be permitted to work on the premises. No carnival worker
permit may be issued to any person who:



   (A)   Is a registered child sex offender;



   (B)   Has been convicted of a felony in the past five years;



   (C)   Has been convicted of any other crime involving moral
turpitude or violence; or



   (D)   Is identified as a known gang member in the Illinois State
Police LEADS system.



(Ord. 2002-06-35, passed 6-17-2002)



§ 10-2-8  INSPECTION ACCESSIBILITY.



   Police officers and all other village officials shall have free access
to the grounds and all booths, shows and concessions on such grounds at all
times to ensure that the carnival is in compliance with the provisions of
this code.



(Ord. 2002-06-35, passed 6-17-2002)



§ 10-2-9  CARNIVAL PERMIT REVOCATION.



   The Village Manager may revoke a carnival amusement permit or a
carnival worker permit at any time and demand immediate cessation of the
carnival based upon violations of this code, on-premises criminal acts by the
carnival employees or when the carnival presents an endangerment to public
safety.



(Ord. 2002-06-35, passed 6-17-2002)



§ 10-2-10  CARNIVAL WORKERS LIVING ON PREMISES.



   No employee, agent or other representative of the carnival may live,
sleep or otherwise reside on the premises of the carnival.



(Ord. 2002-06-35, passed 6-17-2002)



§ 10-2-11  INVESTIGATION FEE; GAME ROOMS.



   There shall be filed with each application for a license to operate a
game room a non-refundable investigation fee of $375. No investigation fee
shall be required for the license of an owner of a game room. The
investigation fee shall not be required for any applicant who then holds a
valid liquor license with the village.



§ 10-2-12  REGULATIONS; AMUSEMENTS.



   (A)   No person conducting or operating a billiard or poolroom shall
allow or permit any screens, curtains, blinds, partitions or other
obstructions to be placed between the front windows and back or rear wall of
such room, but an unobstructed view of the entire interior must be maintained
at all times.



   (B)   Unless otherwise permitted by law, it is unlawful for any
licensee to conduct or permit to be conducted any raffle or lottery upon the
licensed premises.



   (C)   No carnival, exhibition, show or other amusement licensed
herein shall offer and give as a prize in any game of skill or chance any
object or item having a retail value of more than $25 or a cash prize in any
amount. Rules for all games must be prominently displayed and only one prize
may be offered to win per game.



   (D)   All public places of amusement, except those holding licenses
under this code for the sale of alcoholic beverages or food, shall cease
operations for all purposes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. each
day, except as specifically provided else-where in this code.



   (E)   No carnival, exhibition, show or other amusement which takes
place in whole or in part outdoors shall operate earlier than 10:00 a.m. or
later than 11:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday, or from 10:00 a.m. to 12:00
midnight on Friday or Saturday.



   (F)   Except for vehicular parking, no portion of a carnival,
exhibition, show or other amusement which takes place in whole or in part
outdoors shall be located nearer than 200 feet from the nearest lot line of a
lot in residential use.



   (G)   No carnival, exhibition, show or other amusement which takes
place in whole or in part outdoors shall, without written authorization from
the village, place its facilities upon any required paved parking areas
within a shopping center or plaza. Required paved parking spaces shall mean
the minimum number of parking spaces required to be provided for the uses
within the shopping center or plaza.



   (H)   No carnival, exhibition, show or other amusement which is
scheduled to last more than one day shall be granted a license until the
Chief of Police shall approve a parking and security plan submitted by the
applicant. The Chief of Police shall review the plan to make certain that
adequate provision has been made for the safe ingress and egress of vehicles
to the site and to and from parking areas, the marking of parking areas and
maneuvering lanes and lighting for evening events. The plan shall also
contain advanced planning for crowd control, safety of parked vehicles,
security patrols and a disaster plan. The plan shall be tailored to the size
of the event and the particular location.



§ 10-2-13  REGULATIONS; GAME ROOMS.



   In addition to such regulations or conditions as may be contained
within a special use permit for a game room, or such other special conditions
as may be imposed by the Village President at the time that the license is
issued, the following items shall constitute rules and regulations for the
operation of any game room operating within the village. Neither the owner
nor operator of a game room shall cause or permit the operation of a game
room to take place contrary to these regulations.



   (A)   A manager over 25 years of age shall be present in the game
room during all of its hours of operation.



   (B)   If the game room is not an incidental use to a business which
possesses a liquor license, no alcoholic beverages shall be sold or consumed
in the game room.



   (C)   No cigarettes or other smoking product shall be sold in the
area devoted to the game room.



   (D)   Signs shall be posted in the game room denoting any curfew law
then in force within the village.



   (E)   The manager or other security personnel shall periodically
inspect the area outside of the entrance and, where applicable, parking lot
adjacent to the premises to assure that persons are not allowed to congregate
in such areas where the congregation of such persons takes place under
conditions which cause disturbance to patrons of other business
establishments, nearby residents or property owners. The owner or operator of
the game room or his or her agent will direct such persons to leave the
premises and, absent their compliance with that order, he or she will swear
out a complaint for trespass or other applicable violation of the laws of the
state or village with the Police Department.



   (F)   All game rooms will close not later than 11:00 p.m., except as
follows: where the game room is located in a premises where alcoholic liquors
are sold in, the game room may continue in operation until the closing hour
of that establishment; or where the game room is hosting an all night youth
lock in that has been approved by the Chief of Police, the game room may
continue in operation until the conclusion of the youth lock in.



   (G)   No gambling shall take place within the game room.



   (H)   No cash prizes shall be awarded within the game room.



   (I)   Neither the owner, nor operator, of the game room shall cause
or permit loud noises or disturbances to take place within the game room.
Persons who cause such loud noises or disturbances shall be promptly expelled
by the game room management.



   (J)   Amusement devices within game rooms shall be placed so that
the manager shall have a clear and unobstructed view of all amusement
devices. The placement of such devices may not obstruct entrances or aisles.
There shall be devoted a minimum of 40 square feet for each amusement device.
The owner or applicant shall submit at the time of application a drawing
indicating the proposed location of amusement devices within the game room.
Once the game room license is issued, the location of machines may be
changed; provided, however, that, the new placement of machines must be in
compliance with those standards set forth within this section.



(Ord. 99-04-27, passed 4-19-1999)



§ 10-2-14  INSPECTIONS.



   The Chief of the Police Department or any other village officer
designated shall, to the extent permissible by law, have the authority to
inspect any amusement, automatic amusement machine or device, and the
locations thereof.



§ 10-2-15  BOND REQUIRED FOR GOLF RANGES.



   No permit shall be issued to a golf driving range unless the person or
persons making application for the permit shall purchase a public liability
insurance policy covering any personal injury or damage to property suffered
as a result of the operation in the amount of $300,000 for any one occurrence
and $100,000 for injury to any one person or any one person’s property.



ARTICLE 3: ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS



Section



   10-3-1   “Electrical contractor” defined



   10-3-2   Registration



Cross-reference:



   Electrical Code, see Ch. 6, Art. 2



   Electrical Commission, see Ch. 3, Art. 4



§ 10-3-1  “ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR” DEFINED.



   The term ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR, as used in this article, shall mean any
person engaged in the business of installing or altering, by contract,
electrical equipment for the utilization of electricity supplied for light,
heat or power, not including radio apparatus or equipment for wireless
reception of sounds and signals, conductors and other equipment installed for
or by public utilities, including common carriers which are under the
jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce Commission, for use in their operation
as public utilities; but the term ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR does not include
employees employed by such contractor to do or supervise such work.



§ 10-3-2  REGISTRATION.



   Electrical contractors registered in the village prior to 12-31-1989
may renew their electrical contractor’s license each succeeding January 1.



ARTICLE 4: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS



Section



   10-4-1   Definitions



   10-4-2   Solicitation permit required



   10-4-3   Permit issuance; denial



   10-4-4   Display of permit



   10-4-5   Permit revocation



   10-4-6   Permit renewal



   10-4-7   Permit applications



   10-4-8   Application and permit fees



   10-4-9   Village policy on soliciting and trespassing



   10-4-10   Notice regulating soliciting



   10-4-11   Duty of solicitors to obey notices or to leave when
requested



   10-4-12   Uninvited solicitors prohibited



   10-4-13   Time limit on soliciting



   10-4-14   Prohibited acts



   10-4-15   Appeal of permit denial or revocation



   10-4-16   Solicitation on public highways



§ 10-4-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company,
association or joint stock association, church, religious sect, religious
denomination, society, organization or league, and including any trustee,
receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative thereof.



   SOLICITING or SOLICITATION.



      (1)   Any one or more of the following activities by a person
on streets, highways, sidewalks and at residences without invitation:



         (a)   The sale of, offer or attempt to sell, or seeking
to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuff,
consulting services or services of any kind, character or description, for
any kind of consideration whatever;



         (b)   The sale of, offer or attempt to sell, or seeking
to obtain prospective customers for any application or purchase of insurance
of any type, kind or character;



         (c)   The sale of, offer or attempt to sell, or seeking
to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers or any
type kind of publication; and



         (d)   The request, directly or indirectly, for money,
credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value on the plea or
representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or
other thing of value will be used for a political, religious or charitable
purpose.



      (2)   SOLICITATION shall be deemed completed when made,
whether or not the person making the same receives any contribution or makes
any sale referred to in this section.



(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2002-06-34, passed 6-17-2002; Ord.
2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 10-4-2  SOLICITATION PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation
without securing a required permit or to solicit in a manner inconsistent
with the issuance of the permit.



   (B)   Every person desiring to engage in solicitation, as defined in
this article, from persons in residences, on streets, highways or sidewalks
located in the village, except for a merchant conducting a sale on the
sidewalk as permitted under the village’s Zoning Code, is hereby required
to make written application for a solicitation permit as hereinafter
provided, and obtain such permit prior to engaging in solicitation within the
village.



   (C)   Application for solicitation permits shall be made upon a form
provided by, and shall be submitted to, the Village Manager, and shall be
accompanied by such other documentation as is required herein.



   (D)   All statements made by the applicant upon the application or
in connection therewith shall be under oath.



   (E)   The Village Manager and the Chief of Police shall cause to be
kept in their offices an accurate record of every application received and
acted upon, together with all other information and data pertaining thereto,
and copies of all solicitation permits issued under the provisions of this
article. Applications for permits shall be numbered in consecutive order, as
filed, and every permit issued and any renewal thereof shall be identified
with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued.



   (F)   No solicitation permit shall be issued to any person who has
been convicted of soliciting without a permit within the village or in any
other jurisdiction or of a violation of any of the provisions of this
article, nor to any person whose solicitation permit issued hereunder has
previously been revoked, as  herein provided, for a period of two years from
the date of such conviction or revocation.



(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 97-12-85, passed 12-15-1997; Ord.
2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 10-4-3  PERMIT ISSUANCE; DENIAL.



   (A)   Permit issuance. If the applicant has complied with all the
provisions of this article, the solicitation permit shall be issued forthwith.



   (B)   Permit denial.



      (1)   The Village Manager, within ten business days of filing
of the application, after consideration, investigation and review of the
application and all information obtained relative thereto, shall deny the
application if the applicant is not entitled to a permit, pursuant to the
provisions of this article, or if the application does not contain all of the
information and documentation as required herein.



      (2)   Endorsement shall be made by the Village Manager on the
application of the reason for the denial of the application.



      (3)   If the application is denied, the license fee shall be
deemed to have covered the cost of investigation and shall not be returned.



(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 10-4-4  DISPLAY OF PERMIT.



   (A)   A solicitation permit shall be a photo I.D. card,
approximately three inches by four inches, containing the name of the
soliciting organization or company, the product, if any, being offered for
sale, the name of the solicitor, the date solicitation shall occur in the
village, and the effective dates of the permit, in easily readable form.



   (B)   All permits shall bear the name of the village and the
signature of the Village Manager or Assistant Village Manager designated to
examine applications for and issue such permits.



   (C)   Each person engaged in solicitation shall prominently display
the solicitation permit issued hereunder on his or her person while so
soliciting within the village.



(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003; Ord.
2003-12-78, passed 12-1-2003)



§ 10-4-5  PERMIT REVOCATION.



   (A)   (1)   Any solicitation permit issued hereunder shall be
revoked by the Village Manager, if the holder of the permit or anyone
soliciting under the permit is convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this article, or has made a false material statement in the
application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a
solicitation permit under the terms of this article.



      (2)   Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof
shall be given by the Village Manager to the holder of the permit in person,
or by United States mail, return receipt requested, addressed to his or her
residence set forth in the application.



   (B)   The permit shall become null and void upon the first to occur
of the following:



      (1)   Actual notice of revocation to the individual or
organization; and



      (2)   Return of the return receipt of the mailed notice to the
individual or organization, whether or not delivered to the permit holder
personally.



(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 10-4-6  PERMIT RENEWAL.



   (A)   Upon expiration of a solicitation permit, the holder shall be
entitled to renew the permit; provided that, the application for renewal
continues to satisfy all conditions and requirements necessary to obtain an
original permit, and provided any changes in the information originally
submitted in the initial application, if any, are made.



   (B)   The applicant for a renewal of a solicitation permit shall
also pay the fee required for a permit.



(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 10-4-7  PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Solicitation permits. An application for a commercial
solicitation permit shall contain the following information regarding the
applicant:



      (1)   The name and address of the organization making the
application and the name under which it intends to solicit;



      (2)   The name and address of the person in charge of
solicitation in the village;



      (3)   The names and addresses of all the persons who will
solicit in the village;



      (4)   Such additional information which the Village Manager
may require;



      (5)   The dates such solicitation shall be conducted; provided
that, the maximum time period for which the permit shall be issued shall not
exceed 30 days, and provided that permit renewals shall not exceed 30 days;



      (6)   Description sufficient for identification of the subject
matter of the soliciting in which the applicant will engage;



      (7)   For charitable solicitation permits, a written statement
of recent date by the Attorney General of Illinois that the organization is
in compliance with the provisions of An Act to Regulate Solicitation and
Collection of Funds for Charitable Purposes, 225 ILCS 460/1, and such statute
as it may hereafter be amended;



      (8)   A written statement from the Internal Revenue Service
that the organization is a tax exempt organization under § 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code of the United States, and the organization’s federal
Employer Identification Number;



      (9)   Illinois Retail Sales Tax Identification Number, if
applicable;



      (10)   When solicitation will be conducted by an itinerant
vendor utilizing a motorized vehicle, a valid and current DuPage County
Health Department permit is required to be submitted along with a certificate
of insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in this
state shall be provided, insuring the solicitors and their organization for
liability for damages for personal injury and property damage causally
related to an act of ordinary negligence of the soliciting agent. The
certificate must state that is shall not be canceled during the period of
solicitation, and will provide at least the following coverage:



 

Personal injury
 
$500,000 per person


$1,000,000 per occurrence


Property damage
 
$100,000



 



      (11)   Information as to whether a solicitation permit has
been previously issued to the applicant, and if so, whether the permit was
ever revoked;



      (12)   Information as to whether the applicant has ever been
convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article or any
similar law in any jurisdiction; and



      (13)   All prospective solicitors/peddlers whose products is
insurance or insurance-related services must produce a current valid
insurance license issued by the Illinois Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation’s Insurance Division. Failure to provide a current
and valid Illinois insurance license will be cause for permit denial.



   (B)   Scope. Nothing in the foregoing sections shall be construed to
give permission to any solicitor to enter into traffic intersections for the
purpose of soliciting in contravention of any state law or local ordinance
prohibiting such intersection solicitation.



(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 97-12-85, passed 12-15-1997; Ord.
2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003; Ord. 2008-02-05, passed 2-19-2008)



§ 10-4-8  APPLICATION AND PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Original permit.



      (1)   The fees to be charged for a solicitation permit shall
be as follows:



 

(a) Non-refundable application fee
 
Whose fee includes a $25 administrative processing charge in addition to the
current cost of a fingerprint check


(b) Permit fee


   1. Per day
 
$10 per person


   2. Per week
 
$30 per person


   3. Per month
 
$50 per person


   4. Per year
 
$150 per person



 



      (2)   A permit shall be required for each vehicle used for
solicitation.



   (B)   Replacement card. The fee to be charged for the issuance of a
replacement card shall be $5.



   (C)   Religious, charitable or Illinois licensed insurance
agent/broker application and permit fee: exempt.



(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003; Ord.
2003-12-78, passed 12-1-2003; Ord. 2004-05-31, passed 5-17-2004; Ord.
2008-02-05, passed 2-19-2008)



§ 10-4-9  VILLAGE POLICY ON SOLICITING AND TRESPASSING.



   It shall be the policy of the governing body of this village that the
occupant or occupants of any residence located within the village shall make
a determination of whether solicitors or any person shall be or shall not be
invited to their respective residences.



(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 10-4-10  NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.



   (A)   When any solicitation is conducted by an organized group, the
group shall appoint a group representative who shall provide the Police
Department, before 10:00 a.m. on the day of the solicitation, a list of names
of the solicitors and the geographic area of the village in which the
solicitation will be conducted.



   (B)   Any person may give notice of the determination of the refusal
of invitation to solicitors to any residence by displaying a card upon or
near the main entrance door to the residence containing such language as
“No Solicitors”, “No Solicitors Invited” or such other language as
would indicate that solicitors are not to enter or engage in solicitation on
the premises.



   (C)   Such card so exhibited shall constitute notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.



(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 10-4-11  DUTY OF SOLICITORS TO OBEY NOTICES OR TO LEAVE WHEN REQUESTED.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going
onto any premises in the village upon which a residence is located to first
examine the notice provided by herein, if any is attached, and be governed by
the statement contained thereon.



      (2)   If the notice states “No Solicitors” or “No
Solicitors Invited” or other language as would indicate that solicitors are
not to enter or engage in solicitation on the premises, the solicitor shall
immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.



   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence,
whether or not invited, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises when requested to do so by the occupant.



(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 10-4-12  UNINVITED SOLICITORS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance and a trespass for
any person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any
door, create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the
attention of the occupant of such residence for the purpose of securing an
audience with the occupant thereof and engage in solicitation as defined in
this article, when notice is exhibited at the residence in accordance with
the provisions of § 10-4-10(B).



(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 10-4-13  TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITING.



   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to
go about any residence and ring the doorbell, or rap or knock upon any door,
or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention
of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience
with the occupant thereof and engage in solicitation, as defined in this
article, at any time on a Sunday or on a state or national holiday; or before
the hour of 10:00 a.m., or after the hour of 9:00 p.m.



(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003; Ord.
2005-04-20, passed 4-18-2005)



§ 10-4-14  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to file an application for
permit which contains false, misleading or untrue information.



   (B)   Nothing contained in this article shall release or relieve any
person from complying with any additional license requirement established by
the village.



(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003; Ord.
2004-08-44, passed 8-16-2004)



§ 10-4-15  APPEAL OF PERMIT DENIAL OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   (1)   The Village President shall hear appeals on the
denial of an application for a solicitation permit or revocation of a permit
by the Village Manager.



      (2)   A written appeal must be filed in the Village
Manager’s office within 21 days after the date of denial of the application
or revocation of the permit by the Village Manager, and shall contain a
specific request for or waiver of a hearing before the Village President.



   (B)   Where a hearing is waived, the appealing party shall submit
what documentation it desires to have the Village President consider with the
written appeal, and the Village President shall render a decision within 14
days of the filing of the written appeal.



   (C)   (1)   If a hearing is requested, the Village President
shall schedule a hearing to be held within 30 days of receipt of the written
appeal.



      (2)   The appealing party shall have the right to file
additional documents, amend the written appeal and to appear at such hearing
in person, or by attorney, or otherwise to examine and cross-examine
witnesses.



   (D)   The Village President shall not be bound by the rules of
evidence prevailing in the courts of law, but shall, in ascertaining the
conditions and practices involved in the decision appealed, take into account
all reliable, probative and substantial evidence produced at the hearing
relating to the denial of the application or revocation of the permit.



   (E)   The appealing party may supply, at its own cost, a court
reporter.



   (F)   The written decision of the Village President shall be made
available to the appealing party not later than ten days after the hearing on
the appeal is concluded.



(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003)



§ 10-4-16  SOLICITATION ON PUBLIC HIGHWAYS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand on or along the public
streets or highways within the village for the purpose of soliciting
contributions from occupants of vehicles contrary to as 625 ILCS 5/11-1006.



(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 93-09-85, passed 9-28-1993; Ord.
2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003)



ARTICLE 5: RAFFLES



Section



   10-5-1   Definitions



   10-5-2   License required



   10-5-3   Authority for issuance



   10-5-4   Licenses



   10-5-5   Application for license



   10-5-6   License fee



   10-5-7   Restrictions on licenses



   10-5-8   Conduct of raffles



   10-5-9   Manager; bond



   10-5-10   Raffle tickets



   10-5-11   Prizes



   10-5-12   Records



   10-5-13   Regulations



   10-5-14   Auxiliary or affiliates



   10-5-15   Construction



§ 10-5-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHARITABLE. An organization or institution organized and operated to
benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those
eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.



   EDUCATIONAL. An organization or institution organized and operated to
provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods
common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in
their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported
schools.



   FRATERNAL. An organization of persons having a common interest, the
primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and
to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the
burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for
by the government.



   LABOR. An organization composed of workers organized with the objective
to better of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective operations.



   NON-PROFIT. An organization or institution organized and conducted on a
not-for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of
the operation.



   RAFFLE. A form of lottery, as defined in the Criminal Code of the
Illinois Compiled Statutes, conducted by an organization licensed under this
article in which:



      (1)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for
a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of
numbers or by some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be
designated the winning chance; and



      (2)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing
or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of
acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery; except
that, the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly
exhibited sporting contest.



   RELIGIOUS. Any church, congregation, society or organization founded
for the purpose of religious worship.



   VETERANS. An organization or association, comprised of members of which
substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare
of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way
as to confer a public benefit.



§ 10-5-2  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, firm or corporation shall conduct a raffle without first
having obtained a license pursuant to this article.



§ 10-5-3  AUTHORITY FOR ISSUANCE.



   The corporate authorities shall have the authority to issue licenses
for raffles subject to the limitations set forth in this article.



§ 10-5-4  LICENSES.



   Licenses for raffles shall be issued only to religious, charitable,
labor, fraternal, educational or veterans’ organizations which operate
without profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously
for a period of five years immediately before making application for a
license, and have had during that entire five-year period a bona fide
membership engaged in carrying out their objectives. A license issued by the
village shall authorize the sale of raffle chances only within the borders of
the village. The corporate authorities shall act on a license application
within 30 days from the date of application.



§ 10-5-5  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Application for a license shall be made in writing, no fewer
than 30 days before the intended sale of raffle chances, on forms provided by
the Village Manager’s office.



   (B)   Each license and application for license shall contain the
following information:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;



      (2)   The area within the village in which the raffle chances
will be sold and issued;



      (3)   The time period during which raffle chances will be sold
or issued;



      (4)   The date, time, manner and locations of determining the
winning chances;



      (5)   A sworn statement attesting to the non-profit character
of the applicant, signed by its presiding officer and secretary;



      (6)   A copy of the applicant’s articles of incorporation
and/or charter; and



      (7)   Such other information as the Village Manager may
require.



   (C)   Each license issued under this article shall be valid for one
raffle, except as noted under § 10-5-6 herein.



(Ord. 2000-04-27, passed 4-3-2000)



§ 10-5-6  LICENSE FEE.



   (A)   The fee for each single event license shall be as set forth in
the following schedule.



      (1)   Class A. Where the aggregate value of all prizes awarded
in any raffle does not exceed $500, the license fee shall be $10.



      (2)   Class B. Where the aggregate value of all prizes awarded
in any raffle is greater than $500, but does not exceed $5,000, the license
fee shall be $20.



      (3)   Class C. Where the aggregate value of all prizes awarded
in any raffle is greater than $5,000 but does not exceed $50,000, the license
fee shall be $50.



      (4)   Class D. Where the aggregate value of all prizes awarded
in any raffle is greater than $50,000, the license fee shall be $100.



   (B)   The fee for an annual license shall be as set forth in the
following schedule.



      (1)   Where authorized under the terms of an annexation
agreement and during its effective period, an annual raffle license, for the
period beginning on January 1 of any year and ending December 31 of the same
year, shall permit the conduct of a raffle or raffles for a single event not
to exceed $1,000; the maximum retail value of a non-cash prize not to exceed
$1,000.



      (2)   Such license shall permit up to 200 events, the
aggregate value of all prizes awarded annually not to exceed $32,000.



      (3)   The fee for the annual license shall be $100. Annual
licenses shall not be pro-rated as to term or fee.



   (C)   The fee for a raffle license may be waived by an affirmative
vote of the corporate authorities. Each raffle license shall be valid for the
duration of the contest. All raffle license fees waived for non-profit
organizations since 1990 shall automatically be waived in subsequent years;
provided that, all proceeds of the raffle shall benefit the residents of the
Village of Carol Stream and that the organization submits all appropriate
documentation as required in this article. A maximum of three licenses per
non-profit organization per year shall be eligible for the fee waiver.



(Ord. 92-06-65, passed 6-9-1992; Ord. 2000-04-27, passed 4-3-2000; Ord.
2009-06-31, passed 6-15-2009)



§ 10-5-7  RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSEES.



   No raffle license shall be issued to:



   (A)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;



   (B)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or
gambling promoter;



   (C)   Any person who is not of good moral character;



   (D)   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in divisions
(A), (B) or (C) of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit
interest, or in which such person is active or employed;



   (E)   Any organization in which a person defined in divisions (A),
(B) or (C) of this section is an officer, director or employee, whether
compensated or not; and



   (F)   Any organization in which a person defined in divisions (A),
(B) or (C) of this section is to participate in the management or operation
of a raffle as defined in this article.



§ 10-5-8  CONDUCT OF RAFFLES.



   The conducting of raffles in the village is subject to the following.



   (A)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively
devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that
game.



   (B)   No person, except a bona fide member of the sponsoring
organization, may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.



   (C)   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for
participating in the management or operation of the raffle.



   (D)   The maximum fee which may be charged for each raffle chance
sold or issued shall not exceed $100. All such fees shall be paid in currency
or by check.



   (E)   A licensee may rent a premises in which to determine the
winning chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also
licensed under this article.



   (F)   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area
specified on the license and winning chances may be determined only at those
locations specified on the license.



   (G)   No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of 18 years may be
within the area where winning chances are being determined only when
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian.



§ 10-5-9  MANAGER; BOND.



   (A)   All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the
supervision of a single raffle manager designated by the organization. The
manager shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of $5,000 or of the aggregate
value of the prizes to be awarded, whichever is higher, in favor of the
organization conditioned upon his or her honesty in the performance of his or
her duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in
writing to the village not less than 30 days prior to its cancellation.



   (B)   The village may waive the bond requirement for a manager of an
organization applying for an annual raffle license, if the organization, by
the unanimous vote of its members present requests such a waiver in writing
at the time of the license application.



(Ord. 2000-04-27, passed 4-3-2000)



§ 10-5-10  RAFFLE TICKETS.



   (A)   Each raffle ticket, chance or other raffle token shall state,
on its face, the name and address of the licensee, the date or dates of the
drawings, and the prize or prizes to be awarded; provided, however, that this
requirement shall not apply to any raffle in which prizes in the aggregate
value of under $50 are awarded, or to any raffle in which raffle chances are
sold only on the date of the drawing during the event at which the drawing is
to be conducted. No such ticket, chance or token shall be sold or issued more
than 90 days before the determination of the winning chance or chances.



   (B)   If any raffle for which a license is issued under this article
is canceled, or if any such raffle is not conducted on the date contained in
the application for license, the licensee shall refund all money paid for any
raffle chances issued or sold to the persons to whom such raffle chances were
issued or sold within 45 days after the date on which the raffle was to be
conducted or within 45 days after cancellation of the raffle, whichever is
sooner.



§ 10-5-11  PRIZES.



   The maximum cash prize awarded in any raffle shall be $100,000; the
maximum retail value of non-cash prizes awarded in any raffle shall be
$100,000. The aggregate value of all prizes awarded in any raffle shall not
exceed $200,000.



§ 10-5-12  RECORDS.



   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances
shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each
single gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All
deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be
documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a
description of the purchased item or service or other reason for the
deduction, and the recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be
itemized as to payee, amount and date of payment.



   (B)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall, for each
and every raffle, keep records of the name and address of each person to whom
a raffle chance has been sold or issued, and the number of raffle chances
sold or issued to such person.



   (C)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same non-profit
organization pursuant to license therefor issued by the State Department of
Revenue, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have
separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same
person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.



   (D)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report
monthly or at least semi-annually in the case of an annual raffle license
holder permitting multiple raffle events to its membership, and to the
village, its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and the
distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this section.



   (E)   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three
years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to
operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.



(Ord. 2000-04-27, passed 4-3-2000)



§ 10-5-13  REGULATIONS.



   The corporate authorities of the village, or its designated agent, may
publish rules and regulations consistent with this article or state law
governing the conduct of raffles licensed hereunder.



§ 10-5-14  AUXILIARY OR AFFILIATES.



   Whenever used in this article, the word ORGANIZATION shall include an
auxiliary or affiliate of a licensee.



§ 10-5-15  CONSTRUCTION.



   Nothing in this article shall be construed to authorize the conducting
or operating of any gambling scheme, enterprise, activity or device other
than a raffle provided for herein.



ARTICLE 6: SCAVENGERS



Section



   10-6-1   Definitions



   10-6-2   License required; application; number of licenses limited;
terms and conditions



   10-6-3   Duty of scavengers



   10-6-4   Equipment, prohibited use



   10-6-5   Disposal, storage of refuse restricted



   10-6-6   Enforcement



   10-6-7   Bond required



§ 10-6-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OFFAL SCAVENGER. Any person engaged in the business of collecting,
gathering or transporting butcher’s offal, calfskins, hotel or restaurant
bones, grease, glue, stock or kindred refuse, by wagon, cart or otherwise, or
to drive any wagon or vehicle for such purpose through the public ways of the
village.



   PRIVATE SCAVENGER. Any person engaged in the removal and disposal of
wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of
food; wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce, animals and fish
or poultry; non-combustible refuse, including, but not limited to, metals,
tin cans, metal furniture, dirt, rock and pieces of concrete, glass,
crockery, other mineral waste; street rubbish, including, but not limited to,
street sweepings, dirt, leaves, catch basin dirt, content of litter
receptacles, manure, ashes and cinders; combustible refuse, including, but
not limited to, paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree
branches, yard trimmings, wood furniture and bedding.



      (1)   COMMERCIAL OFFICE, INDUSTRIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL
SCAVENGER. A private scavenger who provides solid waste collection to
commercial, office, industrial and institutional properties within the
village.



      (2)   MULTI-FAMILY SCAVENGER. A private scavenger who provides
solid waste collection to properties within the village with more than one
residential living unit which does not receive curbside collection and are
part of a larger complex which are serviced by a centralized dumpster/refuse
collection area.



   SEWER AND CATCH BASIN CLEANER. Any person engaged in the business of
cleaning, collecting, or transporting the contents of catch basins or sewers
by vehicle or otherwise, or in any way engage in the business of cleaning
catch basins and sewers; provided that, licensed plumbers or licensed sewer
builders who may clean catch basins or sewers as an incident to the repair of
such catch basins or sewers shall not be included in such definition.



(Ord. 2000-02-10, passed 2-7-2000)



§ 10-6-2  LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; NUMBER OF LICENSES LIMITED; TERMS
AND CONDITIONS.



   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of private scavenger,
offal scavenger or sewer and catch basin cleaner without first obtaining a
license to do so as provided in this code.



   (B)   Application for such license shall be made in conformity with
the requirements of this code relating to applications for licenses, and
shall set forth the nature of the business to be carried on.



   (C)   There shall be issued in the village not more than 15 regular
licenses. Such regular licenses shall allow the license holder to solicit for
any scavenger service within the village with the exception that the
corporate authorities may enter into a contract with a single regularly
licensed scavenger for the collection of refuse from single-family residences
within the village.



   (D)   The granting of a license to engage in the business of
scavenger or the collection or disposal of garbage, refuse and ashes shall
not preclude the corporate authorities from entering into a separate contract
or contracts for the collection within the village of refuse and/or
recyclable materials including but not limited to newspapers, glass and
metals.



(Ord. 90-11-99, passed 11-27-1990; Ord. 91-07-51, passed 7-23-1991; Ord.
92-01-10, passed 1-28-1992; Ord. 92-07-80, passed 7-14-1992)



§ 10-6-3  DUTY OF SCAVENGERS.



   (A)   General duties. It shall be the duty of every contractor,
scavenger and person, his or her agents and employees, who has contracted or
undertaken to remove any diseased or dead animal, offal, rubbish, garbage,
dirt, street sweepings or other filthy, offensive or noxious substance, or is
engaged in any such removal or in the loading or unloading of any such
substance, to do the same with dispatch and in every particular in a manner
as cleanly and free from offense and with as little danger and prejudice to
life and health as possible.



   (B)   Private scavenger duties and requirements.



      (1)   The term of a private scavenger license is for an entire
calendar year beginning January 1 and expiring on December 31 of that same
year.



      (2)   A company issued a private scavenger license shall
submit and operate a recycling program which includes the following elements:



         (a)   Proper site and design criteria for collection
areas;



         (b)   Collection processes;



         (c)   Container specifications;



         (d)   Data collection and reporting method; and



         (e)   Promotional and educational program materials.



      (3)   Recycling collection area shall be conveniently located,
screened from view and maintained in a clean, sanitary and litter-free manner
within both common areas and in or near the building.



      (4)   (a)   A private scavenger license holder shall submit
a quarterly report to the village that contains the following program data:



            1.   The weight of recyclables, refuse and yard
waste collected from each property; and



            2.   The summary of multi-family recycling
services that includes, but is not limited to, frequency of collection,
method of collection and the name and location of the processing facility for
recyclable materials.



         (b)   Reports shall be due no later than 15 days after
the close of the quarter (first quarter - April 15; second quarter - July 15;
third quarter October 15; and fourth quarter - January 15).



      (5)   All private scavenger license holders shall provide to
the village an annual report listing the village customer accounts serviced
by the licensee which shall include:



         (a)   Name and address of the property owner or property
management company;



         (b)   Name and address of the current village solid
waste collection accounts; and



         (c)   The customer list is to be submitted with the
formal scavenger license application.



      (6)   License holders shall provide the following services to
all village properties serviced by the licensee:



         (a)   Collection of newspapers, corrugated cardboard,
paperboard, magazines, catalogues and phone books, mixed paper, high-grade
paper, glass, aluminum, tin, steel and bi-metal empty aerosol cans,
polyethylene terephthalate (PET) #1, plastic bottles and containers,
high-density polyethylene (HDPE) #2 plastic bottles and containers and six
and 12-pack beverage rings; and



         (b)   At least semi-annually, the scavenger licensee
shall distribute promotional and educational materials to property accounts
serviced by the licensee.



(Ord. 2000-02-10, passed 2-7-2000)



§ 10-6-4  EQUIPMENT, PROHIBITED USE.



   (A)   Any vehicle used by such scavenger in his or her business
shall be water-tight and equipped with airtight covers for such portions as
are used for the transportation of refuse. It shall be unlawful for any such
vehicle to be driven over or through any street in the village during or on a
Sunday.



   (B)   Regulated collection hours.  Commercial scavengers licensed
by the village may only collect, remove or dispose of refuse anywhere in the
village from Monday through Friday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m.  Commercial scavenger service may be extended to Saturdays between 7:00
a.m. to 7:00 p.m. during those weeks which contain a nationally observed
holiday.



(Ord. 2016-07-32, passed 7-18-2016)



§ 10-6-5  DISPOSAL, STORAGE OF REFUSE RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any scavenger to dispose of or to store any
refuse in any place within the corporate limits or within one mile thereof,
excepting with the permission of the corporate authorities.



§ 10-6-6  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this article and
shall issue such reasonable orders in connection with the carrying on of the
business of a licensed scavenger as it deems necessary to protect the health
of the public. It shall be the duty of such licensed scavengers to comply
with such orders and to perform the work required of them in such a way that
no nuisance will be created thereby.



§ 10-6-7  BOND REQUIRED.



   All persons, firms or corporations licensed as scavengers by the
village shall give bond to the village in the penal sum of $10,000 with
surety to be approved by the Village President, conditioned to keep and save
harmless the village from any and all damage that may result to pavements,
sidewalks or other public property of the village resulting from the use of
its streets or other public property in connection with such business, and
further, to save and keep harmless the village from damages to persons or
property arising from suits or claims resulting from obstructions or
materials deposited or dropped upon the streets or other public places in the
village by such scavenger.



ARTICLE 7: SECONDHAND SALES



Section



   10-7-1   License required; exceptions



   10-7-2   Application; investigation



   10-7-3   Records to be kept by licensee; inspection



   10-7-4   Purchase from minors prohibited; exception



§ 10-7-1  LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   No person shall engage in the business of a secondhand dealer without
first obtaining a license therefor for each separate place, premises or
location where such business is to be carried on; provided, however, that,
the words SECONDHAND DEALER as used in this section shall not include
itinerant dealers in secondhand clothes, secondhand bottle dealers or
exchangers, pawnbrokers or junk dealers, or sales or exchanges of used
articles and materials conducted by charitable or religious organizations.
The business of a salvage dealer or salvage store shall be included in the
business of SECONDHAND DEALER and shall obtain a license under the provisions
of this article.



(Ord. 2009-08-36A, passed 8-3-2009)



§ 10-7-2  APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION.



   An application for license as a secondhand dealer shall be made in
conformance with the general requirements of this code relating to
applications for licenses. When an application for such license is made, the
Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be made to ascertain whether
the applicant has complied with the state laws and the provisions of this
article applicable to such business, and whether the applicant has been
convicted of any crime in the past five years. Any person convicted in the
past five years of a felony or any other crime, including in its essential
elements the possession of stolen property, shall not be issued a license
under this article.



(Ord. 2009-08-36A, passed 8-3-2009)



§ 10-7-3  RECORDS TO BE KEPT BY LICENSEE; INSPECTION.



   (A)   Every secondhand dealer shall keep a book in which there shall
be made, at the time of the transaction, a record in English of every article
received, purchased, sold or exchanged by him or her, setting forth the
following:  the date of the transaction, the name and residence of the
purchaser or seller, and a brief description of the article sold or
purchased, including identification numbers thereon, if any.



   (B)   Such record shall at all reasonable times be open to the
inspection of the Police Department.



(Ord. 2009-08-36A, passed 8-3-2009)



§ 10-7-4  PURCHASE FROM MINORS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.



   No secondhand dealer shall purchase any secondhand article whatsoever
from any minor without the written consent of the parents or guardians of
such minor.



(Ord. 2009-08-36A, passed 8-3-2009)



ARTICLE 8: VENDING MACHINES



Section



   10-8-1   Definition



   10-8-2   License required



   10-8-3   Application



   10-8-4   Issuance of license



   10-8-5   Machines without licenses



   10-8-6   Suspension or revocation



§ 10-8-1  DEFINITION.



   A VENDING MACHINE is a mechanical or electronic device that is intended
to be used for the dispensing, sale or distribution of any food or food
related product, or any mechanical or electronic device, other than
electronic game machines, pool tables, juke boxes or amusement machines,
which dispenses any product and which is connected to any electrical outlet
or water system.



§ 10-8-2  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, firm or corporation who owns, leases or has a possessive
interest in any premises within the village shall install, keep, maintain,
use or permit the maintenance or use upon such premises of any vending
machine, as defined above, unless the same shall have been first licensed
under the provisions of this article; and no owner of any vending machine, as
described above, shall install same on any premises located within the
village without first obtaining a license therefor pursuant to the provisions
of this article.



§ 10-8-3  APPLICATION.



   Application for such license shall be made in conformity with the
general requirements of this chapter relating to applications and licenses.
Such application shall include the following information:  the name and
address of owner of the premises upon which the machine is to be located for
use, the owner or lessee of the machine, the product to be sold or
distributed by the machine and a correct description of the premises upon
which the machine will be used.



§ 10-8-4  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a properly executed application, together with
the proper fees as set forth herein, the village shall issue a self-voiding
adhesive license to be placed on each vending machine or mechanical device as
defined herein. Such license shall bear the words “Village of Carol Stream
- Vending Machine License” and such other wording as may be prescribed by
the village. It shall be unlawful for any person to mutilate the license
during the year for which it was issued.



   (B)   In the event that a licensed machine is to be permanently
withdrawn from the village, and another machine permanently substituted in
its place, the licensee, upon the payment of a $1 transfer fee, may receive a
new sticker for the new permanent machine. No rebate or refund shall be made
of any license fee or part thereof for any reason of non-use or
dis-continuance of the operation or any vending machine.



§ 10-8-5  MACHINES WITHOUT LICENSES.



   (A)   In the event that a machine required to be licensed under this
article shall be operated within the village without a license having been
procured for the machine, or where such license is not displayed as provided
in this chapter, the Village Manager or the Chief of Police of the village,
or such person as either officer shall designate, may take one or more of the
following actions.



      (1)   He or she may render the machine inoperable by removing
any electrical or other utility connection to the machine, turning the
machine with its face to a wall, or install some lock or other device to
render the machine inoperable. Where such an action is taken, the officer
shall place upon the machine a notice indicating that the operation of the
machine constitutes a violation of the ordinances of the village.



      (2)   He or she may render such machine inoperable by covering
it with some material which must be broken or torn in order to operate the
machine. After rendering the machine inoperable in this manner, he or she
shall place a notice indicating that the operation of the machine constitutes
a violation of the ordinances of the village.



      (3)   He or she may impound the machine and remove it to any
secure place within the village. In the event that the machine is moved in
this manner, the person who was required to procure a license for the machine
under this article shall, in addition to procuring a license, be responsible
for the payment of the expenses incurred by the village in the impoundment
process.



   (B)   It shall be a violation of this code for any person to
interfere with a village official who is carrying out his or her
responsibilities to render inoperable or impound a vending or similar machine
pursuant to the provisions of this article.



§ 10-8-6  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   The provisions regarding suspension or revocation of any machine or
device for which a license is required under this article may be suspended or
revoked in the event that the machine or device is used in violation of any
village ordinance or regulation or state statute or regulation.



ARTICLE 9: TOBACCO PRODUCTS



Section



   10-9-1   Definitions



   10-9-2   License required



   10-9-3   Prohibited sales; delivery signs



   10-9-4   Minimum age to sell tobacco products



   10-9-5   (Reserved)



   10-9-6   License limited to place of business



   10-9-7   Vending machines; locking devices



   10-9-8   Responsibility for agents and employees



   10-9-9   Use of premises after revocation



   10-9-10   Village President’s power to fine



Cross-reference:



   Possession of tobacco by a minor, see § 14-2-31



§ 10-9-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT.  Any product or devise not consisting or
containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting,
sniffing, or by any other means.  The term ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT
excludes cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, or other tobacco products as these
terms are defined in this section and any product approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration as a non-tobacco product for sale as a
tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other
medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose.



   ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE OR VAPE.  Any electronic device that provides a
gas or vapor derived from nicotine and/or other chemicals and inhaled by the
user simulating smoking.  The term electronic cigarette or vape includes
electronic cigars, electronic pipes, electronic hookah pipes, vape pens,
advanced personal vaporizers, box mods or other devices capable of delivering
aerosolized nicotine or other chemicals through inhalation.



   SMOKELESS TOBACCO.  Any tobacco product that is suitable for dipping
or chewing.



   TOBACCO PRODUCT.  Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but
not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, or
dipping tobacco, and any nicotine delivery systems, including electronic
cigarettes other than those prescribed by a physician.



   VENDING MACHINE.  Any mechanical, electric or electronic, self-service
device which, upon insertion of money, tokens, credit card, debit card, or
any other form of payment, dispense tobacco products.



(Ord. 92-10-116, passed 10-27-1992; Ord. 2014-01-01, passed 1-6-2014; Ord.
2017-05-22, passed 5-1-2017)



§ 10-9-2  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to
give away, other than a situation where the gift is made by one who does not
also sell tobacco products or alternative nicotine products, deliver or to
keep with the intention of selling at retail, giving away or delivering
tobacco products or alternative nicotine products within the village without
having first obtained a tobacco dealer's license pursuant to this article.



   (B)   Such license shall be in addition to any other license
required by this code.



(Ord. 92-10-116, passed 10-27-1992; Ord. 2014-01-01, passed 1-6-2014)



§ 10-9-3  PROHIBITED SALES; DELIVERY SIGNS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee,
to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products, electronic
cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, coupons for tobacco products,
electronic cigarettes or alternative nicotine products, or to provide free
promotional items relating to tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or
alternative nicotine products, to any person under the age of 18 years;
provided, however, that these acts shall not be unlawful under this provision
if a parent carries out such acts in the privacy of the parent's residence
with his or her child.



   (B)   The sale of tobacco products unpackaged shall be prohibited.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to display tobacco products, electronic
cigarettes or alternative nicotine products together with counter displays of
candy or other similar products.



   (D)   Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided
for herein shall be posted by every licensee and on every display of tobacco
products, electronic cigarettes or alternative nicotine products for sale.



      (1)   Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:



         “THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS,



         ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES AND



          ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS



         TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN



         YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW.”



      (2)   The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a
white background; such letters to be at least five-eighths inch high.  The
signs will be provided by the village free of charge.



(Ord. 92-10-116, passed 10-27-1992; Ord. 93-02-20, passed 2-23-1993; Ord.
2014-01-01, passed 1-6-2014)



§ 10-9-4  MINIMUM AGE TO SELL TOBACCO PRODUCTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any licensee and/or any officer, associate
member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee to engage, employ
or permit, suffer or allow any person under 18 years of age to sell tobacco
products or alternative nicotine products or to offer tobacco products or
alternative nicotine products for sale.



(Ord. 92-10-116, passed 10-27-1992; Ord. 2014-01-01, passed 1-6-2014)



§ 10-9-5  (RESERVED)



§ 10-9-6  LICENSE LIMITED TO PLACE OF BUSINESS.



   (A)   Any license issued shall specify the specific location to
which the license shall refer and the license shall only be valid at that
location.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a vendor whose services include
the delivery of tobacco, electronic cigarettes, alternative nicotine
products, and other consumer products to customers at the customer’s
address pursuant to telephonically or electronically transmitted orders, may
deliver tobacco products, electronic cigarettes and alternative nicotine
products to the customer’s address, provided however, that the vendor’s
delivery employee shall determine that the person receiving the delivery of
the tobacco product, electronic cigarette or alternative nicotine product is
not under the age of 18 years.  Such determination shall be made by:



      (1)   Examining from any person that appears to be under 27
years of age a government issued photographic identification that establishes
the person is at least 18 years of age; or



      (2)   For sales made through the Internet or other remote
sales methods, performing age verifications through an independent,
third-party age verification service that compares information available from
public records to the personal information entered by the person during the
ordering process, that establishes the person is 18 years of age or older.



(Ord. 92-10-116, passed 10-27-1992; Ord. 2000-04-31, passed 4-17-2000; Ord.
2014-01-01, passed 1-6-2014)



§ 10-9-7  VENDING MACHINES; LOCKING DEVICES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for
sale, give away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling, giving
away or delivering tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or alternative
nicotine products by use of a vending machine, unless such vending machine is
equipped with a manual, electric or electronic locking device controlled by
the licensee so as to prevent its operation by persons under the age of 18
years.  The locking device shall be activated and operational at all times.



   (B)   All vending machines with tobacco products, electronic
cigarettes or alternative nicotine products shall be placed in an area within
which the licensee's personnel have a clear view and access and where the
machines can only be activated where the person selling the tobacco products,
electronic cigarettes or alternative nicotine products has determined by a
visual inspection and where necessary through identification that the person
purchasing the tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or alternative
nicotine products is not under the age of 18 years.



   (C)   Any premises where access by persons under the age of 18 years
is prohibited and where vending machines are strictly for the use of
employees of business located at such premises, shall be exempt from the
requirements of divisions (A) and (B) of this section.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to have or permit on its
premises any vending machine which sells both non-tobacco products and
tobacco products or alternative nicotine products.



(Ord. 92-10-116, passed 10-27-1992; Ord. 2014-01-01, passed 1-6-2014)



§ 10-9-8  RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES.



   Every act or omissions of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation
of any of the provisions of this article by any officer, director, manager or
other agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the
act of such licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same
manner as if such act or omissions had been done or omitted by the licensee
personally.



(Ord. 92-10-116, passed 10-27-1992)



§ 10-9-9  USE OF PREMISES AFTER REVOCATION.



   When any license shall have been revoked for cause pursuant to §
10-1-13, no license shall be granted to licensee for a period of six months
thereafter for the business of selling tobacco products as required in §
10-9-2 for the premises described in such revoked license.



(Ord. 92-10-116, passed 10-27-1992)



§ 10-9-10  VILLAGE PRESIDENT’S POWER TO FINE.



   In addition to the powers of the Village President to suspend or revoke
a tobacco products license, the Village President may instead levy a fine on
the licensee. The fine imposed shall not be less than $50, nor more than
$750, for each violation. Each day on which a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. No such fine shall be imposed, however,
unless, after a hearing conducted by the Village President, with at least
seven days prior notice, the Village President shall determine that a
provision of this code or of the state statutes has been violated. The
advance notice provision shall begin following delivery by certified mail or
by personal service. The Village President shall, within seven days after the
hearing, if he or she determines that the licensee should be fined, state the
reason for such determination in a written order and the amount of the fine
and shall serve a copy of such order upon the licensee within seven days
after the order has been entered.



(Ord. 92-11-119, passed 11-10-1992)



ARTICLE 10: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section



   10-10-1   Purpose



   10-10-2   Findings



   10-10-3   Definitions



   10-10-4   Sexually oriented business license required



   10-10-5   Sexually oriented business employee license required



   10-10-6   Sexually oriented business license application



   10-10-7   Issuance of a sexually oriented business license



   10-10-8   Sexually oriented business employee license application



   10-10-9   Issuance of a sexually oriented business employee license



   10-10-10   Fees



   10-10-11   Expiration and renewal of license



   10-10-12   Suspension



   10-10-13   Revocation



   10-10-14   Appeal rights



   10-10-15   Transfer of license



   10-10-16   Additional regulations concerning the operation of
sexually oriented businesses



   10-10-17   Penalty



   10-10-18   Injunction



   10-10-19   Effect of partial invalidity



Cross-reference:



   Sexually oriented business zoning regulations, see Ch. 16, Art. 19



§ 10-10-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to minimize and control the negative secondary effects of
sexually oriented businesses within the municipality in order to promote the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the municipality. The
provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor the effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials or communication, including sexually oriented entertainment.
Similarly, it is not the purpose nor effect of this article to restrict or
deny access by adults to sexually oriented entertainment protected by the
First Amendment, or to deny access by distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market. Furthermore, it is not the
intent or effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution or
exhibition of entertainment that is obscene.



(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)



§ 10-10-2  FINDINGS.



   Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of sexually
oriented businesses presented to the municipality from findings incorporated
in the cases of City of Erie v. Pap’s A.M., 529 U.S. 277, 120 S. Ct. 1382
(2000), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), City of Renton v.
Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theaters,
426 U.S. 50 (1976), Berg v. Health and Hospital Corporation 865 F.2d. 797
(7th Cir. 1989), Ellwest Stereo Theaters v. Wenner, 681 F.2d. 1243 (9th Cir.
1982), Bamon Corp. v. City of Dayton, 730 F.Supp. 80 (S.D. Ohio, 1990), and
EWAP, Inc. v. City of Los Angeles, 97 Cal. App. 3d 179, 158 Cal. Rptr.
(1979), and on studies in other cities including the Report of the Attorney
General’s Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses
(Minnesota, 1989), Memorandum re: Adult Entertainment Ordinance, of the
Assistant Chief of Police of Tucson, Arizona (May 1, 1990), Hecht, Peter R.,
Ph.D., Report to the American Center for Law and Justice on the Secondary
Impacts of Sex Oriented Businesses (March 31, 1996), Adult Entertainment
Businesses in Indianapolis, An Analysis (1984), and McCleary, 



Richard, Ph.D., and Meeker, James W., Ph.D., Final Report to the City of
Garden Grove: The Relationship Between Crime and Adult Business Operations on
Garden Grove Boulevard, (Garden Grove, CA, October 23, 1991), the President
and Board of Trustees find as follows.



   (A)   Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary
unlawful and unhealthy activities.



   (B)   Sexual acts, including masturbation, oral sex and anal sex,
occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private
or semi-private booths or rooms for viewing films, videos or live sexually
oriented entertainment. Such activities may result in spreading communicable
diseases such as syphilis, gonorrhea and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).



   (C)   Offering sexually oriented entertainment under conditions that
encourage such activities creates unhealthy conditions.



   (D)   Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part because of the failure of owners and operators to regulate
those activities and maintain their facilities.



   (E)   Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is
found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view
sexually oriented films concealed from public view.



   (F)   The findings noted in divisions (A) through (E) above raise
compelling and substantial governmental concerns.



   (G)   Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics
which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those compelling and
substantial governmental concerns.



   (H)   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism
to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and operators
of sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will
place a heretofore non-existent incentive on operators to see that sexually
oriented businesses are run in a manner consistent with the health, safety
and welfare of patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the
municipality. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the
licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business and fully
in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein.



   (I)   The regulation of nudity, semi-nudity and physical contact
between employees and patrons in sexually oriented businesses will further
the compelling and substantial governmental interests in preventing
prostitution and other sex-related crimes, including illegal sex acts, and
protecting the public health, safety and welfare.



   (J)   Requiring open sight lines in sexually oriented businesses and
requiring sufficient lighting will advance the compelling and substantial
governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity
occurring in sexually oriented businesses and will facilitate enforcement of
the provisions of this article and other federal, state and local laws,
thereby furthering the compelling and substantial governmental interest in
protecting the public health, safety and welfare.



   (K)   The disclosure of certain information by those persons
ultimately responsible for the day to day operation and maintenance of
sexually oriented businesses, and by employees of such businesses, will
facilitate the enforcement of the provisions of this article and other
federal, state and local laws, and will thereby further the compelling and
substantial government interest in protecting the public health, safety and
welfare.



   (L)   A person who recently has been convicted of a sexually related
crime is not an appropriate individual to operate or be employed in a
sexually oriented business.



   (M)   Barring such individuals from the management of and employment
in sexually oriented businesses for a period of years serves as a deterrent
to and prevents the commission of sexually related criminal acts, including
conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.



   (N)   Studies in other cities have demonstrated a correlation
between sexually oriented businesses and crime, including sex-related crimes
like prostitution, obscenity and sexual assault. This correlation is
especially acute when more than one sexually oriented business is located in
a neighborhood and when a sexually oriented business is located near a
business licensed to serve alcoholic beverages.



   (O)   Studies conducted in other cities have demonstrated a
connection between sexually oriented businesses and organized crime.



(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)



§ 10-10-3  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EMPLOYEE. A natural person who performs any service or work on the
premises of a sexually oriented business, including, but not limited to,
providing entertainment, performing work of a management or supervisory
nature, or performing support functions, on a full-time, part-time or
contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee,
independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not the person is
paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of the business.
EMPLOYEE does not include a person on the premises exclusively for repair or
maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery
of goods to the premises.



   EMPLOYEE STATION. An area on the premises of a sexually oriented
business designated for occupancy exclusively by one or more employees whose
duties include assuring compliance with the provisions of this article.



   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The Village Manager of the municipality, or any
person employed by the municipality whom the Village Manager  assigns to
perform the duties of the Enforcement Officer in the Village Manager’s
absence.



   EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS. Urination, defecation, lactation, ejaculation and
menstruation. It shall not mean urination and defecation performed in a
public or employee-only restroom in the manner in which those facilities are
intended to be used, and when not performed or presented for a commercial
purpose. It shall not mean lactation as part of breast-feeding an infant,
unless performed or displayed for a commercial purpose other than education
and training in the art, science or technique of breast-feeding an infant.



   LICENSEE. With respect to a sexually oriented business license issued
under this article, a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual(s) designated on
the license application as principally responsible for the operation of the
sexually oriented business. With respect to a sexually oriented business
employee license issued under this article, LICENSEE means a natural person
in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually
oriented business.



   MUNICIPALITY. The Village of Carol Stream, an Illinois municipal
corporation.



   NUDITY or NUDE. Exposing to view specified anatomical areas or any
device, costume or covering that gives the appearance of or simulates any
specified anatomical areas.



   OPERATE or CAUSE TO BE OPERATED. To control or hold primary
responsibility for the operation of a sexually oriented business, either as a
business entity, as an individual, or as part of a group of individuals with
shared responsibility. It shall also mean to cause to function or to put or
keep in operation. A person may be found to be OPERATING or CAUSING TO BE
OPERATED a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner,
part owner or licensee of the business.



   OPERATOR. Any person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business.



   PATRON. Any natural person who is not an employee.



   PERSON. A natural person, proprietorship, partnership, limited
liability company, firm, association, joint stock company, joint venture,
corporation or combination of individuals of whatever form or character.



   SEMI-NUDITY or SEMI-NUDE. Exposing to view, with less than a fully
opaque covering, any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola
or any portion of the buttocks. This definition shall include the entire
lower portion of the female breast, but shall not include any portion of the
cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard,
bathing suit or other clothing; provided that, the areola is not exposed in
whole or in part.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.



      (1)   Any of the following when done in a place where the
public is invited or permitted, or when done for any commercial purpose
including sale and rental, regardless of who pays or receives the
consideration therefor, and regardless of the form of consideration:



         (a)   The live exhibition or display of a natural person
or people in the state of nudity or semi-nudity, or engaged in specified
sexual activities or excretory functions;



         (b)   Engaging in, promoting or permitting a natural
person or people to engage in specified sexual activities or excretory
functions;



         (c)   The offering of physical contact in the form of
wrestling or tumbling between natural persons of the opposite sex when one or
more of the person is nude or semi-nude;



         (d)   The offering of products, services or activities
by or with a natural person or people when one or more of the people, whether
a patron, agent,  employee or otherwise, is in a state of nudity or
semi-nudity;



         (e)   Displaying or offering to others any recorded
depiction of a natural person, or created image or character, as in cartoons
and animation, by any medium, including without limitation: film, videotape,
closed-circuit television, digital video disc (DVD), laser disc, compact disc
(CD), floppy disc, photograph, slide, television, book, magazine and computer
software, which is:



            1.   Characterized or distinguished by an emphasis
on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory
functions or specified anatomical areas; or



            2.   Advertised or otherwise held out to the
public as being characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions
or specified anatomical areas, including without limitation, the use of the
term “adult” and the use of the designation of one or more “X” such
as, but not limited to, “XXX”.



         (f)   The display and offering to others of novelties,
instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in
connection with specified sexual activities or that give the appearance of or
simulate any of the specified anatomical areas.



      (2)   The term SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS shall exclude the
following:



         (a)   The display and offering to others of condoms,
spermicides or other non-prescription contraceptives, in and of themselves,
unless displayed and offered to others on the premises of a business which
would otherwise be considered a sexually oriented business;



         (b)   The display and offering to others of drugs,
instruments or devices which require a prescription, that are designed
primarily for use in connection with specified sexual activities, and which
are in fact dispensed by or under the supervision of a pharmacist licensed by
the state;



         (c)   The display and offering to others of instruments,
devices or paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in connection
with specified sexual activities if they are displayed and offered to others
on the premises where a pharmacist licensed by the state is employed to
dispense prescription drugs, instruments or devices;



         (d)   Breast-feeding an infant, unless performed or
displayed for a commercial purpose other than education and training in the
art, science or technique of breast-feeding an infant;



         (e)   The display and offering to others of motion
pictures, by any format, which have received a rating from the Motion Picture
Association of America of G, PG, PG-13, R or NC-17, when offered or displayed
substantially in their entirety;



         (f)   Libraries and museums funded in whole or in part
by federal, state or local governmental funds.



         (g)   The display and offering to others of items
described in division (2)(f) of this definition, if and only if the display
and offering are done for a commercial purpose, and all of the following
apply to the business displaying and offering such items to others:



            1.   Less than 25% of its gross income comes from
the sale, rental or exhibition of the following types of items:



               a.   Items which are characterized or
distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities, excretory functions, or specified anatomical areas or 
any combination thereof; and



               b.   Items which are advertised or otherwise
held out to the public as being characterized or distinguished by an emphasis
on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory
functions or specified anatomical areas or any combination thereof,
including, without limitation, the use of the term “adult” and the use of
the designation of one or more “X” such as, but not limited to, “XXX”.



            2.   Less than 25% of its display space is used
for the sale, rental or exhibition of the items described in divisions
(2)(g)1.a. and (2)(g)1.b. above; and



            3.   Less than 25% of the items it offers to
others are the items described in divisions (2)(g)1.a. and (2)(g)1.b. above.



      (3)   Certain uses which fall within the definition of
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS may also constitute uses which are illegal under
local, state or federal law, such as obscenity or child pornography. Even if
such illegal uses constitute a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS under the
definition set forth in this article, they shall not be permitted to receive
a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS license.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. The human genitals, pubic area, perineum,
anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, any portion of the areola of the
female breast if less than a fully and opaquely covered; and the male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if entirely covered by an opaque
covering. In determining whether any of the foregoing portions of the anatomy
are fully and opaquely covered, coverage by make-up, paint or similar matter
applied directly to the skin, shall not be considered to be fully and
opaquely covered.



   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY.



      (1)   Any of the following offenses, as set forth in the State
Criminal Code of 1961, as amended, or any substantially similar offenses to
those set forth below under the criminal or penal code of any local
jurisdiction, state, country or international law: indecent solicitation of a
child, indecent solicitation of an adult, adultery, fornication, public
indecency, sexual exploitation of a child, custodial sexual misconduct,
presence within school zone by child sex offenders prohibited, sexual
relations within families, bigamy, marrying a bigamist, prostitution,
solicitation of a sexual act, soliciting for a prostitute, soliciting for a
juvenile prostitute, pandering, keeping a place of prostitution, keeping a
place of juvenile prostitution, patronizing a prostitute, patronizing a
juvenile prostitute, pimping, juvenile pimping, exploitation of a child,
obscenity, child pornography, commercial film and photographic  print
processor - reports, harmful material, tie-in sales of obscene publications
to distributors, criminal sexual assault, aggravated criminal sexual assault,
predatory criminal sexual assault of a child, criminal sexual abuse,
aggravated criminal sexual abuse, criminal transmission of HIV, ritualized
abuse of a child, female genital mutilation, violation of the Sex Offender
Registration Act, stalking (if the basis of the conviction is the threat of
immediate or future sexual assault, or placing a person in reasonable
apprehension of immediate or future sexual assault), first degree murder (if
the basis for the conviction is 720 ILCS 5/9-1(a)(1), commonly known as
felony murder, where the predicate felony is any felony otherwise set forth
in this definition), burglary (if the basis for the conviction is an intent
to commit any felony otherwise set forth in this definition), residential
burglary (if the basis for the conviction is an intent to commit any felony
otherwise set forth in this definition), armed violence (if the basis for the
conviction is an intent to commit any felony otherwise set forth in this
definition), attempt to commit any of the foregoing crimes, conspiracy to
commit any of the foregoing crimes, and any other felony or misdemeanor for
which an element of the offense is the commission of any of the foregoing
crimes or an intent to commit any of the foregoing crimes.



      (2)   For which:



         (a)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor, business offense or petty offense; or



         (b)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date
of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense.



      (3)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall not
prevent such conviction from constituting a SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY as
defined in this article.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following, whether actual or
simulated:



      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic area, perineum, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, buttocks or
female  breasts, regardless of whether the performer or recipient is
clothed, in a state of nudity or in a state of semi-nudity;



      (2)   The manipulation of the human body of another, including
massage, by the use of any portion of manipulator’s body, whether covered
or uncovered, or by any device, if the person performing the manipulation or
the person receiving the manipulation is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;



      (3)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, heterosexual, homosexual
or bisexual, including without limitation intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus,
analingus, masturbation, bestiality, sodomy, bondage and discipline, sadism
and masochism, and any other act intended to cause sexual arousal; and



      (4)   Sex acts between animals when offered or displayed for
the purpose or with the intent of causing the sexual arousal of a human
viewer.



   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.



      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;



      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a
controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar
means; or



      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar
legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except
for transfers by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.



(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)



§ 10-10-4  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall operate a sexually oriented business without a
valid sexually oriented business license issued by the municipality pursuant
to this article.



   (B)   No person shall, in connection with operating a sexually
oriented business, retain the services of a person as an employee who is not
licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the municipality
pursuant to this article.



(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)



§ 10-10-5  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall act as an employee on the premises of a sexually
oriented business without having secured a sexually oriented business
employee license pursuant to this article.



(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-00; Am. Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-02)



§ 10-10-6  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   An application for a sexually oriented business license shall
be submitted to the municipality’s Clerk on a form provided by the
Enforcement Officer. The application may request and the applicant shall
provide such information as reasonably necessary (including fingerprints) to
enable the municipality to determine whether the applicant meets the
qualifications established in this article.



   (B)   An application for a sexually oriented business license shall
identify the following persons and be signed under oath by the persons that
the information contained therein is true:



      (1)   If the business entity is a sole proprietorship, that
sole proprietor;



      (2)   If the business entity is a corporation, each officer
and Director of the corporation and each individual with a 10% or greater
ownership interest in the corporation;



      (3)   If the business entity is a partnership, each general
partner, and each limited partner who owns 10% or more of total limited
partnership interest; and



      (4)   If the business is a limited liability company, each
manager and each member with a 10% or greater ownership interest in the
company. If the limited liability company does not have any managers, then
each member.



   (C)   An application for a sexually oriented business license must
designate one or more natural person who are to be principally responsible
for the operation of the proposed sexually oriented business, if a license is
granted. At least one natural person so designated must be involved in the
day to day operation of the proposed sexually oriented business on a regular
basis. Each natural person so designated, as well as the business entity
itself, shall be considered a license applicant, must qualify as a licensee
under this article, and shall be considered a licensee if a license is
granted.



   (D)   An application for a sexually oriented business license shall
be completed according to the instructions of the application form, which
shall require the following:



      (1)   If the applicant is:



         (a)   An individual, state the legal name, address, date
of birth, Social Security number and any aliases of such individual;



         (b)   A partnership, state the complete name of the
partnership and all of its partners and whether the partnership is general or
limited, and provide a copy of the partnership agreement, if any, and the
information specified in division (A) above for each partner;



         (c)   A corporation, state the complete name of the
corporation and the date of its incorporation, provide evidence that the
corporation is in good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation
and of the state, and state the names and capacity of all officers and
directors, all persons owning 10% or more of the stock of the corporation,
the name of the registered corporate agent, the address of the registered
office for service of process and the information specified in division (A)
above for each officer, director and owner of 10% or more of the stock; and



         (d)   A limited liability company, state the complete
name of the company and the date of its organization, provide evidence that
the company is in good standing under the laws of its state of organization
and the state, and state the names and capacity of all members, owners and
managers, the name of the registered agent, the address of the registered
office for service of process, and the information specified in division (A)
above for each member, owner and manager.



      (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually
oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, state the
fictitious name to be used and submit copies of documentation evidencing the
registration of the business name under applicable laws;



      (3)   State whether any applicant has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity and, if so, the specified criminal activity
involved and the date, place and jurisdiction of each such conviction;



      (4)   State whether any applicant has had a previous license
under this article or other similar regulation of another jurisdiction
denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually
oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as
well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation; and state whether
the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or
10% or greater owner of a corporation, or a member or manager of a limited
liability company, licensed under this article whose license has previously
been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the
business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the
date of denial, suspension or revocation;



      (5)   State whether any applicant holds any other licenses
under this article or other similar regulation from this or another
jurisdiction and, if so, the names and locations of other such licensed
businesses;



      (6)   State the nature of the sexually oriented business for
which the applicant is filing;



      (7)   State the location of the proposed sexually oriented
business, including a legal description of the property (i.e., block and
lot), street address, telephone number(s), email address and Internet website
URL, if any;



      (8)   State the mailing address and residential address of
each applicant and each person signing the application;



      (9)   Submit a recent photograph of each applicant who is a
natural person;



      (10)   Submit the fingerprints of each applicant who is a
natural person, recorded by the Police Department;



      (11)   For any applicant who is a natural person, describe and
identify the location of any tattoos on such person’s face, arms, legs or
hands, or any other anatomical area that normally would be visible when such
person is on the premises of the proposed sexually oriented business;



      (12)   State the driver’s license number of each applicant
who is a natural person and each person signing the application or, for an
applicant that is not a natural person, the applicant’s federally issued
tax identification number;



      (13)   Submit proof that each applicant who is a natural
person is at least 18 years old; and



      (14)   Submit a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of
the premises of the  sexually oriented business, including the location of
all stages, walls, partitions, designated sales areas, book cases and patron
seating, and a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The
diagram shall also designate the place at which the sexually oriented
business license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. The sketch or
diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus one foot.



(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)



§ 10-10-7  ISSUANCE OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a completed application for a sexually
oriented business license, the municipality’s Clerk shall immediately file
a copy of the completed application with the Enforcement Officer.



   (B)   Upon receipt of a copy of a completed application for a
sexually oriented business license, the Enforcement Officer, or any peace
officer designated by the Enforcement Officer, shall promptly investigate the
information provided in the application concerning the criminal background of
the applicants and shall record the results of the investigation in writing
within five days of the completion of the investigation. If the investigation
is done by a peace officer designated by the Enforcement Officer, then the
written results of the investigation shall also be filed with the Enforcement
Officer within five days of the completion of the investigation.



   (C)   Within five days of receipt of a copy of a completed
application for a sexually oriented business license, the Enforcement Officer
shall notify the Fire Chief of the Fire Protection District and the Village
Community Development Director of such application. In making such
notification, the Enforcement Officer shall request that the Fire Chief and
the Community Development Director promptly inspect the premises for which
the sexually oriented business license is sought to assess compliance with
the regulations under their respective jurisdictions.



   (D)   The Fire Chief shall provide to the Enforcement Officer a
written certification of whether the premises are in compliance with the Fire
Code within five days of completing the inspection.



   (E)   The Community Development Director shall provide the
Enforcement Officer a written certification of whether the premises are in
compliance with the Building Code, the Planning and Zoning Code and the
provisions of this article related to physical characteristics of the
premises within five days of completing the inspection.



   (F)   The Enforcement Officer shall approve the issuance of a
license to an applicant unless the Enforcement Officer determines by a
preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is
true:



      (1)   An applicant is a natural person is under 18 years of
age;



      (2)   An applicant has failed to provide information
reasonably necessary for issuance of the license as requested on the
application form or has provided false information;



      (3)   An applicant has been denied a sexually oriented
business license or has had a license to operate a sexually oriented business
revoked within the preceding 12 months by any jurisdiction;



      (4)   An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity;



      (5)   The proposed sexually oriented business or the premises
on which it would operate would violate or fail to be in compliance with any
provisions of the Zoning Code, the provisions of this article related to
physical characteristics of the premises or any state or federal law;



      (6)   The application and investigation fee required by this
article has not been paid; or



      (7)   An applicant is otherwise in violation of or is not in
compliance with any provision of this article.



   (G)   If the Enforcement Officer determines that no grounds for
denial of a license exist under this section, the Enforcement Officer shall
not delay approval of the application.



   (H)   A sexually oriented business license, if granted, shall state
on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the
expiration date, and the address of the licensed sexually oriented business.
All sexually oriented business licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous
place at or near the entrance to the business so that they may be easily read
at any time.



   (I)   The Enforcement Officer shall advise the applicant in writing
of the reasons for any license denial. The written license denial shall be
either served on the applicant personally or by placing it in a sealed
envelope, addressed to the applicant at the address set forth in the
application, and depositing it with the United States Postal Service, proper
first class postage prepaid. The Enforcement Officer may, but is not required
to serve the written license denial by certified or registered mail, as set
forth above.



(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)



§ 10-10-8  SEXUALLY  ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   An application for a sexually oriented business employee
license shall be submitted to the municipality’s Clerk on a form provided
by the Enforcement Officer. The application may request and the applicant
shall provide such information as reasonably necessary (including
fingerprints) to enable the municipality to determine whether the applicant
meets the qualifications established in this article.



   (B)   An application for a sexually oriented business employee
license shall be completed according to the instructions of the application
form, signed by the applicant under oath that the information contained
therein is true, and shall require the following:



      (1)   State the applicant’s name and any other names
(including “stage” names) or aliases used by the applicant;



      (2)   State the applicant’s date and place of birth;



      (3)   State the applicant’s height, weight and hair and eye
color;



      (4)   Submit a recent photograph of the applicant which
clearly shows the applicant’s face;



      (5)   Submit the applicant’s fingerprints, recorded by the
Police Department;



      (6)   Describe and identify the location of any tattoos on the
applicant’s face, arms, legs or hands, or any other anatomical area that
normally would be visible when the applicant is on the premises of the
proposed sexually oriented business;



      (7)   State the applicant’s present residence address and
telephone number;



      (8)   State the applicant’s present and intended business
address and telephone number, identifying the sexually oriented business at
which the applicant intends employment;



      (9)   State the applicant’s driver’s license number;



      (10)   Submit proof that the applicant is at least 18 years
old;



      (11)   Provide a statement detailing the sexually oriented
business employee license history of the applicant for the five years
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including
whether such applicant previously operated or is seeking to operate a
sexually oriented business, in this or any other jurisdiction, and whether
the applicant has ever had a sexually oriented business license or a sexually
oriented business employee license, permit or authorization to do business
denied, revoked or suspended by this or any other jurisdiction. In the event
of any such denial, revocation or suspension, state the name of the issuing
or denying jurisdiction and describe in full the reason for the denial,
revocation or suspension. Attach a copy of any order of denial, revocation or
suspension; and



      (12)   State whether the applicant has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity and, if so, the specified criminal activity
involved and the date, place and jurisdiction of each such conviction, and
the date of release from confinement, if any, for such conviction.



(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)



§ 10-10-9  ISSUANCE OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a completed application for a sexually
oriented business employee license, the municipality’s Clerk shall
immediately file a copy of the completed application with the Enforcement
Officer.



   (B)   Upon receipt of a copy of a completed application for a
sexually oriented business employee license, the Enforcement Officer, or any
peace officer designated by the Enforcement Officer, shall promptly
investigate the information provided in the application concerning the
criminal background of the applicant and shall record the results of the
investigation in writing within five days of the completion of the
investigation. If the investigation is done by a peace officer designated by
the Enforcement Officer, then the written results of the investigation shall
also be filed with the Enforcement Officer within five days of the completion
of the investigation.



   (C)   The Enforcement Officer shall approve the issuance of a
license to an applicant unless the Enforcement Officer determines by a
preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is
true:



      (1)   The applicant has failed to provide information
reasonably necessary for issuance of the license as requested on the
application form, or has given false information;



      (2)   The applicant is under 18 years of age;



      (3)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity;



      (4)   The sexually oriented business employee license is to be
used for employment in a business prohibited by local, state or federal law,
statute, rule or regulation;



      (5)   The sexually oriented business where the applicant
intends employment is not a licensed sexually oriented business pursuant to
this article; or



      (6)   The applicant has been denied a sexually oriented
business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, or has had
a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee
license revoked within the preceding 12 months by any jurisdiction.



   (D)   The Enforcement Officer shall advise the applicant in writing
of the reasons for any license denial. The written license denial shall be
either served on the applicant personally or by placing it in a sealed
envelope, addressed to the applicant at the address set forth in the
application, and depositing it with the United States Postal Service, proper
first class postage prepaid. The Enforcement Officer may, but is not required
to serve the written license denial by certified or registered mail, as set
forth above.



(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)



§ 10-10-10  FEES.



   (A)   Every application for a new sexually oriented business license
shall be accompanied by a $500 non-refundable application and investigation
fee.



   (B)   Every application for renewal of a sexually oriented business
license shall be accompanied by a $250 non-refundable application and
investigation fee.



   (C)   In addition to the application and investigation fee required
in divisions (A) or (B) above, every applicant that is granted a sexually
oriented business license (new or renewal) shall pay to the municipality an
annual, non-refundable license fee of $250 prior to or at the time of
issuance or renewal.



   (D)   In addition to the application and investigation fee required
in divisions (A) or (B) above, and the license fee required by division (C)
above, every applicant that is granted a sexually oriented business license
(new or renewal) shall pay to the municipality, prior to or at the time of
issuance or renewal, an annual amusement tax upon any and all sexually
oriented amusement device, at the rate scheduled for amusement devices in §
10-1-19, as amended from time to time.



   (E)   Every application for a new sexually oriented business
employee license shall be accompanied by an annual, non-refundable
application, investigation and license fee of $100.



   (F)   Every application for renewal of a sexually oriented business
employee license shall be accompanied by an annual, non-refundable
application, investigation and license fee of $50.



(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)



§ 10-10-11  EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Each license issued pursuant to this article shall expire one
year from the date of issuance and may be renewed by making application as
provided in this section. Application for renewal shall be made no more than
90 days and no less than 28 days before the expiration date. If application
is made less than 28 days before the expiration date, the license will not be
extended pending a decision on the application, but will expire on its normal
expiration date.



   (B)   An application for renewal of a sexually oriented business
license or sexually oriented business employee license shall be submitted to
the municipality’s Clerk on a form provided by the Enforcement Officer. The
renewal application may request and the applicant shall provide such
information as reasonably necessary to enable the municipality to determine
whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this article.
The completed renewal application shall describe any changes or additions to,
or deletions from, the information provided in the applicant’s initial
license application. The completed renewal application shall be accompanied
by copies of any document or material submitted in connection with the
initial license application that has been revised or requires revision to
reflect any change in circumstances or conditions. Sketches or diagrams
submitted with an initial sexually oriented business license application may
be resubmitted with subsequent renewal applications; provided that, the
applicant certifies in writing that the sketch or diagram still depicts the
premises accurately.



   (C)   The Enforcement Officer shall make the determination
concerning the approval of license renewals based on the same criteria and
using the same procedures used to evaluate applications for new licenses
under this article.



   (D)   The Enforcement Officer shall advise the applicant in writing
of the reasons for any renewal denial, and shall issue the written renewal
denial on the applicant in the same manner as a denial of an initial
application.



   (E)   When the Enforcement Officer denies an application for renewal
of a license, the applicant shall not be issued another license for one year
from the date of denial.



(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)



§ 10-10-12  SUSPENSION.



   (A)   The Enforcement Officer shall suspend a sexually oriented
business license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the Enforcement
Officer determines that a licensee:



      (1)   Has violated or is not in compliance with any section of
this article, except as set forth in § 10-10-13(B); or



      (2)   Has knowingly allowed an employee to violate or fail to
comply with any section of this article.



   (B)   The Enforcement Officer shall suspend a sexually oriented
business employee license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the
Enforcement Officer determines that a licensee has violated or is not in
compliance with any section of this article, except as set forth in §
10-10-13(C).



   (C)   The Enforcement Officer shall advise the licensee in writing
of the reasons for any suspension. The written suspension shall be either
served on the applicant personally on or before five days before the
suspension is to take effect, or by placing it in a sealed envelope,
addressed to the licensee at the address set forth in the application and
depositing it with the United States Postal Service, proper first class
postage prepaid, on or before five days before the suspension is to take
effect. The Enforcement Officer may, but is not required to serve the written
suspension by certified or registered mail, as set forth above.



(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)



§ 10-10-13  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Enforcement Officer shall revoke a sexually oriented
business license or sexually oriented business employee license if a cause of
suspension under § 10-10-12 occurs and the license has been suspended two
times within the preceding 12 months.



   (B)   The Enforcement Officer shall revoke a sexually oriented
business license if he or she determines that the licensee:



      (1)   Gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application or renewal process;



      (2)   Has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of
controlled substances on the premises;



      (3)   Has knowingly allowed any specified criminal activity or
the commission of any felony on the premises;



      (4)   Knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during
a period of time when the licensee’s license was pending initial
application, expired or suspended;



      (5)   Has knowingly allowed one or more specified sexual
activities or excretory functions to occur in or on the licensed premises;



      (6)   Has been convicted of a specified criminal activity
during the term of the license; or



      (7)   Is delinquent in payment to the municipality for any
taxes or fees past due that were assessed or imposed in relation to any
business or business property.



   (C)   The Enforcement Officer shall revoke a sexually oriented
business employee license if he or she determines that the licensee:



      (1)   Gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application or renewal process;



      (2)   Has knowingly acted as an employee on the premises of a
sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee’s
license was pending initial application, expired or suspended; or



      (3)   Has been convicted of a specified criminal activity
during the term of the license.



   (D)   The Enforcement Officer shall advise the licensee in writing
of the reasons for any revocation. The written revocation shall be either
served on the applicant personally on or before five days before the
revocation is to take effect, or by placing it in a sealed envelope,
addressed to the licensee at the address set forth in the application, and
depositing it with the United States Postal Service, proper first class
postage prepaid, on or before five days before the revocation is to take
effect. The Enforcement Officer may, but is not required to, serve the
written revocation by certified or registered mail, as set forth above.



   (E)   When the Enforcement Officer revokes a license, the licensee
shall not be issued another license for one year from the date the revocation
became effective.



(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)



§ 10-10-14  APPEAL RIGHTS.



   (A)   Any denial, suspension or revocation of a new or renewal
license under this article may be appealed to the Mayor by written notice
filed with the municipality’s Clerk within ten days of the effective date
of such denial, suspension or revocation.



   (B)   The Mayor shall notify the appellant in writing of the date
for the hearing on the appeal. The written notice shall be either served on
the appellant personally on or before five days before the hearing, or by
placing it in a sealed envelope, addressed to the appellant at the address
set forth in the application, and depositing it with the United States Postal
Service, proper first class postage prepaid, on or before seven days before
the hearing. The Mayor may, but is not required to, serve the written notice
by certified or registered mail, as set forth above.



   (C)   The Mayor shall conduct a hearing on the appeal within 14 days
of receipt of the written notice of appeal by the municipality’s Clerk, at
which hearing the appellant may present witnesses or other evidence opposing
the denial, suspension or revocation. The Enforcement Officer may also
present witnesses or other evidence supporting the denial, suspension or
revocation. Both parties shall have the right to cross-examine witnesses.



   (D)   The Mayor shall determine whether the preponderance of the
evidence presented at the hearing supported the decision of the Enforcement
Officer to deny, suspend or revoke the license of the appellant.



   (E)   The Mayor shall issue a written decision setting forth his or
her findings regarding the evidence presented at the hearing, and his or her
decision to affirm or overrule the decision of the Enforcement Officer. The
Mayor shall serve a copy of his or her written decision on the appellant and
the Enforcement Officer in writing. The written decision shall be either
served on the parties personally on or before five days after the date of the
hearing, or by placing it in a sealed envelope, addressed to the respective
parties at the address set forth in the application and at the Enforcement
Officer’s ordinary business address, and depositing it with the United
States Postal Service, proper first class postage prepaid, on or before five
days after the hearing. The Mayor may, but is not required, to serve the
written decision by certified or registered mail, as set forth above.



   (F)   The written decision of the Mayor shall be considered a final
decision.



(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)



§ 10-10-15  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   (A)   A sexually oriented business license is not transferable from
one licensee to another or from one location to another. Any purported
transfer of a sexually oriented business license shall automatically and
immediately void that license.



   (B)   A sexually oriented business employee license is not
transferable from one licensee to another, but the use of the license by the
individual to whom it was issued may be transferred from one licensed
sexually oriented business to another such licensed establishment during the
term of the license; provided that, the licensee gives written notice of such
transfer to the Enforcement Officer within 15 days after such transfer.



(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)



§ 10-10-16  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE OPERATION OF SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESSES.



   (A)   No employee on the premises of a sexually oriented business
may engage in any specified criminal activity, specified sexual activities or
excretory functions.



   (B)   Any employee appearing on the premises of a sexually oriented
business, in a place that can be viewed by patrons, when said employee is in
a state of nudity or semi-nudity must be on a stage that is at least 45
inches from the floor, and at a distance at least 72 inches from all parts of
a clearly designated area in which patrons will be present, and no patron
shall be permitted in any area closer than 72 inches from the stage.



   (C)   No employee appearing on the premises of a sexually oriented
business in a state of nudity or semi-nudity may intentionally or knowingly
touch a patron or a patron's clothing or permit himself or herself to be
touched by a patron or a patron's clothing. No employee may intentionally or
knowingly touch a patron's genitals, pubic area, perineum, anus, anal cleft
or cleavage, buttocks, pubic hair or female breast either directly or through
clothing or other covering. No employee may intentionally or knowingly permit
a patron to touch the employee's genitals, pubic area, perineum, anus, anal
cleft or cleavage, buttocks, pubic hair or female breast either directly or
through clothing or other covering. For purposes of this section, touching
need not be accomplished by the hand, and includes the touching by any part
of the toucher's body, clothing or device held by the toucher.



   (D)   All sexually oriented businesses that offer live entertainment
must provide separate dressing room facilities for female and male employees
and which shall not be occupied or used in any way by anyone other than
employees.



   (E)   No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted on the
premises of a sexually oriented business. Mistake of age is not a defense to
a charge under this section, unless the person under the age 18 who was
permitted on the premises exhibited to the employee a driver's license, or
other apparently official government-issued identification card bearing the
patron's photograph, and purporting to show that the person was 18 years of
age or over, and the employee to whom that document was exhibited did not
otherwise have reasonable cause to believe that the person seeking admittance
was under 18 years.



   (F)   No sexually oriented business shall remain open at any time
between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, and
12:00 a.m. and noon (12:00 p.m.) on Sundays, nor shall any entertainment,
service or product be provided to a patron on the premises of a sexually
oriented business during those hours.



   (G)   Minimum lighting level.



      (1)   The premises of every sexually oriented business shall
be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to
illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access, including
restrooms, at an illumination level of not less than 150 foot-candles as
measured at floor level.



      (2)   The illumination described in division (G)(1) above
shall be maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises.
In the event of a power failure, the business shall stop operating
immediately and all patrons shall be cleared from the premises. The premises
shall not be reopened until the minimum illumination level is restored.



   (H)   No sexually oriented business shall be operated in any manner
that permits the observation from outside the premises of any image, material
or entertainment depicting or describing excretory functions, specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or any person in a state of
nudity or  semi-nudity, whether by means of display, decoration, sign,
window or any other means.



   (I)   No alcoholic liquor shall be delivered, received, sold,
purchased, provided or consumed at any time on the premises of any sexually
oriented business.



   (J)   No massage services shall be provided on the premises of any
sexually oriented business.



   (K)   No gambling or video gaming machines shall be allowed upon the
premises of any sexually oriented business.



(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002; Ord.
2016-07-31, passed 7-18-2016)



§ 10-10-17  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates or who intentionally or knowingly
permits the violation of any section of this article shall be fined  the
amount of $750 and may additionally be sentenced to a term of incarceration
not to exceed six months.



   (B)   Each day that a sexually oriented business or employee
operates in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense or
violation.



(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)



§ 10-10-18  INJUNCTION.



   Any person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business in violation of this article is subject to a suit for injunction as
well as prosecution for ordinance violations as provided in § 10-10-17.



(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)



§ 10-10-19  EFFECT OF PARTIAL INVALIDITY.



   If any section, division, clause or phrase of this article shall be
deemed to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the
remaining sections, divisions, clauses and phrases shall not be affected.



(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)



ARTICLE 11:  PYROTECHNIC FIREWORKS DISPLAY



Section



   10-11-1   Definition



   10-11-2   Sale, use or explosion prohibited; public displays; permits



   10-11-3   Permit requirements



   10-11-4   Fire Code review



   10-11-5   Permit approval notification and required public notice



   10-11-6   Permit restrictions



   10-11-7   Interpretation and penalty



§ 10-11-1  DEFINITION.



   PYROTECHNIC FIREWORKS are those outdoor fireworks using professional,
proximate audience or flame effect displays.



(Ord. 2010-03-09, passed 3-15-2010)



§ 10-11-2  SALE, USE OR EXPLOSION PROHIBITED; PUBLIC DISPLAYS; PERMITS.



   It shall be an offense for any person to use or explode any pyrotechnic
fireworks within the corporate limits without a permit. A permit for a
pyrotechnic fireworks display may be granted by the Village Manager. Every
such display, which must be performed outdoors, shall be conducted and
performed only by a licensed individual designated by the Office of the State
Fire Marshal and shall be of such a character and so located, discharged or
fired as not to be hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons.



(Ord. 2010-03-09, passed 3-15-2010)



§ 10-11-3  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   With the exception of the Village/Park Districts’ annual
Independence Day fireworks show, any other desired pyrotechnic fireworks
display in the village will require a permit application from a pyrotechnics
distributor licensed by the Illinois Office of the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to the pyrotechnic distributor and operator licensing rules (41 Ill.
Adm. Code 230) which shall be submitted with the appropriate $100 permit fee
to the village no later than 30 days prior to the proposed display date.



   (B)   The application shall contain:



      (1)   Proof of possession of an Illinois state pyrotechnic
distributor license in accordance with 41 Ill. Adm. Code 230;



      (2)   Identification of the lead pyrotechnic operator that
will supervise the set-up and firing of the display and proof of that
person’s possession of a state pyrotechnic operator license in accordance
with 41 Ill. Adm. Code 230. The operator must have the type of license which
will permit the operator to perform the planned outdoor display;



      (3)   Proof of a current valid pyrotechnic operator’s
insurance certificate of not less than $1,000,000 in product liability
insurance, $1,000,000 in general liability insurance, and workers’
compensation insurance, as required pursuant to the pyrotechnic distributor
and operator licensing rules (41 Ill. Adm. Code 230) and pyrotechnic and
consumer display permitting rules (41 Ill. Adm. Code 235);



      (4)   Identification of any assistants to be used and proof
that those assistants are not less than 18 years of age;



      (5)   A site plan/map which displays the location of the
fireworks display and the setbacks;



      (6)   A list of the specifics applicable to the display to
include numbers, types and sizes of shells;



      (7)   Evidence that the owner of the property upon which the
display will be conducted maintains comprehensive general liability insurance
with limits of liability of not less than $1,000,000 liability insurance; and



      (8)   A copy of the letter to be sent to the neighbors, if any
residing within 1,000 feet of the closest point of the launch site, notifying
them of the display should the application be determined to be acceptable.



(Ord. 2010-03-09, passed 3-15-2010)



§ 10-11-4  FIRE CODE REVIEW.



   (A)   Following receipt of the application by the village, it shall
request the Carol Stream Fire Protection District to determine that the
proposed set-up and display meet the National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA) Standard 1123 in all aspects, including display, buffer distances,
clearing distances, safety rules and operations as well as those related
provisions of the Internal Fire Code, and to visit and inspect the proposed
launching site, and the places where persons will be permitted to observe the
display.



   (B)   The Village Manager shall make an independent decision on the
issuance of the permit and any conditions to be imposed after having received
the recommendation of the Fire Protection District.



(Ord. 2010-03-09, passed 3-15-2010)



§ 10-11-5  PERMIT APPROVAL NOTIFICATION AND REQUIRED PUBLIC NOTICE.



   Within 20 days of receipt of the application, the village shall advise
the applicant in writing of one of the following:



   (A)   The application is denied and the reason;



   (B)   (1)   The application is preliminarily approved. If
preliminary approved, the applicant will be required to provide proof of
written notification about the fireworks display to the neighbors within at
least 1,000 feet from the closest point of the launch site. Proof of written
notification and a copy of the letter must be submitted to the Village
Manager within 14 days of receipt of the preliminary approval notification.
Proof of notification can include a sworn affidavit indicating the letter was
sent and to whom, or a receipt from the post office along with a listing of
recipients. Once the proof of notification is received, the application will
be considered by the Village Manager for final approval and public comment.
The notice to the neighbors shall include:



         (a)   Date of the display and expected starting time;



         (b)   Identification of the owner of the property;



         (c)   Identification of the host of the event;



         (d)   Anticipated length of time of the display;



         (e)   General location of the launch site;



         (f)   Contact information so that questions may be
addressed; and



         (g)   Date and time of Village Board meetings prior to
the date of the event.



      (2)   Notification to the applicant that the application is
preliminarily approved shall also include notice that standby Carol Stream
Fire Protection District personnel and firefighting equipment may be required
with the cost for such personnel and equipment to be borne by the applicant
hosting the fireworks display. The payment of such cost must be made before a
final permit is issued.



   (C)   Issued permits shall be kept on the designated premises at all
times and shall be readily available for inspection by a village or Fire Code
official.



(Ord. 2010-03-09, passed 3-15-2010)



§ 10-11-6  PERMIT RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   The Village Manager is authorized to revoke a permit issued
under the provisions of this code or to refuse to issue a new permit when it
is found by inspection or otherwise that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation as to the material facts in the application or construction
documents on which the permit or approval was based including, but not
limited to, any one of the following:



      (1)   The permit is intended to be or is used for a location
or establishment other than that for which it was issued;



      (2)   The permit is intended to be or is used for a condition
or activity other than that listed in the permit;



      (3)   Conditions and limitations set forth in the permit have
been violated;



      (4)   There have been any false statements or
misrepresentations as to the material fact in the application for permit or
plans submitted or a condition of the permit;



      (5)   The permit is intended to be or is used by a different
person or firm than the name for which it was issued;



      (6)   The permittee failed, refused or neglected to comply
with orders or notices duly served in accordance with the provisions of this
code within the time provided therein; and



      (7)   The permit was issued in error or in violation of an
ordinance, regulation or this code.



   (B)   The village is authorized to limit the quantity of explosives,
explosive materials or fireworks permitted at a given location. No person,
possessing a permit for storage of explosives at any place, shall keep or
store an amount greater than authorized in such permit. Only the kind of
explosives specified in such a permit shall be kept or stored. The permit
holder shall follow directions from the Village Police Department or the Fire
Protection District in the set-up or performance of the pyrotechnic fireworks.



(Ord. 2010-03-09, passed 3-15-2010)



§ 10-11-7  INTERPRETATION AND PENALTY.



   All questions pertaining to the meaning or applicability of this
article should be submitted in writing to the Village Manager. The Village
Manager will provide a written interpretation to all inquiries. In addition
to the penalty for the violation of any provision of the code, a person or
entity found to have violated the conditions of a permit shall not receive a
new permit for a period of 24 months after the date of the finding that a
violation has occurred or an admission of a violation.



(Ord. 2010-03-09, passed 3-15-2010)



ARTICLE 12: RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSE




Section



   10-12-1    Purpose



   10-12-2    Interpretation and application of code



   10-12-3    Definitions



   10-12-4    Residential rental license required



   10-12-5    Nuisance residential rental property



   10-12-6    Enforcement procedures



§ 10-12-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to provide for the annual licensing of
residential rental property, so as to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the village, including but not limited to:



   (A)   Providing minimum standards for the maintenance, operation,
use and appearance of residential rental properties.



   (B)   Preventing living conditions that adversely affect or are
likely to affect the life, safety, health and general welfare of persons
occupying rental dwelling units.



   (C)   Preserving the value of land and buildings throughout the
village.



   (D)   Reducing and preventing crimes from occurring within
residential rental properties and throughout the village.



(Ord. 2014-09-46, passed 9-15-2014)



§ 10-12-2  INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION OF CODE.



   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of the Code or
Ordinances shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the
protection of the public health, safety, and welfare.  This Code and The
International Property Maintenance Code,  latest edition adopted by the
village, shall apply as minimum standards for maintenance of residential
rental housing.  Where the requirements of this Code vary from any other
lawfully adopted state laws, rules, regulations, ordinances, codes, deed
restrictions or covenants, the more restrictive or that imposing the higher
standards shall govern.  The village does not enforce any private covenants
between land owners or tenants or finally determine conflicts between
neighboring property owners.



(Ord. 2014-09-46, passed 9-15-2014)



§ 10-12-3  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   DWELLING UNIT.   A single unit providing complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons, in accordance with occupancy limitations,
including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation.



   OPERATE.   To own, manage, maintain, rent, lease, advertise, or offer
for rent or lease any residential rental property or any dwelling unit
therein for the purpose of renting to others.



   OWNER.   The person or persons, jointly or severally, that hold legal
or equitable title to a parcel of property, including a mortgage holder in
possession.



   PERSON.   An individual, partnership, corporation, business trust,
estate, trust, beneficial interest holder, association or any other legal or
commercial entity.



   PROPERTY.   Any unimproved or improved real property or portion
thereof, situated in the village and includes the buildings or structures
located on the property regardless of condition.



   PROPERTY AGENT.   A person designated in writing to the village as
having authority to manage a residential rental property including the
authority to receive notices or citations.



   RENT.   To provide or offer for possession or occupancy a dwelling
unit to a person who is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to an
agreement, written, oral or implied, for consideration or pursuant to
articles of agreement for deed or similar agreement, if not recorded with the
Recorder of Deeds of DuPage County, Illinois. 



   RENTAL LICENSE.   A license required for any owner of a residential
building, structure, dwelling or dwelling unit who rents, leases, or controls
any portion of the property, building, or structure to another person,
business, corporation, or entity for any fixed period of time.



   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY.   A dwelling unit that is rented to
persons other than the person(s) holding legal or equitable title to the
property.  A dwelling unit occupied by a purchaser under the provisions of
articles of agreement for deed or similar agreement shall be considered a
residential rental property unless the articles of agreement or similar
agreement have been recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of Du Page County,
Illinois.  There shall be a presumption that any dwelling unit that is not
occupied by the owner is a residential rental property.



(Ord. 2014-09-46, passed 9-15-2014)



§ 10-12-4  RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall operate a residential rental property, or
shall rent any residential property, without having obtained a license for
such property, as provided by this article.  Each license shall be issued
only for the premises and to the owner named in the application and shall not
be transferable or assignable.



   (B)   This licensing requirement shall not apply to:



      (1)   Single family dwellings occupied by a member of the
owner's immediate family.



      (2)   Hotels and motels.



      (3)   Nursing homes, retirement centers, rest homes, or
hospices licensed, inspected and governed by state or federal laws, rules or
regulations.



      (4)   Group homes governed by 405 Illinois Compiled Statutes
35/1 et seq., as amended, Specialized Living Centers Act, dealing with the
developmentally disabled, or other similar uses governed by state or federal
laws, rules or regulations.



   (C)   Each applicant for a residential rental license shall file a
written application and shall submit the following information on an
application provided by the village:



      (1)   Name, address, and home and business telephone numbers
of the owner of the property and, if property is held in trust, the name,
address, home and business telephone numbers of the beneficiaries and the
percentages of ownership of all the beneficiaries of the trust, appropriate
corporate or partnership information, including the name of the registered
agent, president, manager or managing partner. The name, address, and phone
number of the property manager or management company representing the owner.



      (2)   Name, address (no P.O. boxes), business, and home
telephone numbers of the owner and property agent to be contacted when
potential violations of municipal ordinances occur.



      (3)   Telephone number of the owner or agent to be contacted
when an emergency exists.



      (4)   An acknowledgment that the agent or owner shall be
reasonably accessible to the village and have a telephone number which shall
be available to the village at any time. The owner or property manager shall
have a local office available for contact in Illinois.



      (5)   In the event any of the information requested should
change, it shall be the obligation of the owner to notify the village in
writing within ten days of the change.



      (6)   No license shall be issued or renewed unless the owner
or operator agrees in their application to inspection pursuant to this
article as the Village Manager may require to determine whether the location
in connection with which such license is sought is in compliance with the
applicable provisions of the this article and with the applicable provisions
of the Code of Ordinances.



   (D)   License fee.  The cost of an annual license shall be as
follows:



      (1)   Single family dwelling unit: $75 per residential
dwelling unit; and



      (2)   Apartment and multi-family buildings, (more than one
unit per building):  $100 per residential building.



   (E)   Crime free housing seminar required for residential property
owners.  All persons applying for a rental license for residential property
shall have successfully completed a mandatory crime free housing seminar,
administered by the Police Department, prior to issuance of the license. The
seminar may be attended after an application has been submitted. The license
will be issued only after successful completion of the seminar.



   (F)   Crime free lease addendum.



      (1)   Any owner or property agent entering into leases
regarding residential rental property shall utilize a crime-free lease
addendum or have a clause in the lease substantially similar to a crime-free
lease addendum. Samples of crime-free lease addendums shall be available from
the Police Department.  The Department shall review any clauses within
actual leases to determine if the clause is substantially similar to the
required crime-free lease addendum. All owners or property agents shall
advise prospective tenants of the required crime free lease addendum prior to
entering into any lease or rental agreement.  The crime free lease addendum
shall make criminal activity a lease violation and shall specify that
criminal activity is not limited to violent criminal activity or drug-related
criminal activity engaged in by, facilitated by, or permitted by the tenant,
a member of the household, a guest, or any party under the control of the
tenant. The term CRIMINAL ACTIVITY shall mean a violation of the Criminal
Code of 2012, of the Cannabis Control Act, of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act, or of the Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection
Act.  The operator or property agent shall take all reasonable action to
enforce the terms of the crime free housing addendum by initiating an
eviction proceeding as specified in the Illinois Forcible Entry and Detainer
Statutes. Proof of criminal activity shall not require a criminal conviction,
but shall only require proof by a preponderance of the evidence.



      (2)   It shall not be a violation of a crime free lease
addendum and no owner or property agent shall take any action to evict a
tenant based upon:



         (a)   Contact made to the police or seeking other
emergency services, if (a) the contact was made with the intent to prevent or
respond to domestic violence or sexual violence; (b) the intervention or
emergency assistance was needed to respond to or prevent domestic violence or
sexual violence; or (c) the contact was made by, on behalf of, or otherwise
concerns an individual with a disability and the purpose of the contact was
related to that individual's disability;



         (b)   An incident or incidents of actual or threatened
domestic violence or sexual violence against the tenant, household member, or
guest occurring in the rental unit or on the premise; or



         (c)   Criminal activity occurring in the rental unit or
on the premises that is directly relating to domestic violence or sexual
violence, engaged in by a tenant, member of a tenant's household, guest, or
other party, and against a tenant, household member, guest or other party.



      (3)   It shall constitute a violation of this article for any
owner or property agent to knowingly permit any tenant to occupy any
residential rental property without entering into a crime free lease addendum
or to occupy any residential rental property in violation of any provision of
the crime free lease addendum required under this section.  Any failure to
include a crime-free lease addendum or similar approved language may result
in suspension or revocation of the residential rental license.  Any failure
of an owner to take reasonable action to enforce the terms of the crime free
lease addendum after having been notified by the Police Department of
activity or conduct occurring on the residential rental property in violation
of the addendum, and after having been given a reasonable opportunity to
remedy such activity or conduct, shall be sufficient grounds for the
suspension or revocation of his or her residential rental license.



   (G)   Inspections.



      (1)   In the event that the Village Manager finds that it is
necessary to determine whether the location in connection with which such
license has been requested is in compliance with this article and with the
applicable ordinances, rules and regulations of the village, an inspection
may be required prior to and as a condition of issuance of the license. 
After inspection, no such license shall be issued unless the location is
found to meet all applicable requirements of this article and applicable
ordinances, including but not limited to the International Building Code, the
NFPA 70 National Electric Code, the Illinois Plumbing Code, the International
Mechanical Code, the International Fire Code, the International Residential
Code,  the International Property Maintenance Code, the International Fuel
Gas Code, the International Energy Conservation Code, and the Swimming Pool
and Spa Code, latest adopted editions, and any amendments to such codes as
are adopted by the village.



      (2)   Property that changes ownership may be required to be
inspected before a new license can be issued. After inspection, no such
license shall be issued unless the location is found to meet all applicable
requirements of this article and applicable ordinances, rules and regulations
of the village.



         (a)   Whenever, upon inspection of the location, the
Director of Community Development or his designee finds that conditions or
practices exist which are in violation of the provisions of this article or
of any applicable ordinances, rules and regulations, the owner shall be
served with notice of such violation in the manner hereinafter provided. Such
notice shall state that unless the violations cited are corrected within
reasonable time, the license may be suspended.



         (b)   At the end of the time allowed for correction of
any violation cited, the Director of Community Development or his designee
shall re-inspect the location, and if the re-inspection reveals that such
conditions have not been corrected, a request to the Village Manager to
suspend the license may be made.



         (c)   Any person whose license has been recommended for
suspension shall be entitled to an appeal to the Village Manager in the
manner provided by this title.  Any written request for appeal shall be
filed with the Village Manager within 15 days following the issuance of the
notice.



         (d)   If, upon re-inspection, the Director of Community
Development or his designee finds that the location in connection with which
the notice was issued is now in compliance with this article and with the
applicable ordinances, rules and regulations, a recommendation of the
reinstatement of the license may be made to the Village Manager.



         (e)   When the Director of Community Development or his
designee determines after an initial inspection that additional follow up
inspections are necessary for enforcement of this article, two additional
follow up inspections for noncompliance shall be granted each license holder
without charge. In the event more than two follow up inspections are needed,
the license holder shall be assessed a noncompliance inspection service
charge in the amount of $60 per division/inspection type required to make the
re-inspection. Payments must be made in full prior to the license being
renewed. Failure to pay any balance will serve as grounds to deny further
permits or licenses from being issued by the village.



   (H)   The owners and their designated property agents shall be
responsible for informing their tenants of any scheduled inspection or
re-inspection of any residential rental property; and they shall be
responsible for requesting permission from any person whose consent is
necessary for village inspector to enter the property if that person is not
home at the time of the inspection or re-inspection.  The village shall
provide notice to both the owner and the tenant, on a form provided by the
village, of the tenant's right to refuse consent to the residential licensing
inspection and to require the village to obtain an administrative search
warrant.  If any tenant, occupant or other person in control and/or
possession and whose consent to inspect is necessary concerning a residential
rental property or a dwelling unit contained therein fails or refuses to
consent to access and entry to the property or dwelling unit under his or her
control for any residential licensing inspection required by this article,
the code official or his or her designee may apply to the circuit court for
an administrative search warrant. The application for the administrative
search warrant shall specify the basis upon which the warrant is being sought
and shall include a statement that the inspection shall be limited to a
determination whether there are any violations of the minimum standards of
the village.  Nothing set forth herein shall limit the right of a tenant to
grant the village access to the dwelling unit.



(Ord. 2014-09-46, passed 9-15-2014; Ord. 2016-06-28, passed 6-6-2016)



§ 10-12-5  NUISANCE RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY.



   (A)   It is hereby declared a nuisance and against the health,
safety, peace, and comfort of the village for any property owner or owner's
agent to allow or permit the following:



      (1)   Rental of a rental unit, or residential rental property,
to a tenant who commits or allows a member of the tenant's household, guest
or other party under the control of the tenant to commit any of the following
offenses to occur on or near the rental unit, common areas or appurtenances
related to the tenant: murder, kidnapping, sexual assault, robbery, burglary,
aggravated kidnapping, prostitution, solicitation of prostitution, pandering,
obscenity, child pornography, sale or distribution of obscene publications,
criminal housing management, possession of explosives, unlawful use of
weapons, sale of firearms, gambling, keeping a gambling place, concealing a
fugitive, any violation of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, any
violation of the Cannabis Control Act, any violation of the Methamphetamine
Control and Community Protection Act or the commission of any other felony
under Illinois or federal law or a misdemeanor under Illinois law not
specifically listed above which by its nature or effect impact the quality of
life of persons in the area.  Prohibition of these offenses applies also to
members of the tenant's household, guests or other parties under control of
the tenant.



      (2)   Rental of a rental unit, or residential rental property
to a tenant who commits or allows a member of the tenant's household, guest
or other party under the control of the tenant to commit four or more village
ordinance violations in a one year period which violations by their nature or
effect impact the quality of life of persons in the area.



      (3)   The commission of any act of Criminal Housing Management
as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-5.1, or the commission of more than four
violations in a one year period of Articles 1 through 7 of Chapter 6 of the
village's Code of Ordinances.



   (B)   Divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section shall not apply to:



      (1)   Contact made to the police or other emergency services,
if: (a) the contact was made with the intent to prevent or respond to
domestic violence or sexual violence; (b) the intervention or emergency
assistance was needed to respond to or prevent domestic violence or sexual
violence; or (c) the contact was made by, on behalf of, or otherwise concerns
an individual with a disability and the purpose of the contact was related to
that individual's disability;



      (2)   An incident or incidents of actual or threatened
domestic violence or sexual violence against the tenant, household member, or
guest occurring in the rental unit or on the premise; or



      (3)   Criminal activity occurring in the rental unit or on the
premises that is directly relating to domestic violence or sexual violence,
engaged in by a tenant, member of a tenant's household, guest, or other
party, and against a tenant, household member, guest or other party.



   (C)   Division (B) of this section shall not limit:



      (1)   Enforcement of Section 15.2 of the Illinois Emergency
Telephone System Act, Article 26 of the Criminal Code of 2012, or Article IX
of the Code of Civil Procedure;



      (2)   The village from enacting or enforcing its crime free
housing program and ordinance to impose penalties on the basis of the
underlying criminal activity or village ordinance violation not covered by
division (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section and to the extent otherwise
permitted by existing state and federal law; or



      (3)   The eviction of or imposition of penalties against the
perpetrator of the domestic violence, sexual violence or other criminal
activity.



   (D)   The standard of proof of one or more of the offenses described
in divisions (A)(1), (A)(2) and (A)(3) of this section shall be by a
preponderance of the evidence.



   (E)   If the residential rental property is found to be a nuisance,
the property owner can be fined pursuant as provided in the Code or
Ordinances or have his or her license suspended or revoked as provided herein.



(Ord. 2014-09-46, passed 9-15-2014; Ord. 2016-06-28, passed 6-6-2016)



§ 10-12-6  ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Authority. The Director of Community Development and his
designees are authorized to exercise the police power of the village in such
manner and to such extent as any code official determines that the character
of the violation and the interests of public health, safety and welfare
warrant to secure compliance with the provisions of this article and this
Code.



   (B)   Enforcement actions. The Director of Community Development and
his designees are authorized and shall demand compliance with the provisions
of this title and this Code through enforcement actions including, but not
limited to, the issuance of a stop work order, a determination that the
dwelling unit is uninhabitable and order the unit be vacated, notice of
violation, citation or ticket, prosecution for violations, and to recover any
penalty or fine and authorized attorney's fees and costs, the institution of
the appropriate action of law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such
violation or to require the removal of the unlawful use or act and the filing
of liens and judgments against property, as authorized by law. In addition,
the Director of Community Development may seek the suspension and/or
revocation of any license issued hereunder if the licensee is in continuing
violation of any law or ordinance, or that a nuisance violation pertaining to
tenant activity on the premises has or continues to occur, or that the
licensee is operating in a manner not conducive to the public health, morals
or safety. Prior written notice of a violation shall not be required for the
initiation of enforcement actions. The Director of Community Development or
his designees shall institute or cause to be instituted the appropriate legal
proceedings to prosecute, restrain, correct or abate any violation or to
require removal or termination of the unlawful use of the premises, building
or structure in violation of the provisions of this title or of any order or
direction made pursuant thereto.



   (C)   Service. Written notice of enforcement actions shall be served
upon the owner, a duly authorized agent or upon the occupant or other person
responsible for the condition that is the subject of the enforcement action
violation.  If the enforcement action concerns a nuisance violation
pertaining to violations on or near the premises by the tenant, household
member, guest or other party in the control of the tenant, the village shall
provide written notice to the tenant of such enforcement action. Such notice
shall be served either by delivering a copy of same to such person or persons
by ordinary mail to the last known post office address, delivered in person
or by delivering it to and leaving it in the possession of any person in
charge of the premises, or in case such person is not found upon the premises
and reasonable attempts to locate the individual or a valid address have been
unsuccessful, by affixing a copy thereof, in a conspicuous place at the
entrance door or avenue of access; and such procedure shall be deemed
equivalent of personal notice.



   (D)   Fines. Any person or legal entity who violates any provision
of this article or provisions of this Code or fails to comply with any of the
requirements thereof shall be subject to a fine for each offense of not less
than $150 nor more than $1,000. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.



   (E)   Suspension or revocation of residential rental license. Any
person or legal entity who violates any provision of the article or the
provisions of this Code or fails to comply with any of the requirements
thereof shall be subject to suspension or revocation of their license. 



   (F)   Pre-court compliance and payment of fines. Any person charged
with any violation of this article who has since come into compliance and who
desires to pay the applicable fine in advance of a court or administrative
adjudication hearing may contact the village and request a re-inspection or
shall fully comply with the residential rental licensing provisions of this
chapter. Upon verification of compliance, the village may accept prepayment
of any fine, or may otherwise agree to dispose of the matter in advance of a
court or administrative adjudication hearing, subject to the following
conditions:



      (1)   No pre-court payment shall be made more than five days
from the date on the ticket that set forth the court hearing;



      (2)   A receipt shall be issued for any pre-court payment;



      (3)   Any violation for which the fine or penalty is paid in
full by pre-court-payment as provided in this subsection shall not be subject
to further prosecution;



      (4)   If more than two violations are issued for the same
property in any one year period, only the first two violations may be subject
to the pre-court or administrative adjudication hearing payment pursuant to
this subsection;



      (5)   Any violation for which a fine is sought shall be
confirmed by the code official to be in compliance no less than five days
before the date of a court hearing set for such violation at the request of
the person receiving the citation alleging the violation.



      (6)   No pre-court payment shall be available to any person
who has received a notice of suspension or revocation of their license.



      (7)   No pre-court payment shall be available to any person
who has received more than three violations issued for the same property.



(Ord. 2014-09-46, passed 9-15-2014; Ord. 2016-06-28, passed 6-6-2016)



ARTICLE 13:  MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



   10-13-1   Definitions



   10-13-2   Massage business license required



   10-13-3   Application for massage establishment business license



   10-13-4   Issuance of license for a massage establishment



   10-13-5   Approval or denial of application



   10-13-6   Posting of license; photo identification card



   10-13-7   Register of employees



   10-13-8   Revocation of suspension of license



   10-13-9   Revocation of massage therapist license



   10-13-10   Facility requirements



   10-13-11   Operating requirements



   10-13-12   Persons under age 18 prohibited on premises



   10-13-13   Alcoholic beverages prohibited



   10-13-14   Hours



   10-13-15   Employment of massage therapist



   10-13-16   Inspections required



   10-13-17   Unlawful acts



   10-13-18   Massage establishment license; exemptions



   10-13-19   Sale or transfer or change of location



   10-13-20   Name and place of business



   10-13-21   Joint and several liability



   10-13-22   Public nuisance



   10-13-23   Duty to report



   10-13-24   Violation and penalty



§ 10-13-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:



   APPLICANT. Any person or entity seeking a massage establishment
business license. If it is a corporation or limited liability company, the
term shall include any stockholder holding more than 5% of the stock, and
each officer and director. If it is a partnership, it shall include each
partner, including each limited partner. It shall also include the manager or
other person principally in charge of the operation of the business.



   EMPLOYEE. Any person over 18 years of age, other than a massage
therapist, who renders any service in connection with the operation of a
massage business and receives compensation from the operator of the business
or patrons.



   LICENSEE. The operator of a massage establishment.



   MASSAGE. Any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the body
with the hands, elbows, feet, or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical
apparatus or appliance, with or without rubbing alcohol, liniments,
antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar
preparations used in this practice, under such circumstances that it is
reasonably expected that the person to whom treatment is provided, or some
third party on such person's behalf, will pay money or give any other
consideration or gratuity.



   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment having a fixed place of
business where any person, firm, association or corporation engages in or
carries on, or permits to be engaged in or carried on, a business of
providing massages.



   MASSAGE THERAPIST. Any person who, for any consideration or gratuity
whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage and is licensed by the State
of Illinois.



   OUTCALL MASSAGE SERVICE. Any business, a function of which is to engage
in or carry on massages at a location designated by the customer or patron
rather than at a massage establishment.



   PATRON. Any person who is offered or receives a massage under such
circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay money or
any other consideration for such massage.



   SEXUAL MISCONDUCT. Any unwelcome behavior of a sexual nature that is
committed without consent or by force, intimidation, coercion, or
manipulation.



   SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA. Genitals, pubic area, anus, or perineum of any
person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.



   STATE LICENSE. A valid license issued pursuant to the Illinois Massage
Licensing Act (225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.).



(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 10-13-2  MASSAGE BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A) Massage business license required; exceptions. No person or entity
shall operate a massage establishment unless that person has a valid massage
establishment business license issued by the village pursuant to the
provisions of this article for each and every separate office or place of
business in the village. However, where individuals possessing the license
required in division (B) below perform massage in their own homes or as an
outcall massage service without a massage establishment in Carol Stream, no
massage business license shall be required for that home. When a licensee
performs massage in his or her own home, the requirements of the Carol Stream
zoning code pertaining to home occupations shall apply. All massage
establishments within the village shall be licensed on or before September 1,
2018, which licenses shall expire on December 31, 2019. Thereafter, all
licenses shall be due on or before January 1 of each year and will terminate
on December 31 following such issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked.



   (B)   State license required. No person shall engage in massage for
compensation or other consideration, unless the person has a valid state
license issued pursuant to the Massage Licensing Act (225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.).



(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-18)



§ 10-13-3  APPLICATION FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT BUSINESS LICENSE.



   (A) Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate, or conduct a
massage establishment shall file an application, under oath, with the Village
of Carol Stream upon a form provided by the Village Clerk and pay a
nonrefundable annual license fee, in the amount set forth in § 10-1-19 of
this chapter. Copies of the massage establishment business license
application shall be forwarded to the Director of Community Development. The
Director of Community Development shall, within 30 days of receiving a
complete application, cause an inspection of the premises proposed to be
operated as a massage establishment and upon inspection, shall prepare a
written report concerning compliance with the applicable regulations. The
complete application, once accepted, shall also be referred to the Police
Department by the Village Clerk for investigation. The Police Department will
perform the required criminal record check. Background investigations shall
require the submission of fingerprints for the owner/applicant(s) and the
manager(s). The cost of the criminal record check and cost of fingerprint
submissions shall be borne by the applicant.



   (B)  Each application shall contain the following information:



      (1)    The name under which the business will be conducted and
a complete statement of the service or services to be provided.



      (2)   The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers
where the business is to be conducted. If the premises is leased, the name
and address of the owner of the premises, and if the premises is held in a
trust, the names and addresses all owners of the beneficial interest in the
trust. A copy of the lease for the premises shall also be provided.



      (3)   Federal employer identification number (FEIN) and state
of Illinois business tax number (IBT).



      (4)   The name and residence address of each applicant (all
provisions which refer to applicant include an applicant which may be a
corporation, limited liability company or partnership).



         (a) If applicant is a corporation or limited liability
company, the term applicant includes each of the officers, directors, member
or manager of the corporation or company and of each stockholder owning more
than 5% of the stock of the corporation or company.



         (b)   If applicant is a partnership, the term applicant
includes each of the partners including limited partners.



         (c)   If the applicant is a corporation, limited
liability company or partnership, the business address of the partnership, if
different from the address of the massage establishment shall be provided.



      (5)   The two previous addresses immediately prior to the
present address of each applicant.



      (6)   Proof that each applicant is at least 18 years of age.



      (7)   Copy of a government issued photo identification, such
as a driver's license or State of Illinois identification for each applicant.



      (8)   One portrait photograph of each applicant at least two
inches by two inches and a complete set of applicant's fingerprints shall be
taken by the Chief of Police or his or her agent. If the applicant is a
partnership, limited liability company, or corporation, the Chief of Police
shall have the right to require fingerprints of any and all officers,
shareholders, directors, partners, members, managers or agents of the entity
along with the fee for each.



      (9)   Business, occupation, or employment of each applicant
for the three years immediately preceding the date of application.



      (10)   The massage or similar business license history of the
applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another
municipality, county or state, has had a business license revoked or
suspended, the reason for the revocation or suspension, and the business
activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation.



      (11)   All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic
violations, including the dates of convictions, nature of the crimes and
place convicted for each applicant.



      (12)   The name and residence address of each person who shall
be employed as massage therapists, managers, assistant managers or any other
persons principally in charge of the operation of the business, whether such
persons are employees or independent contractors. Each application shall be
accompanied by a copy of the state license issued by the State of Illinois
authorizing the practice of massage therapy under the Massage Licensing Act
(225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.). Each application shall also be accompanied by a copy
of a photo identification card such as an Illinois driver's license or
Illinois identification card for each massage therapist, manager, assistant
manager or any other person principally in charge of the operation of the
business.  The business license holder shall provide the information
required herein for every new employee or independent contractor employed, to
the Village Clerk, at least ten business days prior to the person beginning
work at the premises.



      (13)   The name and address of any other business owned or
operated by any person whose name is required to be given as an applicant as
provided in division (B)(4) above.



      (14)   A description of any other business to be operated on
the same premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the
applicant.



      (15)   Authorization of the village, its agents and employees
to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the
statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the
applicant for the permit. Authorization for the village or its agents to
inspect the premises.



      (16)   Such other identification and information necessary to
discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application.



   (C)   Upon the completion of the above provided form and the
furnishing of all foregoing information, the Village Clerk shall accept the
completed application for the necessary investigations. The holder of a
massage establishment license shall notify the Village Clerk of each change
in any of the data required to be furnished by this section within ten days
after such change occurs.



(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 10-13-4  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE FOR A MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.



   The Village of Carol Stream shall issue a license for a massage
establishment if all requirements for a massage establishment described in
this article are met unless it finds one or more of the following:



   (A)   The license application is incomplete, is missing required
documentation, or the correct license fee or other fees or fines owed to the
Village of Carol Stream have not been tendered to the village.



   (B)   The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted,
would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the
village's building, zoning, and health regulations.



   (C)   The applicant or employees, other than massage therapists,
have been found guilty of any of the following offenses or found guilty of an
offense outside the State of Illinois that would have constituted any of the
following offenses if committed within the State of Illinois:



      (1)    An offense involving the use of force and violence upon
the person of another that amounts to a felony.



      (2)  An offense enumerated in any provision of Article 11,
entitled "Sex Offenses", of the Illinois Criminal Code (70 ILCS 5/11-1 et
seq.), as amended from time to time.



      (3)  Any offense involving possession or delivery of a
controlled substance or other illegal drug offense that amounts to a felony.



      (4)    A felony offense enumerated in Article 24, "Deadly
Weapons", of the Illinois Criminal Code (720 ILCS 5/24-1 et seq.), as amended
from time to time, or any other offense that involves the use of weapons.



      (5)   Any crime of moral turpitude. The Village of Carol
Stream may issue a license to any person found guilty of (or whose employees,
other than massage therapists, have been found guilty of) any of the crimes
described in division (C)(1) through (C)(4) of this section only if it
determines that such finding of guilt occurred more than ten years prior to
the date of the application and the individual has had no subsequent felony
findings of guilty of any nature and no subsequent misdemeanor findings of
guilty for a crime or crimes set forth in this section. Further, for the
purpose of this section, any finding of guilty, including an order resulting
in supervision, shall apply.



   (D)   Any applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of fact or failed to disclose or attempted to conceal
required information or a fact in the license application or in any other
document required by the village.



   (E)   Any applicant has had a massage business, massage therapy or
other similar permit or license denied, revoked or suspended by the village
or any other state, county or local agency within five years prior to the
date of the application.



   (F)  Any applicant is not 18 years of age or older.



   (G)   Copies of the state licenses of persons, who will be providing
massage services at the business establishment, including outcall services,
have not been provided.



   (H) The business is licensed as a sexually oriented business as defined
in § 10-10-3.



(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 10-13-5  APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF APPLICATION.



   The Village of Carol Stream, through the Village Clerk or designee
shall act to approve or deny an application for a license under this article
within a reasonable period of time and in no event shall the Village of Carol
Stream act to approve or deny said license later than 90 days from the date
that a full and complete application was filed with the village.



(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 10-13-6  POSTING OF LICENSE; PHOTO IDENTIFICATION CARD.



   (A)   The state licenses issued to each massage therapist shall be
posted in the reception area for patrons, or in the therapist's work area and
shall be available for immediate inspection.



   (B)   The village's paper massage business license shall be posted
in a publicly viewable area and the village's sticker massage business
license shall be posted in a front window.



   (C)   In the event of the loss or destruction of a license issued
pursuant to this article, upon written application to the Office of the
Clerk, and payment of a fee of $5, a duplicate license will be issued, noting
it is a reissued license.



   (D)   Every massage therapist shall possess a government issued
photo identification card while on the licensed premises and produce such
identification card upon request of any representative of the Village of
Carol Stream.



   (E)   To provide outcall massage service, the massage therapist must
possess a government issued photo identification card and state license in
the name of the individual providing the service.



   (F)   Every manager, assistant manager or other person principally
in charge of the operation of the business shall possess a government issued
photo identification card while on the licensed premises and produce such
identification card upon request of any representative of the Village of
Carol Stream.



(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 10-13-7  REGISTER OF EMPLOYEES.



   The licensee or person designated by the licensee of a massage
establishment shall maintain a register of all persons employed at any time,
including massage therapists, along with their current photographs and a copy
of their licenses. Such register shall be available at the massage
establishment to representatives of the Village of Carol Stream during
regular business hours.



(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 10-13-8  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked
or suspended by the Village of Carol Stream after notice and a hearing by the
Mayor or designee, for good cause, or in any case where any of the provisions
of this article are violated or where any employee of the licensee, including
a massage therapist, is engaged in any conduct which violates any of the
state or local laws or regulations at licensee's place of business. Such
license may also be revoked or suspended by the Village of Carol Stream after
notice and hearing, upon the recommendations of the inspector that such
business is being managed, conducted or maintained without regard to proper
sanitation and hygiene.



   (B)   Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license or permit
shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the
complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be sent by
certified mail (return receipt requested) to the licensee or permittee at his
or her last known address, at least three days prior to the date set for the
hearing. Notice will also be posted on a public bulletin board and the
village website no less than 48 hours before the hearing. A stenographic or
electronically recorded record of the hearing shall be kept. The village
shall pay the cost of attendance fees of the reporter and the costs of the
transcript, if such transcript shall be ordered by the village. The licensee
or permittee shall pay the cost of any transcript ordered by him or her.



   (C)   Within a reasonable time after the conclusion of the hearing,
but not later than 30 days after such conclusion, the Mayor shall file a
written decision in which he or she has summarized the evidence and has
stated the reasons for his or her decision. If a license has been revoked for
any cause, no license shall be granted to any person for the conduct of the
business of a massage establishment at that location for a period of 12
months.



   (D)   No person shall destroy, obliterate, take, remove or carry
away without the consent of the owner any license, certificate, plate or
sticker which has been issued by the village, except when such license,
certificate, plate or sticker has been discontinued or the licensed premises
have been abandoned. Nothing herein shall prevent the Mayor or his or her
duly authorized representative from removing any license, certificate, plate
or sticker from the possession of a former licensee, his or her premises, any
vehicle or any machine when such license has been revoked under the
provisions of this code.



(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 10-13-9  REVOCATION OF MASSAGE THERAPIST LICENSE.



   A massage therapist license issued by the state may be revoked or
suspended in accordance with the Illinois Massage Licensing Act (225 ILCS
57/1 et seq.), as it may be amended from time to time. The Chief of Police
shall report any and all suspected violations to the department of
professional regulation.



(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 10-13-10  FACILITY REQUIREMENTS.



   Every location for which a massage establishment license is sought
shall, in addition to meeting all other village regulations, comply with the
following:



   (A)   The minimum number of plumbing fixtures shall be provided and
maintained as required by code.



   (B)   The establishment will comply with all building, property
maintenance, and fire codes.



(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 10-13-11  OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Prices for all services shall be prominently posted in the
reception area in a location available to all prospective customers on a
placard of at least eight inches by ten inches.



   (B)   All employees, including massage therapists, shall wear
nontransparent outer garments.



   (C)   The sexual or genital areas of patrons must be covered with
nontransparent towels, cloths, or undergarments when in the presence of an
employee or massage therapist.



   (D)   No massage therapist, employee, or licensee shall perform,
offer, or agree to perform any act, which shall require the touching of a
patron's sexual or genital area.



   (E)   Any reception or waiting area shall be open to the public and
visible from outside of the immediate entrance of establishment, e.g.,
storefront windows and any entrance door shall be transparent and
unobstructed. Any exterior windows or doors with a view to the waiting area
or reception area must be free of any posting or material that would obstruct
the view of the waiting area or reception area from the outside of the
establishment. No massage establishment shall be equipped with tinted or
one-way glass in any room or office. No doors to corridors or individual
massage rooms shall be equipped with a lock or shall be obstructed.



   (F)   No massage establishment granted a license under the
provisions of this article shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be
placed, published or distributed any advertisement, picture, or statement
which is known or through the exercise of reasonable care should be known to
be false, deceptive or misleading in order to induce any person to purchase
or utilize any professional massage services.



   (G)   No massage establishment granted a license under the
provisions of this article shall depict, place, publish, distribute, or cause
to be depicted, placed, published, or distributed any advertising matter that
suggests to prospective patrons that any services are available other than
those services permitted by this article, or which would suggest that
employees or massage therapists are dressed in any manner other than that
permitted by this article.



   (H)   No advertising will suggest or describe the physical
characteristics of employees or massage therapists.



   (I)   No person shall be denied a massage or access to the massage
establishment because of gender.



   (J)   No massage establishment or employee of any massage
establishment may display or offer to others any novelties, instruments,
devices, or paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in connection
with specified sexual activities or that give the appearance of or simulate
any of the specified anatomical areas.



   (K)   An owner or manager of the massage establishment must be
present during all operating hours.



(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 10-13-12  PERSONS UNDER AGE 18 PROHIBITED ON PREMISES.



   It shall be unlawful to permit any person under the age of 18 years to
be offered or receive a massage at any massage business establishment unless
accompanied by, or with written consent of, a parent or legal guardian.



(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 10-13-13  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep, or cause to be
sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage on any
premises used in any way for or by a massage business, patron or massage
therapist.



(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 10-13-14  HOURS.



   No portion of any business premises used in any way for or by a massage
business shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m.



(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 10-13-15  EMPLOYMENT OF MASSAGE THERAPIST.



   No person shall employ, as a massage therapist, any person unless the
employee has obtained and has in effect a state license issued by the
Illinois Department of Professional Regulation pursuant to the Illinois
Massage Licensing Act (225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.), as it may be amended from time
to time, or a reciprocal license as defined by 225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.



(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 10-13-16  INSPECTIONS REQUIRED.



   Upon issuance of a massage establishment business license, in addition
to the inspection requirements of this article, the licensee shall provide
any representative of the village with reasonable opportunity to inspect the
premises for which the license is issued and to interview the licensee's
agents and employees for the purpose of determining that the provisions of
this article and other applicable ordinances and state and federal laws are
being complied with. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to allow any
representative of the village access to the premises of the massage
establishment or to hinder such access in any manner.



(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 10-13-17  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, in a massage
establishment, to place his or her hand or hands upon, to touch with any part
of his or her body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage, a sexual or
genital area of any other person.



   (B)    It shall be unlawful for any person, in a massage
establishment, to expose his or her sexual or genital area to any other
person. It shall also be unlawful for any person, in a massage establishment,
to expose the sexual or genital area of any other person.



   (C)    It shall be unlawful for any person, while in the presence of
any other person in a massage establishment, to fail to conceal with a fully
opaque covering, the sexual or genital area of his or her body.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to perform, offer or agree
to perform any act which shall require the touching of a patron's sexual or
genital area or any unlawful act, as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-14, 11-14.1,
11-14.3, and 11-14.4, which are incorporated as now or hereafter amended.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or
managing a massage establishment, to



cause, allow or permit in or about such massage establishment, any agent,
employee or any other person under his or her control or supervision to
perform such acts prohibited in divisions (A), (B), (C), or (D) above.



   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this article to
administer or permit massage within the village, except within the
establishment licensed to carry on such business under this article or as
outcall massage service.



   (G)  It shall be unlawful for any massage service to be carried on
within any cubicle, room, booth or any area within a massage establishment,
which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. Toilets and cubicles
used solely for the application of liquid and vapor baths shall be clearly
marked as to purposes on the exterior door or curtain of the cubicle, room or
booth. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to eliminate any
other regulation concerning the maintenance of premises, or to preclude
authorized inspection of any premises, whenever such inspection is deemed
appropriate by the Carol Stream Police Department.



(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 10-13-18  MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE; EXEMPTIONS.



   The massage establishment license shall not be required for hospitals,
nursing homes, sanatoriums, or any facility at which a healthcare worker duly
licensed by the State of Illinois provides, on an ongoing basis, professional
health services to individuals, including, but not limited to, the offices of
an occupational therapist licensed under the Illinois Occupational Therapy
Practice Act (225 ILCS 75/1 et seq.); a physical therapist licensed under the
Medical Practice Act (225 ILCS 60/1 et seq.); a chiropractor licensed under
the Medical Practice Act (225 ILCS 60/1 et seq.); and a naprapath listed
under the Illinois Naprapathic Practice Act (225 ILCS 63/1 et seq.).



(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 10-13-19  SALE OR TRANSFER OR CHANGE OF LOCATION.



   No license issued under the provisions of this article is transferable.
Upon sale, transfer or relocation of a massage establishment, the license
shall be null and void and a new license required.  Upon the death or legal
incapacity of the licensee or any co-licensee of the massage establishment,
any heir or beneficiary of a deceased licensee, or any legal guardian of an
heir or beneficiary of a deceased licensee, or any legal guardian of any
legally incapacitated licensee, may continue the business of the massage
establishment for a reasonable period of time not to exceed 60 days to allow
for an orderly transition and application for a new license.



(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 10-13-20  NAME AND PLACE OF BUSINESS.



   No person granted a license pursuant to this article, shall operate the
massage establishment under a name not specified in the license, nor shall
the person conduct business under any designation or location not specified
in the license, except that the location for outcall massage service need not
be specified on the license.



(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 10-13-21  JOINT AND SEVERAL LIABILITY.



   Any act or failure to act of an employee, a person performing massage
at or on behalf of a massage establishment, or an agent of the licensee with
respect to the licensed business shall be deemed to be the act of the
licensee. The licensee and individual committing a violation are jointly and
severally liable for any fines or penalties assessed pursuant to this article.



(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 10-13-22  PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   It is determined and declared by the corporate authorities to be a
public nuisance and a menace to the health, safety and welfare for any
person, firm association or corporation to establish, operate, or maintain a
massage establishment, whether open to the public generally or operated as a
private or semi-private club, within the village where any massage therapist,
employee or patron touches, rubs, strokes, kneads, massages, fondles, or
manipulates the genital area of any other person or exposes his or her sexual
or genital area to any other person for the purpose of sexual arousal and/or
sexual gratification.  Touching of the genital area by a licensed physician,
chiropractor, osteopath, or nurse for the purpose of medical examination or
treatment shall not constitute a public nuisance hereunder.



(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 10-13-23  DUTY TO REPORT.



   All employees, managers and agents of a massage establishment are
mandated reporters and shall immediately report to the Carol Stream Police
Department within one business day any sexual misconduct that is observed or
any allegations of sexual misconduct that are reported.



(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)



§ 10-13-24  VIOLATION AND PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be punished
by a fine as determined by § 15-4-5 (Index of Minimum Fines). Penalties for
ordinance violations may also be determined by administrative adjudication. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed each time on each day during or on
which violation occurs or is permitted to occur.



(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)



CHAPTER 11: INTOXICATING LIQUOR



      Article



         1.   LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER



         2.   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR DEALERS



         3.   SOCIAL HOSTING



ARTICLE 1:  LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER



Section



   11-1-1   Commissioner



   11-1-2   Compensation



   11-1-3   Powers, duties and functions



   11-1-4   Suspension and revocation of liquor licenses



   11-1-5   Complaint of violation



   11-1-6   Notice, hearing and order



Cross-reference:



   Liquor dealers, see Ch. 11, Art. 2



§ 11-1-1  COMMISSIONER.



   The Village President shall, in accordance with state law, serve as the
Liquor Control Commissioner of the village and shall be charged with the
administration of the provisions of the Liquor Control Act, 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et
seq., and of such ordinances and resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor as
may be enacted. The Village President may appoint a person or persons to
assist him or her in the exercise of the powers and the performance of the
duties provided for such Liquor Control Commissioner.



§ 11-1-2  COMPENSATION.



   The corporate authorities may establish a salary for the Liquor Control
Commissioner prior to the term of a new Village President. The corporate
authorities may, from time to time, fix and pay compensation to the deputies,
assistants or employees of the Liquor Control Commissioner as may be deemed
necessary for the proper performance of the duties vested in them.



§ 11-1-3  POWERS, DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS.



   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the following powers, duties
and functions with respect to local liquor licenses:



   (A)   To grant or suspend for not more than 30 days or revoke for
cause all local licenses issued to persons or entities for premises within
his or her jurisdiction;



   (B)   To adopt rules and regulations for the conduct and operation
of a licensee’s business which are not inconsistent with state law or
municipal ordinances;



   (C)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter,
at any time, upon the premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of
the provisions of the state law or municipal ordinances or any rules or
regulations adopted by him, her or by the State Liquor Control Commission
have been or are being violated, and at such time to examine the premises of
the licensee in connection therewith;



   (D)   To receive complaints from any citizen within his or her
jurisdiction that any of the provisions of the state law or of this code have
been or are being violated and to act upon such complaint in the manner
provided by law;



   (E)   To order local license fees paid to the Village Treasurer;



   (F)   To examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant
for a local license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom
notice of revocation or suspension has been served, or any licensee against
whom a citation proceeding has been instituted by the State Liquor Control
Commission;  to examine, or cause to be examined, the books and records of
any such applicant or licensee or respondent; and to hear testimony and take
proof for his or her information in the performance of his or her duties; and
for such purposes to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of
the state. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the
Liquor Control Commissioner under this section, he or she may authorize his
or her agent to act on his or her behalf; and



   (G)   To order, upon the issuance of a written order, the licensed
premises closed for not more than seven days, giving the licensee an
opportunity to be heard during that period, if the Liquor Control
Commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a
particular licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the
community; except that, if such licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct
of another business or businesses on the licensed premises, such order shall
not be applicable to such other business or businesses.



§ 11-1-4  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LIQUOR LICENSES.



   The Liquor Control Commissioner may, in accordance with law, revoke or
suspend any license issued by him or her if he or she determines that the
licensee has violated any state law, any municipal ordinance, or any
applicable rule or regulation established by the Liquor Control Commissioner
which is not inconsistent with law.



§ 11-1-5  COMPLAINT OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   Any five residents of the village shall have the right to file
a complaint with the Liquor Control Commissioner stating that any retailer
licensed within the village has been or is violating the provisions of the
State Liquor Control Commission. Such complaint shall be in writing and shall
be signed and sworn to by the parties complaining. The complaint shall state
the particular provision, rule or regulation believed to have been violated
and the facts in detail upon which belief is based.



   (B)   If the Liquor Control Commissioner is satisfied that the
complaint substantially charges a violation and that from the facts alleged
there is reasonable cause for such belief, he or she shall set the matter for
hearing and shall serve notice upon the licensee of the complaint.



§ 11-1-6  NOTICE, HEARING AND ORDER.



   (A)   No such liquor license shall be revoked or suspended, except
after a public hearing before the Liquor Control Commissioner. The Liquor
Control Commissioner shall give written notice to the licensee, not less than
three days prior to the hearing, affording the licensee an opportunity to
appear and defend or otherwise answer.



   (B)   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall, within five days after
such hearing, if he or she determines that the license should be revoked or
suspended, state the reason or reasons for such determination in a written
order of revocation or suspension and shall serve a copy of such order upon
the licensee within five days. The corporate authorities prescribe that an
appeal from a decision of the Local Liquor Commissioner of the village shall
be limited to review of the official record of the proceedings of such Local
Liquor Control Commissioner.



   (C)   In the event that a hearing takes place and an appeal from
that hearing is filed, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall require
that a certified official copy of the proceedings, taken and prepared by a
certified court reporter or a certified shorthand reporter, shall be filed
within five days after notice of the filing of such appeal. The review by the
State Liquor Control Commission shall be limited to and based upon the
transcript so filed. No new or additional evidence shall be admitted or
considered.



   (D)   In the event the appeal is from an order of the Liquor Control
Commissioner denying a renewal application, the licensee shall have on
deposit with the village an amount sufficient to cover the license fee for
the renewal period and the certificate of dram shop insurance as required by
this code.



ARTICLE 2:  ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR DEALERS



Section



   11-2-1   Definitions



   11-2-2   License required



   11-2-3   Term of license



   11-2-4   Applications



   11-2-5   Persons ineligible to license



   11-2-6   Violation of Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act



   11-2-7   Classification of licenses; number issued; fees



   11-2-8   Record of licenses



   11-2-9   Disposition of fees



   11-2-10   Dram shop insurance



   11-2-11   License renewal



   11-2-12   Displaying license



   11-2-13   Duplicate license



   11-2-14   Transfer of license



   11-2-15   Change in personnel



   11-2-16   Change of premises name



   11-2-17   Change of location



   11-2-18   Recovery of fees



   11-2-19   Use of premises after revocation



   11-2-20   Retail sales restrictions



   11-2-21   Election days



   11-2-22   Restrictions concerning minors



   11-2-23   Parental responsibility



   11-2-24   Hours, days of sale regulated



   11-2-25   Books and records available on request



   11-2-26   Sales to minors, habitual drunkards, spendthrifts and
mental incompetents



   11-2-27   Gambling



   11-2-28   Refilling original packages



   11-2-29   Civil rights in licensed premises



   11-2-30   Sales on credit



   11-2-31   Sanitary conditions



   11-2-32   Health requirements; employees and others



   11-2-33   Peddling



   11-2-34   Possession of alcoholic liquor in motor vehicles



   11-2-35   Compliance with state statutes



   11-2-36   BASSET training required



   11-2-37   Video gaming by persons under 21 years of age prohibited



   11-2-38   Conduct prohibited in licensed premises



Cross-reference:



   Liquor Control Commission, see Ch. 11, Art. 1



§ 11-2-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid
containing more than 0.5% of alcohol by volume, which is fit for beverage
purposes.



   CLUB. A corporation organized under the laws of this state, not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than
the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by
its members through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing
a building or space in a building of such extent and character as may be
suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and
accommodation of its members and their guests, and provided with suitable and
adequate kitchen and dining room space and equipment, and maintaining a
sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and
serving food and meals for its members and their guests; and, provided
further that, its affairs and management are conducted by a board of
directors, executive committee or similar body chosen by the members at their
annual meeting and that no member or any other officer, agent, or employee of
the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary
or other compensation, any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic
liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests introduced by
members, beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any
annual meeting by the members or by its board of directors or other governing
body out of the general revenue of the club.



   INTENTIONAL CONDUCT. Conduct engaged in by a person with the conscious
objective to accomplish that result or engage in that conduct.



   KNOWING CONDUCT. Conduct engaged in by a person when he or she is
consciously aware of the nature or attendant circumstances of his or her
conduct which constitutes an offense under this section.



   LEGAL GUARDIAN. Any foster parent, person appointed guardian or given
custody of a minor by a circuit court of this state, or person appointed
guardian or given custody of a minor under the State Juvenile Court Act,
being 705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq., not including any person appointed guardian
only to the estate of a minor.



   MINOR. Any person over seven years of age, but not yet 21 years of age.



   NEGLIGENCE. Conduct engaged in by a person where such person fails to
be aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or
that a result will follow which constitutes an offense under this section and
where such failure constitutes a substantial deviation from the standard of
care which a reasonable person would exercise in the situation.



   PARENTS. The father and mother of a minor child, whether by birth or
adoption, or the parent having legal custody of the minor in the event the
parents are divorced or separated. The term PARENT, as used in this section,
shall also be deemed to mean LEGAL GUARDIAN.



   RECKLESS CONDUCT. Conduct engaged in by a person in conscious disregard
of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or that a
result will follow which constitutes an offense under this section and where
such disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which
a reasonable person would exercise in the situation.



   RETAIL SALE. The sale for use or consumption and not for resale.



§ 11-2-2  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in
the village any alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer’s
license, or to sell or offer for sale such alcoholic liquor in violation of
the terms of such license.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to permit the consumption of alcoholic
liquor on the premises of any restaurant business by any person, unless a
retail liquor dealer’s license has been issued for such premises, and then
only in accordance with the terms of such license.



(Ord. 2011-12-47, passed 12-19-2011)



§ 11-2-3  TERM OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Each license shall terminate on April 30 next following its
issuance. A full yearly fee shall be paid for each license issued between the
period of May 1 through October 31. In the event that a new license is sought
between the period of November 1 through April 30, the fee for such new
license shall be 50% of the yearly license fee.



   (B)   In the event that an application for the renewal of an
existing license is not filed by the second Wednesday in April, or in the
event that payment submitted with the application renewed is returned to the
village because of insufficient funds or other reason, the amount of the
applicable fee shall be increased by 20%.



(Ord. 90-03-25, passed 3-27-1990)



§ 11-2-4  APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Liquor
Control Commissioner, in writing, signed by the applicant, if an individual,
or by a duly authorized agent thereof if a club or corporation, verified by
oath or affidavit, and shall contain information required by application
forms approved by the Liquor Control Commissioner and provided by the Village
Clerk.



   (B)   All such applications shall be accompanied by a non-refundable
fee in the amount of $500 to cover application handling and the costs to
conduct a background investigation of the individual or the duly authorized
agent. An additional fee of $150 shall be paid for each additional individual
or authorized agent for which an investigation must be conducted. Application
fees are in addition to the yearly license fee.



   (C)   Any change in the individual or the duly authorized agent made
during the term of the license which requires an investigation shall be
accompanied by a non-refundable fee in the amount of $375 for each such
change made during the year.



   (D)   Such applications shall contain the following information and
statements:



      (1)   The name, age and address of all applicants, whether
individuals, partners, or limited partners; in the case of corporations or
clubs, the date of incorporation or organization, corporate or organizational
purpose, and names and addresses of all officers and directors. In addition,
corporate applicants whose stock is not regulated by a state or federal
securities commission shall identify all stockholders, including trust
beneficiaries, pledges, contract purchasers, optionees on holders of a right
of first refusal to purchase, or persons otherwise having a similar interest
in any of its stock, by name, address and number of shares;



      (2)   The citizenship of the applicant; his or her place of
birth and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her
naturalization;



      (3)   The character of business of the applicant; and, in the
case of a corporation, the objects for which it was formed;



      (4)   The location and description of the premises or place of
business which is to be operated under such license;



      (5)   A statement as to whether applicant has made similar
application for a similar license on premises other than described in this
application, and the disposition of such application;



      (6)   A statement that the applicant has never been convicted
of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any
matter or thing contained in this article, laws of the state or ordinances of
the village;



      (7)   The name and address of the landlord, if the premises
are leased;



      (8)   The address of the applicant’s ware-house if he or she
warehouses liquor;



      (9)   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision
thereof, or by the federal government has been revoked, and the reasons
therefor; and



      (10)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of
the laws of the state or the United States in the conduct of his or her place
of business.



(Ord. 92-06-76, passed 6-23-1992)



§ 11-2-5  PERSONS INELIGIBLE TO LICENSE.



   No such retail liquor dealer’s license shall be issued to the
following:



   (A)   A person who is not a resident of the village; (See division
(J) below for corporations.)



   (B)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the
community in which he or she resides;



   (C)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;



   (D)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal
or state law if the Liquor Control Commissioner determines, after
investigation, that such person has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to
warrant the public trust;



   (E)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper, or is
keeping a house of ill fame;



   (F)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;



   (G)   A person whose license issued under this article has been
revoked for cause;



   (H)   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any
license issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application;



   (I)   A co-partnership, unless all the members of such
co-partnership shall be qualified to obtain a license;



   (J)   Corporations:



      (1)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director
thereof, or any stockholder or stock-holders owning in the aggregate more
than 5% of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a
license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within
the village; and



      (2)   A corporation, unless it is incorporated in this state,
or unless it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the State
Business Corporation Act, being 805 ILCS 5/1.05 et seq., to transact business
in the state.



   (K)   Any person whose place of business is conducted by a manager
or agent, unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications
required by the licensee;



   (L)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal
or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic
liquor, or who shall have forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to
answer charges for any such violation;



   (M)   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which
a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued;



   (N)   Any law enforcing public official, including members of the
Liquor Control Commission, the Village President and any member of the
corporate authorities within their own community; and no such official whose
residence is within the village shall be interested in any way, either
directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic
liquor;



   (O)   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be
operated by the licensee;



   (P)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as
prescribed by state law;



   (Q)   A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period;



   (R)   A co-partnership to which a federal gaming device stamp or a
federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the
current tax period, or if any of the partners have been issued a federal
gaming device stamp or federal wagering stamp by the federal government for
the current tax period;



   (S)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or
any stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 20% of the stock of such
corporation has been issued a federal gaming device stamp or wagering stamp
for the current tax period; and



   (T)   Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a
federal wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the
current tax period.



§ 11-2-6  VIOLATION OF RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX ACT.



   In addition to other grounds specified in this article, the Liquor
Control Commissioner may refuse the issuance or renewal of a retail license,
or suspend or revoke such license, for any of the following violations of the
state law:



   (A)   Failure to make a tax return;



   (B)   The filing of a fraudulent return;



   (C)   Failure to pay all or part of any tax or penalty finally
determined to be due;



   (D)   Failure to keep books and records;



   (E)   Failure to secure and display a certificate or subcertificates
of registration; and/or



   (F)   Willful violation of any rule or regulation of the state
relating to the administration and enforcement of tax liability.



Cross-reference:



   Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act, see Ch. 5, Art. 1



§ 11-2-7  CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES; NUMBER ISSUED; FEES.



   Licenses issued under this article shall be divided into various
classes, and shall be limited in number and shall provide for fees as follows.



   (A)   Class A licenses.



      (1)   Class A licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic beverages in hotels, restaurants and bowling alleys for consumption
on the premises. The issuance of a Class A license in a restaurant and the
retention of that license in a restaurant shall only take place where more
than 50% of the gross retail sales in such restaurant shall be derived from
the sale of food and non-alcoholic beverages. Not more than 13 Class A
licenses shall be issued. The fee for such license shall be $3,725 for each
year the license is issued in the name of such licensee.



      (2)   The holder of a Class A license may also apply for a
special license which shall permit the retail sale of alcoholic liquors
through the entire license year for consumption in a structure located within
the village where the holder of the Class A license has entered into an
agreement with the owner or tenant to provide food and liquor catering
services for a business or social event. The arrangement between the holder
of the Class A license and the person or entity for whom the catering
services are to be performed must be a bona fide contract and such operation
may not be a permanent extension or a satellite operation of the Class A
licensee. A Class A special license shall also authorize the retail sale of
wine, but not for consumption on the premises where sold, when such sale is
made in conjunction with the sale of a carry-out food order at the restaurant
for which the license holder possesses a Class A license. No such special
license shall be issued. The fee for such special license shall be $300 for
each year the license is issued in the name of the licensee.



   (B)   Class B licenses.  Class B licenses shall authorize the
retail sale of alcoholic liquors in hotels and restaurants located in the
same building or complex as a hotel, or in meeting rooms, banquet facilities
and conference areas located in the same hotel. Banquet facilities, meeting
rooms and conference areas are locations which are not open to the general
public, but are rented to persons or groups for meals, parties, weddings,
conferences and other similar functions. The issuance of a Class B license in
a restaurant shall only take place where more than 50% of the gross retail
sales in such restaurant are derived from the sale of food and non-alcoholic
beverages. When, within a single hotel, the retail sale of alcoholic liquors
in a restaurant is provided by a different person, partnership,
co-partnership or corporation from that entity which provides service within
meeting rooms, banquet facilities and conference areas, a separate license
shall be required for each entity. Not more than one license shall be issued.
The fee for such license shall be $3,850 for each year the license is issued
in the name of the licensee.



   (C)   Class C licenses.  Class C licenses shall authorize the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor, but not for consumption on the premises
where sold. No more than 19 such licenses shall be issued.  The fee for such
license shall be $3,400 for each year that the license is issued in the name
of such licensee.



   (D)   Class E licenses.



      (1)   Class E licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor on the premises during a 24-hour period if such sales are
limited to occasions when groups are assembled on the premises solely for the
promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of
alcoholic liquor. Issuance of such 24-hour licenses shall be limited to
schools, churches, hospitals, homes for the aged or indigent persons, or for
veterans, their spouses or children, or any military or naval station,
governmental group or fraternal organization incorporated under a general
not-for-profit corporation act.



      (2)   No more than seven such Class E licenses shall be issued
to any group mentioned herein, or to any person representing any group
mentioned herein in any one year. The fee for such 24-hour license shall be
$25, unless waived by the Liquor Control Commissioner.



   (E)   Class F licenses.  Class F licenses shall authorize the
retail sale of beer and wine only, for consumption on the premises. The
retention of such Class F license shall only take place where more than 75%
of the gross retail sales on such premises shall be derived from the sale of
food and non-alcoholic beverages. No more than seven Class F licenses shall
be issued. The fee for such license shall be $2,175 for each year that the
license is issued in the name of such licensee.



   (F)   Class G licenses.  Class G licenses shall authorize the
retail sale of beer and wine only, but not for consumption on the premises
where sold. No more than two such licenses shall be issued. The fee for such
license shall be $1,700 for each year that the license is issued in the name
of such licensee.



   (G)   Class I licenses.  Class I licenses shall authorize the
retail sale of draft beer only, for consumption on the premises where sold.
The retention of such Class I license shall only take place where more than
75% of the gross retail sales on such premises shall be derived from the sale
of food and non-alcoholic beverages. The draft beer may only be furnished in
regular glasses or in disposable glasses furnished without tops. The sale of
such draft beer shall be made at a separate station or location from the
place where food or non-alcoholic beverages are sold. The holder of such a
license shall post signs in prominent places within the establishment stating
that "BEER MAY NOT BE REMOVED FROM THE PREMISES". Zero Class I licenses are
authorized for issuance. The fee for such license shall be $925 for each year
that the license is issued in the name of such licensee.



   (H)   Class J licenses.  Class J licenses shall authorize the
retail sale of wine, in its original package, not for consumption on the
premises, by a restaurant holding a Class A license, under the following
conditions:  The retail sale must only be to members of a wine club operated
by the restaurant or the retail sale must be made to a dining patron of the
restaurant in conjunction with a meal that has been served to the dining
patron.  Tasting or sampling of wine on the premises shall be allowed only
if conducted as part of a promotion or sales device for the purpose of the
retail sale of wine through wine club membership.  One Class J license is
authorized for issuance.  The fee for such license shall be $1,100 for each
year that the license is issued in the name of such licensee.



   (I)   Class K licenses.  Class K licenses shall authorize the
retail sale of beer and wine by means of mail order, telephone order, or
internet transmitted order for delivery to be made directly to the purchaser.



      (1)   A Class K license shall only be issued to a bona fide
mail order, telephone order, or internet business for retail distribution of
beer and/or wine with no direct sales of beer and wine at the facility.



      (2)   Beer and wine shall be sold and delivered in sealed
packages only, and shall not be for gift or consumption on the premises of
the licensee. Sales shall only be by mail order, telephone order or by
internet for delivery to various locations or destinations away from the
premises of the licensee.



      (3)   It is a condition of the Class K license that, beer and
wine be sold only through mail order, telephone or internet order and such
beer and wine be delivered by the licensee or an agent of the licensee, or by
United Parcel Service or other authorized carrier, pursuant to the
regulations adopted by the Illinois State Liquor Control Commission, to
locations and destinations away from the premises of licensee.



      (4)   Zero Class K licenses is authorized for issuance.  The
fee for such license shall be $1,700 for each year that the license is issued
in the name of such licensee.



      (5)   (a)   Every Class K licensee shall establish and
conduct a full age verification process which shall include the following
requirements:  (i) that the purchaser provide his or her birth date and
certify that he or she is at least 21 years of age prior to the placement of
any order, (ii) that upon delivery of the beer or wine, the purchaser must
provide a valid and legal form of identification verifying that the purchaser
is at least 21 years of age and must sign a receipt for delivery of the beer
or wine, and (iii) the deliverer must verify that the identification is that
of the purchaser and that the purchaser is at least 21 years of age, and (iv)
the licensee must maintain a copy of the signature and a receipt for the beer
or wine delivery for a minimum period of one year from the date of sale.



         (b)   It shall be unlawful for holders of a Class K
license to deliver beer or wine without having procured adequate information
to determine that the purchaser is legally qualified to receive the product
prior to delivery.



         (c)   The provisions of § 11-2-26, concerning sale or
delivery to underage persons, shall apply to any delivery made by a Class K
license holder whether such delivery is made by the licensee an agent of the
licensee, or any postal or parcel delivery carrier. Evidence of any delivery
made or shipped by a licensee in violation of § 11-2-26 shall be grounds for
suspension or revocation of the Class K license.



      (6)   Every Class K licensee shall provide training to all
employees or agents delivering alcoholic beverages to customers which
training shall include verification techniques for identification and age.



   (J)   Class L licenses.  Class L licenses shall authorize the
retail sale of alcoholic liquors by means of mail order, telephonic order or
internet transmitted order for delivery to be made directly to the purchaser.



      (1)   A Class L license shall only to a bona fide mail order,
telephone order or internet business for retail distribution of alcoholic
liquor with no direct sales of alcoholic liquor at the facility.



      (2)   Alcoholic liquor shall be sold and delivered in sealed
packages only, and shall not be for gift or consumption upon the premises of
the licensee.  Sales shall only be by mail order, telephone order or by
internet for delivery to various locations away from the premises of the
licensee.



      (3)   It is a condition of the Class L license that alcoholic
liquor be sold only through mail order, telephone order or internet order and
such alcoholic liquor be delivered by the licensee or an agent of the
licensee, or by the United Parcel Service or other authorized carriers,
pursuant to the regulations adopted by the Illinois State Liquor Control
Commission to locations and destinations away from the premises of licensee.



      (4)   One Class L license is authorized for issuance.  The
fee for such license shall be $3,400 for each year the license is issued in
the name of such licensee.



      (5)   (a)   Every Class L licensee shall establish and
conduct a full age verification process which shall include the following
requirements:  (i) that the purchaser provide his or her birth date and
certify that he or she is at least 21 years of age prior to the placement of
any order, (ii) that upon delivery of the alcoholic liquor, the purchaser
must provide a valid and legal form of identification verifying that the
purchaser is at least 21 years of age and must sign a receipt for delivery of
the alcoholic liquor, and (iii) the deliverer must verify that the
identification is that of the purchaser and that the purchaser is at least 21
years of age, and (iv) the licensee must maintain a copy of the signature and
a receipt for the alcoholic liquor delivery for a minimum period of one year
from the date of sale.



         (b)   It shall be unlawful for holders of a Class K
license to deliver alcoholic liquor without having procured adequate
information to determine that the purchaser is legally qualified to receive
the product prior to the alcoholic liquor.



         (c)   The provisions of § 11-2-26, concerning sale or
delivery to underage persons, shall apply to any delivery made by a Class L
license holder whether such delivery is made by the licensee an agent of the
licensee, or any postal or parcel delivery carrier.  Evidence of any
delivery made or shipped by a licensee in violation of § 11-2-26 shall be
grounds for suspension or revocation of the Class L license.



      (6)   Every Class L licensee shall provide training to all
employees or agents delivering alcoholic beverages to customers which
training shall include verification techniques for identification and age.



   (K)   Class M licenses.  A Class M license shall authorize holders
of a Class C or Class G license to provide for delivery of alcoholic liquor
(in the case of a Class C licensee), or beer and wine (in the case of a Class
G licensee) sold on the licensed premises to a location within the village
elsewhere and apart from the licensed premises. The provisions of § 11-2-26,
concerning sale or delivery to minors, shall apply to any delivery made by a
Class M license holder. In addition, the licensee, its agent or employee,
shall obtain the signature of the recipient of the delivery upon a
certification that the recipient is age 21 or older. This certification shall
be retained by the licensee for a period of six months and shall be made
available for inspection upon request by village officials. Zero licenses are
authorized for issuance. The fee for such license shall be $450 for each year
that the license is issued in the name of such licensee.



   (L)   Class N license.  A Class N license shall authorize the
retail sale of alcoholic liquors for the consumption on the premises, but
only when those premises are a fixed location owned by a veterans' group or
fraternal organization incorporation under a general Not-for-Profit
Corporation Act to which only its members and members' guests shall be served
the alcoholic liquor. Not more than one such license shall be issued. The fee
for such license shall be $1,625 for each year the license is issued in the
name of the licensee.



   (M)   Class O license.



      (1)   A Class O license shall authorize the consumption of
beer and wine which has been brought onto the premises by a patron or patrons
over the age of 21 for on-site consumption where the premises is that of a
restaurant as defined herein. The following provisions shall apply.



         (a)   Service of alcohol shall be permitted in
conjunction with the purchase and consumption of a meal prepared on the
premises while seated at a table and served by wait staff.



         (b)   No more than one 750 ml bottle of wine per patron
or no more than 36 ounces of beer per patron (unopened) shall be permitted to
be brought into the premises.



         (c)   Service of alcohol shall be allowed only during
the restaurant hours of operation and only along with and during the regular
food service and shall not exceed the hours of service of alcohol found in §
11-2-24.



         (d)   Service of alcohol shall be limited to indoor
seating only. Under no circumstances shall the service of alcohol be
permitted outside unless otherwise permitted by the Carol Stream Code of
Ordinances.



         (e)   Licensees may only provide glassware and ice to
patrons, may uncork, pour and control its consumption and may charge a
corkage fee. The amount of any corkage fee shall be prominently displayed on
the establishment's menu.



         (f)   The licensee shall not permit any customer to
leave the licensed premises with any open beer or wine container. Partially
consumed wine, which has been securely sealed by the licensee, placed into a
transparent, one-time use, tamper-proof bag may be removed from the licensed
premises. A licensee shall not charge for this service.



         (g)   Only employees who have successfully completed a
certified training program may perform corkage/serving duties. Such employees
must be at least 19 years of age and shall serve in accordance with all state
and local laws.



         (h)   Licensees are prohibited from storing liquor on
the licensed premises, unless otherwise provided by a separate license
classification validly held by the licensee.



         (i)   Package and on-site sales of liquor is prohibited,
unless otherwise provided by a separate license classification validly held
by the licensee.



         (j)   No licensee shall be permitted to charge a cover
charge.



         (k)   A Class O license may be issued to a restaurant in
valid possession of another license classification.



         (l)   Licensees shall provide a certificate of insurance
reflecting coverage for dram shop or equivalent liability for service of
alcohol.



         (m)   Licensees shall be liable for violations of this
article in the same manner as the holder of any other classification of
liquor license, including, but not limited to, violations for service to
minors and over-serving of patrons.



      (2)   The number of Class O licenses authorized for issuance
shall be set at zero, effective 5-6-2013.



      (3)   The fee for a Class O license shall be $650 annually.



   (N)   Class P license.  A Class P License shall authorize the
retail sale of beer and wine in its original package, not for consumption on
the premises where sold, in a premises whose primary purpose is the sale of
gasoline. The area devoted to the sale of beer and wine shall comprise no
more than 20% of the premises retail square footage. For purposes of
determining the allowable beer and wine sales area, the licensee shall submit
a floor plan of the retail sales area at the time of application for the
license. Areas to which access by customers is prohibited shall not be
counted in the floor area calculation. The issuance of a Class P license and
the retention of that license shall only take place where no more than 20% of
the gross retail sales are derived from the sale of beer and wine. Sales of
beer shall be limited to packages of six-packs or more, and the sale of
individual serving containers of beer is prohibited. All extra beer and wine
stock shall be kept in a storage room with access only to the employees.
Subject to the provisions of § 11-2-24, the sale of beer and wine shall be
limited to only those hours gasoline is sold. The number of Class P licenses
authorized for issuance shall be seven. The fee for a Class P license shall
be $1,700 annually.



   (O)   Class R  (Park District Recreation Center Caterer's License)
license, which shall authorize the retail sale or the service of alcoholic
liquor by the holder of a Class A or B license for consumption on the
premises of the Carol Stream Park District Recreation Center in conjunction
with the sale of food on the date of a catered event as specified herein.  A
Class R license shall only allow service of alcoholic liquor on the date of
catered Park District special events or private special events approved by
the Park District where full multiple course meals or buffet style meals are
served for consumption at tables, and at which alcoholic liquor may be served
or sold with and incidental to the service of food by the licensee. Any
private special event must be approved by the Park District, be prearranged
under the sponsorship of a particular person or organization, including but
not limited to weddings, graduation parties and similar affairs and cannot be
open to members of the general public. Alcoholic liquor shall be consumed
only within the room used for the event and no alcoholic liquor shall be
served to members of the general public or consumed in areas of the
Recreation Center open to the general public or outside the Recreation Center
building.  No bar area devoted primarily to the service and consumption of
alcoholic liquor shall be allowed. The sale and consumption of alcohol shall
not be related to any commercial purpose or in connection with the sale of
non-alcoholic products or to promote the sale of non-alcoholic products.  A
Class R licensee shall comply with all other requirements of this Article
2.  The fee for such license shall be $50 per day for an event the license
is issued in the name of the licensee.



   (P)   Limitation on sales of alcoholic liquor. Where this section,
as a condition of issuance of the license, provides for a limitation on the
sales of alcoholic liquor by percentage of gross retail sales, the license
holder shall, upon the request of the Liquor Commissioner, provide evidence
in a form satisfactory to the Liquor Commissioner that such percentage
limitation on sales has not been exceeded.



   (Q)   Class V license.



      (1)   A Class V license shall authorize holders of a Class A,
Class B, Class F, Class I or Class N license to operate video gaming devices
upon the licensed premises upon receipt of a video gaming license issued by
the Illinois Gaming Board in accordance with the provisions of the Video
Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.



      (2)   Not more than 16 Class V licenses shall be issued. The
annual fee for such license shall be $1,000 for each terminal located upon
the licensed premises. No more than five video gaming terminals shall be
located on any premises issued a Class V license.



      (3)   Upon receipt of proof of the issuance of an Illinois
video gaming license, the Village Clerk shall issue a video gaming sticker
which shall be affixed to each video gaming terminal in a conspicuous place,
readily identifiable upon public inspection. Video gaming stickers shall not
be transferable. It is unlawful to operate a video gaming terminal in the
village without a valid video gaming sticker affixed thereon.



      (4)   Any denial or revocation of a video gaming license
application by the Illinois Gaming Board shall constitute a revocation of a
Class V license.



      (5)   Every establishment issued a Class V license to operate
video gaming shall comply with the provisions of the Illinois Video Gaming
Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq., and all rules, regulations and restrictions
imposed by the Illinois Gaming Board.



      (6)   The operation of video gaming terminals shall not be
permitted during the hours alcoholic liquor sales are prohibited as provided
in § 11-2-24.



      (7)   Video gaming shall be located in an area that is
restricted to persons over 21 years of age.



   (R)   A Class T license shall authorize the retail sales of
alcoholic beverages by means of bar service only for the consumption on a
premises that is annexed into the corporate limits of the village pursuant to
the terms of an annexation agreement which authorizes such license.  Under
no circumstances shall the service of alcohol be permitted outside unless
otherwise permitted by the Carol Stream Code of Ordinances.  Unless
otherwise authorized, the holder of such a license shall post signs in
prominent places within the establishment stating that "ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
MAY NOT BE REMOVED FROM THE PREMISES".  No more than one Class T license may
be issued.  The fee for such license shall be $3,850.



(Ord. 90-05-45, passed 5-8-1996; Ord. 92-04-35, passed 4-14-1992; Ord.
93-05-47, passed 5-25-1993; Ord. 96-07-45, passed 7-1-1996; Ord. 96-07-46,
passed 7-1-1996; Ord. 96-08-60, passed 8-19-1996; Ord. 96-10-70, passed
10-7-1996; Ord. 97-04-26, passed 4-21-1997; Ord. 97-04-27, passed 4-21-1997;
Ord. 97-09-59, passed 9-2-1997; Ord. 97-11-81A, passed 11-17-1997; Ord.
98-06-40, passed 6-1-1998; Ord. 98-06-41, passed 6-1-1998; Ord. 98-10-72,
passed 10-22-1998; Ord. 98-11-76, passed 11-2-1998; Ord. 99-05-33, passed
5-17-1999; Ord. 99-12-65, passed 12-6-1999; Ord. 99-12-66, passed 12-6-1999;
Ord. 99-12-67, passed 12-6-1999; Ord. 2000-02-09, passed 2-7-2000; Ord.
2001-04-20, passed 4-16-2000; Ord. 2000-04-30, passed 4-17-2000; Ord.
2000-05-35, passed 5-1-2000; Ord. 2000-05-39, passed 5-15-2000; Ord.
2000-06-55, passed 6-5-2000; Ord. 2000-06-56, passed 6-5-2000; Ord.
2000-07-60, passed 7-17-2000; Ord. 2000-11-96, passed 11-6-2000; Ord.
2001-04-21, passed 4-16-2001; Ord. 2001-05-22, passed 5-7-2001; Ord.
2001-05-23, passed 5-7-2001; Ord. 2001-05-25, passed 5-7-2001; Ord.
2001-05-26, passed 5-21-2001; Ord. 2001-10-52, passed 10-1-2001; Ord.
2002-05-19, passed 5-6-2002; Ord. 2002-06-36, passed 6-17-2002; Ord.
2002-06-37, passed 6-17-2002; Ord. 2002-06-38, passed 6-17-2002; Ord.
2002-06-39, passed 6-17-2002; Ord. 2002-06-40, passed 6-17-2002; Ord.
2003-02-05, passed 2-3-2003; Ord. 2003-03-09, passed 3-3-2003; Ord.
2003-11-74, passed 11-17-2003; Ord. 2004-01-01, passed 1-19-2004; Ord.
2004-01-02, passed 1-19-2004; Ord. 2004-05-27, passed 5-3-2004; Ord.
2004-05-28, passed 5-3-2004; Ord. 2004-06-35, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
2004-11-61, passed 11-1-2004; Ord. 2004-12-67, passed 12-6-2004; Ord.
2005-02-11, passed 2-22-2005; Ord. 2005-04-18, passed 4-18-2005; Ord.
2005-04-19, passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 2005-06-28, passed 6-6-2005; Ord.
2005-06-29, passed 6-6-2005; Ord. 2005-06-30, passed 6-6-2005; Ord.
2005-05-31, passed 6-6-2005; Ord. 2005-05-32, passed 6-6-2005; Ord.
2005-08-42, passed 8-1-2005; Ord. 2006-04-17, passed 4-17-2006; Ord.
2006-05-21, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 2006-05-22, passed 5-15-2006; Ord.
2006-06-26, passed 6-19-2006; Ord. 2006-06-27, passed 6-19-2006; Ord.
2006-11-61, passed 11-20-2006; Ord. 2006-11-62, passed 11-20-2006; Ord.
2006-11-63, passed 11-20-2006; Ord. 2006-11-64, passed 11-20-2006; Ord.
2006-11-65, passed 11-20-2006; Ord. 2006-12-72, passed 12-4-2006; Ord.
2006-12-73, passed 12-4-2006; Ord. 2007-04-17, passed 4-16-2007; Ord.
2007-05-19, passed 5-7-2007; Ord. 2007-05-21, passed 5-7-2007; Ord.
2007-10-40, passed 10-15-2007; Ord. 2007-10-41, passed 10-15-2007; Ord.
2007-10-42, passed 10-15-2007; Ord. 2007-11-44, passed 11-5-2007; Ord.
2007-11-45, passed 11-5-2007; Ord. 2008-04-13, passed 4-21-2008; Ord.
2008-04-14, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 2008-05-21, passed 5-19-2008; Ord.
2008-05-22, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 2008-05-23, passed 5-19-2008; Ord.
2008-05-24, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 2008-08-36, passed 8-4-2008; Ord.
2009-07-36, passed 7-20-2009; Ord. 2009-11-63, passed 11-16-2009; Ord.
2009-11-65, passed 11-16-2009; Ord. 2009-12-68, passed 12-21-2009; Ord.
2009-12-69, passed 12-21-2009; Ord. 2010-01-04, passed 1-19-2010; Ord.
2010-03-08, passed 3-15-2010; Ord. 2010-05-25, passed 5-3-2010; Ord.
2010-08-43, passed 8-2-2010; Ord. 2010-10-47, passed 10-4-2010; Ord.
2011-01-01, passed 1-18-2011; Ord. 2011-09-30, passed 9-6-2011; Ord.
2011-09-31, passed 9-6-2011; Ord. 2011-09-33, passed 9-19-2011; Ord.
2011-12-47, passed 12-19-2011; Ord. 2012-02-04, passed 2-6-2012; Ord.
2012-02-05, passed 2-6-2012; Ord. 2012-03-09, passed 3-19-2012; Ord.
2012-04-11, passed 4-2-2012; Ord. 2012-04-14, passed 4-16-2012; Ord.
2012-05-18, passed 5-7-2012; Ord. 2012-05-19, passed 5-7-2012; Ord.
2013-01-01, passed 1-7-2013; Ord. 2013-02-04, passed 2-4-2013; Ord.
2013-03-06, passed 3-4-2013; Ord. 2013-04-08, passed 4-1-2013; 2013-05-13,
passed 5-6-2013; 2013-05-14, passed 5-6-2013; Ord. 2013-05-15, passed
5-6-2013; Ord. 2013-05-16, passed 5-6-2013; Ord. 2013-05-18, passed 5-6-2013;
Ord. 2013-05-22, passed 5-20-2013; Ord. 2013-05-23, passed 5-20-2013; Ord.
2013-06-24, passed 6-3-2013; Ord. 2013-06-25, passed 6-3-2013; Ord.
2013-06-26, passed 6-3-2013; Ord. 2013-06-28, passed 6-17-2013; Ord.
2013-06-29, passed 6-17-2013; Ord. 2013-08-36, passed 8-5-2013; Ord.
2013-08-37, passed 8-19-2013; Ord. 2013-11-46, passed 11-4-2013; Ord.
2013-12-51, passed 12-16-2013; Ord. 2013-12-52, passed 12-16-2013; Ord.
2013-12-53, passed 12-16-2013; Ord. 2013-12-54, passed 12-16-2013; Ord.
2013-12-55, passed 12-16-2013; Ord. 2014-01-02, passed 1-6-2014; Ord.
2014-01-03, passed 1-6-2014; Ord. 2014-02-09, passed 2-18-2014; Ord.
2014-03-10, passed 3-3-2014; Ord. 2014-04-16, passed 4-21-2014; Ord.
2014-04-17, passed 4-21-2014; Ord. 2014-06-27, passed 6-16-2014; Ord.
2014-07-29, passed 7-7-2014; Ord. 2014-08-34, passed 8-4-2014; Ord.
2014-08-36, passed 8-18-2014; Ord. 2014-08-37, passed 8-18-2014; Ord.
2014-08-38, passed 8-18-2014; Ord. 2014-08-39, passed 8-18-2014; Ord.
2014-10-50, passed 10-20-2014; Ord. 2014-10-51, passed 10-20-2014; Ord.
2015-01-01, passed 1-5-2015; Ord. 2015-05-08, passed 5-4-15; Ord. 2015-05-09,
passed 5-4-2015; Ord. 2015-10-20, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. 2015-11-25, passed
11-2-2015; Ord. 2015-11-27, passed 11-16-2015; Ord. 2015-11-28, passed
11-16-2015; Ord. 2016-02-07, passed 2-16-2016; Ord. 2016-02-08, passed
2-16-2016; Ord. 2016-03-12, passed 3-7-2016; Ord. 2016-03-13, passed
3-7-2016; Ord. 2016-03-14, passed 3-21-2016; Ord. 2016-03-16, passed
3-21-2016; Ord. 2016-03-17, passed 3-21-2016; Ord. 2016-03-18, passed
3-21-2016; Ord. 2016-04-24, passed 4-18-2016; Ord. 2016-05-26, passed
5-2-2016; Ord. 2016- 12-48, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2017-01-01, passed
1-17-2017; Ord. 2017-01-02, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 2017-06-24, passed
6-5-2017; Ord. 2017-06-25, passed 6-5-2017; Ord. 2017- 06-26, passed
6-5-2017; Ord. 2017-07-31, passed 7-17-2017; Ord. 2017-07-35, passed
7-17-2017; Ord. 2017-08-47, passed 7-17-2017; Ord. 2017-08-48, passed
8-7-2017; Ord. 2017-08-49, passed 8-7-2017; Ord. 2017-08-50, passed
8-21-2017; Ord. 2017-08-51, passed 8-21-2017; Ord. 2017-08-52, passed
8-21-2017; Ord. 2017-09-53, passed 9-5-2017; Ord. 2017-10-57, passed
10-2-2017; Ord. 2017-10-59, passed 10-2-2017; Ord. 2017-10-60, passed
10-2-2017; Ord. 2017-11-67, passed 11-20-2017; Ord. 2017-11-68, passed
11-20-2017; Ord. 2017-12-71, passed 12-4-2017; Ord. 2017-12-72, passed
12-4-2017; Ord. 2018-01-02, passed 1-16-2018; Ord. 2018-02-03, passed
2-5-2018; Ord. 2018-02-06, passed 2-20-2018; Ord. 2018-05-18, passed
5-7-2018; Ord. 2018-05-20, passed 5-21-2018; Ord. 2018-06-21, passed
6-18-2018; Ord. 2018-07-24, passed 7-2-2018 ; Ord. 2018-10-39, passed
10-15-2018; Ord. 2018-10-40, passed 10-15-2018 ; Ord. 2018-12-45, passed
12-3-2018; Ord. 2019-02-01, passed 2-4-2019; Ord. 2019-03-08, passed 3-4-2019)



§ 11-2-8  RECORD OF LICENSES.



   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall keep, or cause to be kept, a
complete record of all such licenses issued, and shall furnish the Treasurer,
Chief of Police and Village Clerk each with a copy thereof. Upon the issuance
of a new license, or the revocation of any old license, the Liquor Control
Commissioner shall give written notice of such action to each of these
officers within 48 hours of such action.



§ 11-2-9  DISPOSITION OF FEES.



   (A)   All such license fees shall be paid to the Liquor Control
Commissioner at the time application for license is made, and shall be
forthwith turned over to the Village Treasurer for deposit in the general
village accounts. In the event the application is denied, the fee shall be
returned to the applicant.



   (B)   If the license is granted, the fee shall be deposited as set
forth above, and no portion thereof shall be refunded.



§ 11-2-10  DRAM SHOP INSURANCE.



   No license shall be granted to any applicant until such applicant shall
furnish evidence satisfactory to the Liquor Control Commissioner that such
applicant is covered by a policy of dram shop insurance issued by a
responsible insurance company authorized and licensed to do business in the
state insuring such applicant and the owner of the premises against liability
in the minimum amount of $100,000 each for liability, one person, means of
support and property damage, which such applicant may incur under the
provisions of state law.



§ 11-2-11  LICENSE RENEWAL.



   (A)   Each licensee shall make application for renewal of his or her
license to the Liquor Control Commissioner not less than one month prior to
the end of the licensing period. The annual fee for the license must
accompany this renewal application. If the Liquor Control Commissioner
determines that the renewal application contains information that is in any
way changed from the original application for license, in which case a new
investigation of the license is necessary, a fee of $375 shall be charged to
the licensee to cover the costs of such investigation, in addition to the
yearly license fee.



   (B)   If, after investigation, it is determined that the applicant
is not entitled to a renewal license, the yearly license fee shall be
returned. The charge for the investigation is non-refundable.



   (C)   A renewal license shall be issued provided the licensee is
entitled to receive a license and provided that the premises for which
renewal license is sought are suitable for such purposes; pro-vided further
that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a
vested right which shall in any case prevent the corporate authorities from
decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within the village.



   (D)   In the event that the village shall reduce the number of
licenses below that number issued in the prior year and the number of
applicants do not decrease such as to be equal to or less than the number of
available licenses, the Liquor Control Commissioner may issue the available
licenses on the basis of date of application, years holding prior licenses,
adequate service to areas in village, record of violation or any other
reasonable basis.



§ 11-2-12  DISPLAYING LICENSE.



   Every licensee shall cause his or her license to be framed and hung in
plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises.



§ 11-2-13  DUPLICATE LICENSE.



   In the event of the loss or destruction of a license issued pursuant to
this article, upon written application to the Liquor Control Commissioner,
and payment of a fee of $5, a duplicate license will be issued.



§ 11-2-14  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.



   A license shall be a purely personal privilege, good for not to exceed
one year after issuance unless sooner revoked or suspended as provided in
this article, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to
attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such license shall cease upon the death of the licensee, and
shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, provided
that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and
the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists
in part of alcoholic liquor under the order of the appropriate court, and may
exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee
after the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy, until the
expiration of such license, but not longer than six months after the death,
bankruptcy or insolvency of such license.



§ 11-2-15  CHANGE IN PERSONNEL.



   (A)   Any changes in partnerships, officers, directors, persons
holding directly or beneficially more than 5% of the stock or ownership
interest, or managers of establishments licensed under this article, shall be
reported in writing to the Liquor Control Commissioner within ten days of the
change. All new personnel shall meet all the standards of this article and
must otherwise qualify to hold a liquor license. All such changes in
personnel shall be subject to review by the Liquor Control Commissioner. In
each case, a new investigation shall be completed, with the licensee paying
an investigation charge of $375. Such investigation charge is non-refundable.



   (B)   When a license has been issued to a partnership and a change
of ownership occurs resulting in a partnership interest by one who is not
eligible to hold a liquor license, such license shall terminate.



   (C)   When a license has been issued to a corporation and a change
takes place in officers, directors, managers or shareholders of more than 5%
of the stock, resulting in the holding of office or such shares of stock by
one who is not eligible for a license, such license shall terminate.



   (D)   When a license has been issued to an individual who is no
longer eligible for a license, such license shall terminate.



§ 11-2-16  CHANGE OF PREMISES NAME.



   Written application to the Liquor Control Commissioner must be made
before the name of the premises holding the liquor license can be changed. If
the Liquor Control Commissioner determines that there is no other change to
the original application, except for the name of the premises, the license
issued in the former name shall become null and void and a license shall be
issued in the new name at no charge to the licensee.



§ 11-2-17  CHANGE OF LOCATION.



   A retail liquor dealer’s license shall permit the sale of alcoholic
liquor only in the premises described in the application and license. Such
location may be changed only upon the written permission to make such change
issued by the Liquor Control Commissioner. No change of location shall be
permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor under the laws of this state and the ordinances of
the village. Such relocation may only be permitted if ownership of the
premises remains the same. When a change of location is desired by the
licensee, an investigation of the new premises shall be completed by the
village, with the licensee paying an investigation charge of $375. Such
investigation charge is non-refundable.



§ 11-2-18  RECOVERY OF FEES.



   Whenever any license hereunder has been revoked or suspended as
provided for in this code, the licensee shall not recover any of the moneys
that have been paid for such license.



§ 11-2-19  USE OF PREMISES AFTER REVOCATION.



   When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license
shall be granted to any person for the period of one year thereafter for the
conduct of the business of manufacturing, distributing or selling alcoholic
liquor in the premises described in such revoked license.



§ 11-2-20  RETAIL SALES RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor within 100 feet of any church, school, other than an
institution of higher learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons
or for veterans, their spouses or children, or any military or naval station;
provided that, this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant
service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other
places where sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried
on, if such place of business so exempted shall have been established for
such purposes prior to the taking effect of this ordinance; nor to the
renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises
within 100 feet of any church or school where such church or school has been
established within such 100 feet since the issuance of the original license.
In the case of a church, the distance of 100 feet shall be measured to the
nearest part of any building used for worship services or educational
programs and not to property boundaries.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a
license to a church or private school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor if
any such sales are limited to periods when groups are assembled on the
premises solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale
or consumption of alcoholic liquors.



   (C)   No license shall be issued to any person for the sale of any
alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority
of customers are minors of school age or where the principal business
transacted consists of school books, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks
for such minors.



§ 11-2-21  ELECTION DAYS.



   Licensees may sell at retail any alcoholic liquor on the day of any
national, state, county or municipal election, including primary elections,
during the hours the polls are open, within the village.



§ 11-2-22  RESTRICTIONS CONCERNING MINORS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years
to purchase or obtain any alcoholic liquor any place in the village where
alcoholic liquor is sold.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years
to misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining
alcoholic liquor any place in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold.



   (C)   In every place in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold,
there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place, a printed card
which shall be supplied by the Village Clerk and which shall read
substantially as follows:



 

   “WARNING TO MINORS

 

You are subject to a fine up to $750 under the provisions of the Village Code
if you purchase alcoholic liquor or misrepresent your age for the purpose of
purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor.”



 



   (D)   No person under the age of 21 years may draw, pour, mix or
tend bar as an employee of any retail licensee.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years
to dispense, sell or deliver any alcoholic liquor in the original bottle or
case for consumption off the premises of any liquor licensee.



   (F)   Except for the prohibitions provided herein, it shall be
lawful for any person 18 years of age or over to work in a licensed premise
and to serve alcoholic liquor.



   (G)   The Liquor Control Commissioner may revoke or suspend the
retail dealer’s license for any violation of this section.



   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years
to have in his or her possession any alcoholic liquor on any street, highway,
public place open to the public, or in any other place. This prohibition does
not apply to possession by a person under the age of 21 years making a
delivery of an alcoholic liquor in pursuance of the order of his or her
parent or in pursuance of his or her employment as long as such employment is
not prohibited under the provisions of this article.



   (I)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years
to consume any alcoholic liquor on any street, highway, public place, in any
place open to the public or in any other place. This prohibition does not
apply to consumption by a person under the age of 21 years where such
consumption is in the performance of a religious service or ceremony or such
consumption takes place under the direct supervision and approval of the
parent or a person standing in loco parentis of the person under the age of
21 years.



   (J)   Any person under the age of 21 years convicted of any
violation of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $50,
nor more than $750, for each offense.



§ 11-2-23  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   No parent shall give or deliver alcoholic liquor to his or her
minor child for the minor’s consumption unless the consumption of alcoholic
liquor by such minor is in the performance of a religious service or
ceremony, or such consumption takes place under the direct supervision and
approval of the parent of the minor or such person standing in loco parentis
to the minor in the privacy of a home.



   (B)   No parent shall intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or
negligently give or deliver alcoholic liquor to, or permit possession of
alcoholic liquor by, his or her minor child, or any other person under the
age of 21, unless such minor or person under the age of 21 is making a
delivery of such alcoholic liquor pursuant to order of his or her parent, in
pursuance of his or her employment, as long as such employment is not
prohibited under the provisions of this article, or as otherwise allowed by
division (A) of this section.



   (C)   No parent shall intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or
negligently give, deliver, invite or permit the consumption of alcoholic
liquor by any minors on or about any premises owned, leased or controlled by
such parent, except as otherwise allowed by division (A) of this section.



   (D)   Parents shall restrain or prevent their minor children from
consuming alcoholic liquor where the parent knows, or in the exercise of
ordinary care should know, of a substantial probability that his or her minor
child is or will consume alcoholic liquor under circumstances which would
violate the provisions of this section, the State Liquor Control Act, being
235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq., or any other ordinances, statutes or amendments
thereto.



   (E)   Parents who know, or in the exercise of ordinary care should
know, of a substantial probability that their minor child has consumed or
will consume alcoholic liquor, whether in violation of this section, the
State Liquor Control Act, or any other ordinances, statutes or amendments
thereto, or as allowed under division (A) of this section, shall restrain or
prevent their minor child from operating or driving a motor vehicle on the
public streets and ways of the village in violation of any ordinances, law or
statutes.



   (F)   Parents who know, or in the exercise of ordinary care should
know, of a substantial probability that their minor child has consumed or
will consume alcoholic liquor, whether in violation of this section, the
State Liquor Control Act, or any other ordinance, statutes or amendments
thereto, or as allowed under division (A) of this section, shall restrain or
prevent their minor child from committing acts which constitute vandalism,
theft, disorderly conduct, or the unjustifiable use of force in violation of
any ordinance, law or statute.



   (G)   Any person who fails to perform the acts required of him under
this act shall be guilty of a violation of law, and upon conviction of any
violation of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $50
nor more than $750 for each offense.



§ 11-2-24  HOURS, DAYS OF SALE REGULATED.



   (A)   Except as provided herein, no person licensed under this
article shall sell, permit to be sold or give away any alcoholic liquor
between the following hours:



      (1)   2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Saturdays and Sundays;



      (2)   3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on New Year's Day; and



      (3)   1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on all other days.



   (B)   In any premises for which a license to sell alcoholic liquors
is held, all alcoholic liquor shall be removed from the tables of patrons, or
other places at which patrons are seated, within 30 minutes after the
applicable closing times set forth above.  In addition, no alcoholic liquor
shall be consumed on any such premises 30 minutes after the applicable
closing time for such premises set forth above.



   (C)   With respect to K and L licenses only, mail, telephonically or
electronically transmitted orders for sales of alcoholic liquor may be
received at any time, but the delivery of alcoholic liquor to the customer
shall not occur during the hours set forth in division (A) of this section.



   (D)   With respect to Class R licenses, no person licensed under §
11-2-7 (O) shall sell, permit to be sold or give away any alcoholic liquor
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. each day of the week.



(Ord. 2000-04-30, passed 4-17-2000; Ord. 2014-02-09, passed 2-18-2014; Ord.
2014-04-17, passed 4-21-2014; Ord. 2014-10-51, passed 10-20-2014)



§ 11-2-25  BOOKS AND RECORDS AVAILABLE ON REQUEST.



   It shall be the duty of every retail licensee to make books and records
available upon request at all times for the purpose of investigation and
control by the State Liquor Control Commission and the Liquor Control
Commissioner.



§ 11-2-26  SALES TO MINORS, HABITUAL DRUNKARDS, SPENDTHRIFTS AND MENTAL
INCOMPETENTS.



   (A)   No licensee nor any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or
deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21 years, or to any
intoxicated person, or to any person known by him or her to be an habitual
drunkard, spendthrift, insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient or in need of
mental treatment. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining
alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to any
person under the age of 21 years, except in the performance of a religious
ceremony or service.



   (B)   Each employee of a Class A, B, C, F, G, I, N or P license, who
will be engaged in selling, mixing, preparing, serving or delivering
alcoholic beverages to customers, guests or patrons, for consumption on or
off of the premises, shall successfully complete a Beverage Alcohol Sellers
and Servers Education and Training program conducted by an agency licensed by
the Illinois Liquor Control Commission. Such training shall be completed not
more than 60 days after the employee begins employment with the licensee. A
copy of the employee's certificate of completion of training shall be filed
with the Liquor Commissioner.



   (C)   No express company, common carrier or contract carrier that
carries or transports alcoholic liquor for delivery within the village shall
knowingly give or knowingly deliver to a residential address any shipping
container clearly labeled as containing alcoholic liquor and labeled as
requiring signature of an adult of at least 21 years of age to any person in
the village under the age of 21 years. An express company, common carrier or
contract carrier that carries or transports such alcoholic liquor for
delivery within the village shall obtain a signature acknowledging receipt of
the alcoholic liquor by an adult who is at least 21 years of age. Any person
who violates the provisions of this division (C) shall be subject to a fine
of not less than $500, in addition to any other penalty provided by this code.



(Ord. 2000-11-96, passed 11-6-2000; Ord. 2013-02-04, passed 2-4-2013)



§ 11-2-27  GAMBLING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to permit any gambling on any premises
licensed to sell alcoholic liquor, except as otherwise provided herein.



   (B)   Video gaming shall be permitted only in establishments that
have a Class V liquor license issued in accordance with the provisions of
this code.



   (C)   Only establishments issued a Class V liquor license are
authorized to operate video gaming terminals within the village when licensed
by the Illinois Gaming Board pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois
Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.



(Ord. 2012-08-28, passed 8-6-2012; 2013-05-13, passed 5-6-2013)



§ 11-2-28  REFILLING ORIGINAL PACKAGES.



   No person licensed under this article shall fill or refill, in whole or
in part, any original package of alcoholic liquor with the same or any other
kind or quality of alcoholic liquor or any other potable liquid; and it shall
be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession for sale at
retail any bottles, casks, or other containers containing alcoholic liquor,
except in original packages.



§ 11-2-29  CIVIL RIGHTS IN LICENSED PREMISES.



   No licensee licensed under the provisions of this article shall deny or
permit his or her agents and employees to deny any person the full and equal
enjoyment of the accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges of any
premises in which alcoholic liquors are authorized to be sold subject only to
the conditions and limitations established by law and applicable alike to all
citizens.



§ 11-2-30  SALES ON CREDIT.



   No person shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor at retail to any
person on credit or on a pass book, or order on a store, or in exchange for
any goods, wares or merchandise, or in payment for any services rendered; and
if any person shall extend credit for such purpose the debt thereby attempted
to be created shall not be recoverable at law; provided that nothing herein
contained shall be construed to prevent any club from permitting checks or
statements for alcoholic liquor to be signed by members or bona fide guests
of members and charged to the account of such members or guests in accordance
with the by-laws of such club; and, provided further that, nothing herein
contained shall be construed to prevent any hotel from permitting checks or
statements for liquor to be signed by regular guests residing at such hotel
and charged to the accounts of such guests; and provided further that nothing
herein shall be construed to prevent payment by credit card or other credit
device.



§ 11-2-31  SANITARY CONDITIONS.



   All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the
storage of such liquor for such sale, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, and shall be governed by the ordinances of the village regulating
the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human
consumption.



§ 11-2-32  HEALTH REQUIREMENTS; EMPLOYEES AND OTHERS.



   It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises open to the public or
engaged in the transportation, processing, preparation or packaging of food
or beverages any person who the employer knows or should know, based upon
reasonable observation, is afflicted with, or who is a carrier of, any
contagious or infectious disease; and it shall be unlawful for any person who
knows or should know that he or she is afflicted with or a carrier of any
such disease, to work in or about any such premises.



§ 11-2-33  PEDDLING.



   It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the village.



§ 11-2-34  POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR IN MOTOR VEHICLES.



   No person shall transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor
within the passenger area of any motor vehicle, except in the original
package with the seal unbroken.



§ 11-2-35  COMPLIANCE WITH STATE STATUTES.



   All licenses issued under this article shall be subject to all of the
provisions of the State Dram Shop Act, to all applicable state statutes,
village ordinances and rules of the State Liquor Commission.



§ 11-2-36  BASSET TRAINING REQUIRED.



   (A)   Each applicant for a liquor license shall successfully
complete a Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Training (BASSET) program
conducted by an agency licensed by the Illinois Liquor Commission prior to
issuance of a liquor license. Applications submitted by corporations shall
require all managers and subsequent managers to successfully complete BASSET
training prior to issuance of a liquor license. Proof of successful
completion of BASSET training shall be required prior to issuance of the
liquor license.



   (B)   Each employee of a Class A, B, C, F, G, I, N or P license, who
will be engaged in selling, mixing, preparing, serving or delivering
alcoholic beverages to customers, guests or patrons, for consumption on or
off of the premises, shall successfully complete a Beverage Alcohol Sellers
and Servers Education and Training program conducted by an agency licensed by
the Illinois Liquor Control Commission. Such training shall be completed not
more than 60 days after the employee begins employment with the licensee. A
copy of the employee’s certificate of completion of training shall be filed
with the Liquor Commissioner.



   (C)   A BASSET certificate shall be considered valid for a period of
36 months after successful completion of the program. Thereafter, employees
will be required to attend a state-certified and Police Department-approved
BASSET program. A person with a BASSET certificate that does not have an
expiration date shall file a new certificate before 4-30-2012.



(Ord. 2002-03-07, passed 3-4-2002; Ord. 2004-06-38, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
2011-02-02, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. 2013-02-04, passed 2-4-2013)



§ 11-2-37 VIDEO GAMING BY PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
play or operate a video gaming terminal.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any licensee, its employees or agents, to
allow any person under the age of 21 years to play or operate a video gaming
terminal.



(Ord. 2012-08-28, passed 8-6-2012)



§ 11-2-38  CONDUCT PROHIBITED IN LICENSED PREMISES.



   The following conduct is prohibited in any premises licensed under the
provisions of this chapter:



   (A)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
area, perineum, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, buttocks or female
breasts;



   (B)   The manipulation of the human body of another, including
massage, by the use of any portion of manipulator's body, whether covered or
uncovered, or by any device, if the person performing the manipulation or the
person receiving the manipulation is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;



   (C)   The performance of any sexual acts, heterosexual, homosexual
or bisexual, including without limitation intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus,
analingus, masturbation, bestiality, sodomy, bondage and discipline, sadism
and masochism, and sex acts between animals;



   (D)   The actual or simulated display of the female breast below the
areola, the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, or vulva;



   (E)   The permitting by a licensee of any person who exposes to
public view any portion of his or her genitals or anus, to remain in or upon
the licensed premises;



   (F)   The displaying of any films, videos or pictures depicting any
act, the live performance of which is prohibited by this section.



(Ord. 2016-07-31, passed 7-18-2016)



ARTICLE 3:  SOCIAL HOSTING



Section



   11-3-1   Definitions



   11-3-2   Duty of host



   11-3-3   Prohibited acts



   11-3-4   Prima facie evidence—presumption



   11-3-5   Exceptions



   11-3-6   Unlawful assembly by underaged persons



   11-3-7   Penalties



§ 11-3-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine,
whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including dilutions
and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every
liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, and which contains
.5% or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes
either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.



   CONTROL. To have legal authority over a premise by ownership, lease,
license, or permission or, where no legal authority exists, to exert
authority over a premise.



   CONVEYANCE. Any vehicle, trailer, watercraft or container operated for
the transportation of persons or property.



   GATHERING OR EVENT. Any group of two or more persons who have assembled
or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.



   HOST. To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise, control,
or permit.



   ILLICIT DRUGS. Any drug, substance or compound prohibited by law,
including drugs prescribed by a physician, which are in the possession of or
used by someone other than the person to whom the drug was prescribed.



   PARENT. Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:



      (1)   As a natural, adoptive parent, or stepparent;



      (2)   As a legal guardian; or



      (3)   As a person to whom legal custody has been given by
order of the court.



   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, corporation, or
any association of one or more individuals.



   POSSESSION. Actual possession or constructive possession based on
facts, which permit the inference of intent to possess or control.



   PREMISES. Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment, condominium,
hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, park,
or any other place of conducive of assembly, public or private, whether
occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or
specifically for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased,
rented, or used with or without permission or compensation.



   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways,
and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office
buildings, governmental buildings, transport facilities, parks, businesses or
parking lots.



   RELIGIOUS CEREMONY. The possession, consumption and dispensation of
alcohol or an alcoholic beverage for conducting any bona fide rite or
religious ceremony.



   UNDERAGE PERSON. Any individual under 21 years of age.



(Ord. 2019-04-13, passed 4-1-2019)



§ 11-3-2  DUTY OF HOST.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of each person who controls a premise to
take reasonable steps to ensure that underage persons do not possess or
consume alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs on such premises.



   (B)   Reasonable steps shall include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   Controlling underaged persons access to alcoholic
beverages or illicit drugs,



      (2)   Supervising underaged persons activities at any
gathering on such premises,



      (3)   Controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages,



      (4)   Verifying the age of persons being served, in possession
of or consuming alcoholic beverages at any gathering,



      (5)   Notifying law enforcement of underage possession or
consumption of alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs and allowing the law
enforcement officers to enter the premises for stopping the possession or
consumption of alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs by underage persons.



      (6)   Notifying law enforcement in advance of departing the
premises that the owner, lessee, tenant, or person in control of a premise
will be away and no underage person is authorized to be present and consume
or be in possession of any alcoholic beverage or illicit drugs on the
premises.



(Ord. 2019-04-13, passed 4-1-2019)



§ 11-3-3  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to host a gathering of underaged
persons on any premises, whether public or private, or in any conveyance,
over which that person has control or a reasonable opportunity to control,
when that person knows or reasonably should have known that an underage
person is in possession of or has possessed or consumed an alcoholic beverage
or an illicit drug at such gathering.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to fail to take reasonable steps
to prevent the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages or illicit
drugs by any underage person at a gathering on a premise, whether public or
private, or in a conveyance, over which that person has control or a
reasonable opportunity to control.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to intentionally aids, advises,
hires, counsels, conspires with, or solicits another person to commit a
violation of this article.



   (D)   A person who hosts a gathering does not have to be present at
the gathering to be responsible and in violation of the provisions of this
article.



(Ord. 2019-04-13, passed 4-1-2019)



§ 11-3-4  PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE—PRESUMPTION.



   It shall be prima facie evidence that a person who hosts a gathering of
underaged persons had knowledge or should have had knowledge that an underage
person possessed or consumed an alcoholic beverage or illicit drug, if the
person who hosts the gathering is present at the premises at the time the
underaged person possessed or consumed any alcoholic beverage or illicit drug.



(Ord. 2019-04-13, passed 4-1-2019)



§ 11-3-5  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   A person who hosts a gathering of underaged persons shall not
be in violation of this article if he or she:



      (1)   Terminates the gathering because the person has been
unable to prevent an underage person from consuming or possessing alcoholic
beverages or illicit drugs, as long as the termination occurs prior to law
enforcement intervention or any other person making a complaint to a law
enforcement agency about the gathering.



      (2)   Seeks assistance from law enforcement to remove any
person who refuses to abide by the host's performance of his or her duties
under this article.



   (B)   This article shall not apply to conduct involving the use of
alcoholic beverages that occurs at a religious ceremony or exclusively
between an underaged person and his or her parent, as permitted by state law.



(Ord. 2019-04-13, passed 4-1-2019)



§ 11-3-6  UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY BY UNDERAGED PERSONS.



   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to remain in
any premises or conveyance, when such person knows, or reasonably should have
known that one or more other persons under the age of 21 years located upon
such premises or conveyance is/are in possession of or have consumed any
alcoholic beverage or illicit drug.



(Ord. 2019-04-13, passed 4-1-2019)



§ 11-3-7  PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be
fined not more than $1,000 for each such violation.  Each day on which, or
during which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   The first violation of this article shall be punishable by a
fine of not less than $500 plus applicable court costs.



   (C)   A second violation of this article by the same person within a
12-month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than $750 plus
applicable court costs.



   (D)   A third or subsequent violation of this article by the same
person within a 12-month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than
$1,000 plus applicable court costs.



   (E)   The court may, in its discretion, order the person to perform
community service of an equivalent value to the fine imposed under this
section



(Ord. 2019-04-13, passed 4-1-2019)



CHAPTER 12: ANNEXATIONS, PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTIES



      Article



         1.   ANNEXATIONS



         2.   BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM



         3.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS



         4.   DITCHES, DRAINS AND DRAINAGE STRUCTURES



         5.   CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY



         6.   MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE
RIGHTS-OF-WAY



         7.   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES



ARTICLE 1:  ANNEXATIONS



Section



   12-1-1   Fees established; rates



   12-1-2   Payment of fees



   12-1-3   Annexation ordinance



   12-1-4   No buildings or improvements until payment of fees



Cross-reference:



   Extension of annexation agreements, see § 15-7-1



§ 12-1-1  FEES ESTABLISHED; RATES.



   In consideration of annexation of any real estate to the village, there
shall be paid to the village for each acre of property so annexed the
following amounts in accordance with the zoning established for such property
by ordinance.



 

 
 
Per Acre


Business Districts - All
 
$600


Industrial Districts - All
 
$600


Residential Districts R-1 and R-2
 
$600


Residential Districts R-3 and R-4
 
$600



 



(Ord. 2000-03-18, passed 3-20-2000)



§ 12-1-2  PAYMENT OF FEES.



   Annexation fees shall be paid to the village prior to the recordation
of the ordinance annexing the property.



(Ord. 2003-03-11, passed 3-17-2003)



§ 12-1-3  ANNEXATION ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Each annexation ordinance shall contain a clause making the
payment of annexation fees a binding obligation upon the successors in title
of the person requesting the annexation.



   (B)   The annexation ordinance shall be recorded by the Village
Clerk in the office of the DuPage County Recorder of Deeds, thereby making
the obligations under the ordinance a matter of public record to any
successors in title of the owner at the time the property is annexed.



   (C)   The Village Clerk shall also file a certified copy of the
annexation ordinance with the following:



      (1)   DuPage County Clerk;



      (2)   DuPage County Board of Election Commissioners;



      (3)   Northern Illinois Gas Company;



      (4)   Commonwealth Edison Company;



      (5)   Illinois Bell Telephone;



      (6)   United States Post Office; and



      (7)   Illinois Department of Revenue.



§ 12-1-4  NO BUILDINGS OR IMPROVEMENTS UNTIL PAYMENT OF FEES.



   No buildings or improvements shall be made on any properties so annexed
until payment in full shall be made of all annexation fees. Nothing herein
contained shall be construed as compelling the village to make any extension
or improvements or to expend any moneys for such purpose.



ARTICLE 2:  BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM



Section



   12-2-1   Building numbering system established



   12-2-2   Base lines



   12-2-3   Numbers per mile



   12-2-4   Street numbers to be displayed; size; location



   12-2-5   Even, odd numbers



   12-2-6   Numbering on adjacent, abutting streets



   12-2-7   Numbering to be continuous; changes in directions



§ 12-2-1  BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM ESTABLISHED.



   In order to maintain uniformity and continuity in the number of postal
addresses in the village, and to show the location of addresses to Fire and
Police Departments and other agencies requiring ready knowledge of building
locations, the system of grid building numbering set forth hereinafter is
hereby established.



§ 12-2-2  BASE LINES.



   The 100 north, 100 south base line of the numbering system of the
village is a line running east and west parallel to section lines, and such
base line shall run through the center of the intersection of Gary Avenue and
North Avenue, and the 100 east, 100 west base line is a line running north
and south down the centerline of the public right-of-way of Gary Avenue.



§ 12-2-3  NUMBERS PER MILE.



   There shall be an assumed 500 building numbers per mile. Building
numbers shall be assigned on the basis of number of feet of street frontage,
in increments of 21 feet per odd or even number. Only one number will be
assigned per occupiable building or dwelling unit and this number shall be
the number given by the addition of the last increment of 21 feet. Thus, if a
building has a street frontage of 60 feet and is the first building on the
even side of the street, it will be assigned the number “106”.



§ 12-2-4  STREET NUMBERS TO BE DISPLAYED; SIZE; LOCATION.



   (A)   All buildings in the village must display street numbers of
the building address. Buildings under construction shall display building
numbers prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit.



   (B)   The street numbers must be displayed in a prominent place on
the main building, contrasting from the background and clearly visible from
the traveled portion of the street on which the building is located, and must
be at least six inches high.



   (C)   The street numbers shall be in Arabic numerals and placed to
the left, right or above the main entrance doorway. If this location is not
visible from the street, the numerals may be located near the garage doorway
or any other portion of the building which is clearly visible from the
roadway.



§ 12-2-5  EVEN, ODD NUMBERS.



   All even numbers in the numbering system of the village shall fall on
the south and west sides of the streets, and all odd numbers shall fall on
the north and east sides of the streets.



§ 12-2-6  NUMBERING ON ADJACENT, ABUTTING STREETS.



   On streets that abut but do not cross, buildings on the corner thus
formed shall be determined to face the street where the bulk of the building
lies on the side of a line which is the bisector of such street angle
intersection.



§ 12-2-7  NUMBERING TO BE CONTINUOUS; CHANGES IN DIRECTIONS.



   Building numbering shall be continuous down each individual street,
regardless of the change in general direction of the street. Such directions
shall be based on the basic or established direction of such street. Where it
becomes apparent that the general direction of any street has made a long
continuous change, the change of number shall be made at a street crossing
only.



ARTICLE 3:  STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS



Section



   12-3-1   Street names



   12-3-2   Scaffolds, tools over public places



   12-3-3   Articles on windows



   12-3-4   Obstructions generally



   12-3-5   Obstructions to drains



   12-3-6   Supervision and control



   12-3-7   Permit required



   12-3-8   Permit fees



   12-3-9   Location, line and grade of sidewalks and drive approaches



   12-3-10   Driveway approach construction



   12-3-11   Construction of drive approach crossing sidewalk



   12-3-12   Entrance culverts



   12-3-13   Maintenance of unpaved drive approach



   12-3-14   Maintenance of drive



   12-3-15   Abandoning drive approach



   12-3-16   Parkway trees



   12-3-17   Public improvement preservation bond



§ 12-3-1  STREET NAMES.



   Street names within the planning jurisdiction of the village shall be
chosen so that they are of a simple phonetic spelling and so that no conflict
will be created with the names of existing village streets. For streets
within planned unit developments or property developed by the same developer,
the street names shall be chosen to carry out a single theme of the
development in which the particular street is located. The developer, in
coordination with the administrative staff of the village, will propose area
themes and street names which will be reviewed by the Plan Commission as part
of its review of the final development plan or plat of subdivision.



§ 12-3-2  SCAFFOLDS, TOOLS OVER PUBLIC PLACES.



   Any scaffold or ladder placed in such a position that it overhangs or
can fall onto any public street, alley or other public place in the village
shall be firmly and properly constructed and safeguarded. It shall be
unlawful to place or leave any tool or article on any such place in such a
manner that the same can fall into any such street, sidewalk, alley or other
public way from a greater height than four feet.



§ 12-3-3  ARTICLES ON WINDOWS.



   It shall be unlawful to place any movable article on any window ledge,
or other place abutting on a public street, alley or other place at a height
above four feet from the ground, in such a manner that the same can be or is
in danger of falling onto such sidewalk, street, alley or other public place.



§ 12-3-4  OBSTRUCTIONS GENERALLY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or
maintain any obstruction upon any street, alley, sidewalk or anywhere within
a public right-of-way, except as may be specifically authorized in this code.
For the purpose of this section, an OBSTRUCTION may be any person or natural
or artificial object or grade of land. Without limiting the powers of the
corporate authorities to develop regulations pursuant to this section, the
following objects shall be specifically declared to be unlawful obstructions:



      (1)   Objects which are so placed as to interfere with the
snowplowing operations of the village;



      (2)   Objects which are so placed as to likely result in
damage to any village maintenance or other equipment;



      (3)   Objects which tend to impede the flow of traffic or
interfere in a dangerous manner with the visibility of pedestrians,
bicyclists or the drivers of motor vehicles;



      (4)   Objects which have been placed at a location in
violation of other ordinances of the village;



      (5)   Objects which, by their nature or placement, would be
likely to cause injuries to persons or property; and/or



      (6)   Objects which will impede or interfere with the
efficient operation of village or other governments to utilize the public
right-of-way or facilities placed therein.



   (B)   Any object which constitutes an unlawful obstruction may be
removed without regard to the length of time during which it has remained
upon the public right-of-way without village permission.



   (C)   No person may be required to remove an unlawful obstruction
prior to having received a written notice, by certified or registered mail,
that the obstruction is unlawful and having been given a period of not less
than ten days to remove the obstruction; provided, however, that, if the
obstruction constitutes an immediate danger to public health and safety, it
may be removed without the notification having been given. Even under an
emergency circumstance, if sufficient time exists to grant a notice to the
owner to remove the obstruction, the officials of the village will attempt to
give such a notice so long as the identity of the owner is known. After the
notice required under this section has been given, and the obstruction has
not been removed, the village officials may remove the obstruction using
reasonable care.



   (D)   Any obstruction which is brought about as a result of a
recreational activity in any street, alley, sidewalk, parkway, or anywhere
within a public right-of-way shall be governed by the provisions of § 14-4-5
of this code.



(Ord. 95-08-44, passed 8-21-95)



§ 12-3-5  OBSTRUCTIONS TO DRAINS.



   It shall be unlawful to obstruct any drain in any public street or
alley.



§ 12-3-6  SUPERVISION AND CONTROL.



   The maintenance, repair, new construction, curb cut excavation and
pavement cut or street openings of streets, sidewalks, alleys, curbs and
other public ways shall be supervised, controlled and under the direction of
the Director of Public Works and/or Village Engineer, and he or she is hereby
authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this article.



§ 12-3-7  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct,
reconstruct, alter, repair, make curb cuts or lay any pavement or surfacing
material of any nature whatsoever on any public street, sidewalk, alley, curb
or any other public way in the village, nor shall they make any tunnel,
opening or excavation of any kind in or under the surface of any public
street, sidewalk, alley, curb or other public way in the village without
first having obtained a permit therefor.



§ 12-3-8  PERMIT FEES.



   Permit and inspection fees for excavations or street cuts, sidewalk
construction, drive approaches, including curb cuts and street opening
deposits, shall be as are required in the permit fee schedule of the Building
Code, located at Ch. 6, Art. 13, of this code.



§ 12-3-9  LOCATION, LINE AND GRADE OF SIDEWALKS AND DRIVE APPROACHES.



   All sidewalks and drive approaches shall be laid and constructed at the
locations and to the lines and grades designated or approved by the Director
of Public Works and/or the Village Engineer.



§ 12-3-10  DRIVEWAY APPROACH CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   No industrial or commercial driveway approach shall be
constructed with a greater pavement width than 30 feet measured at the
property line, or 50 feet measured at the edge of street pavement. No
residential driveway approach shall be constructed with a greater width than
20 feet measured at the property line, and 30 feet measured at the edge of
street pavement. No driveway approach shall extend past the face of the curb
or edge of the street onto the pavement so as to change the street grade at
the gutter line.



   (B)   On a corner lot, no driveway approach shall be located closer
than ten feet to the right-of-way corner.



§ 12-3-11  CONSTRUCTION OF DRIVE APPROACH CROSSING SIDEWALK.



   Whenever a drive approach crosses a sidewalk, it shall be constructed
of portland cement concrete.



§ 12-3-12  ENTRANCE CULVERTS.



   Material used for entrance culverts shall be of corrugated metal pipe
or reinforced concrete sewer pipe and all material must meet current State
Highway Department specifications.



§ 12-3-13  MAINTENANCE OF UNPAVED DRIVE APPROACH.



   It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain an unpaved drive approach
where such approach abuts a paved street.



§ 12-3-14  MAINTENANCE OF DRIVE.



   Every portion of a driveway area on public property shall be maintained
in good repair by the owner of the property being served, and shall be kept
clean and free of snow and ice.



§ 12-3-15  ABANDONING DRIVE APPROACH.



   If, at any time, a drive approach is abandoned, the curb and gutter at
the edge of the street and sidewalk shall be replaced in accordance with
current village specifications by, and at the expense of, the owner
abandoning this curb cut.



§ 12-3-16  PARKWAY TREES.



   (A)   The owners of property on which single-family homes have been
constructed may petition the village requesting the installation of parkway
trees in the parkway area immediately adjoining their property. The
application shall be made upon a form prepared by the village and shall be
made at such time as determined by the village. Generally, applications shall
be taken once each year, in the summer, with planting taking place in the
fall of the year. The village will notify the property owner in writing as to
whether the size, location and nature of the parkway will permit the
installation of trees in accordance with the standards set forth within this
section. In the event that the village informs the owner that trees can be
installed, the applicant for the trees shall remit a check in the amount
determined by the village for each tree to be installed. The village shall
endeavor to plant the trees during the period of time established for such
planting. In the event that the number of requests for the planting of trees
shall exceed the ability of the village to honor all requests within the same
planting season, the owner of the property shall be permitted to withdraw the
request and receive a refund. The village shall inform the owner of the type
of tree which it intends to install at the location. In making a selection,
the village shall consider any request by the homeowner for the installation
of a particular kind of tree provided that the tree is on a list of permitted
trees to be planted within parkways. A final decision regarding the type of
tree to be planted shall reside with the village. This program shall be
administered within the village by the Department of Public Works.



   (B)   In determining the appropriate places within the village where
trees may be placed within a parkway, the village shall generally utilize the
following standards.



      (1)   A PARKWAY is defined as that property owned by the
village located between the curb of a public street and the property lot line.



      (2)   No tree will be planted less than ten feet from a curb,
nor less than two and one-half feet from the edge of a sidewalk; provided,
however, that, in the sole case where the distance between the curb and a
public sidewalk is ten feet in width, trees may be planted seven and one-half
feet from the curb and, in the sole case where there are conflicting utility
lines in the parkway, trees may be planted six feet from the curb.



      (3)   No tree may be placed within 30 feet of a street
intersection, or seven feet of a driveway or a crosswalk, or 12 feet of a
street light, traffic control sign device or fire hydrant or utility
structure.



      (4)   A minimum of 20 feet between trees, whether or not such
trees are on public or private property, shall be maintained.



      (5)   Parkway trees may not be installed where, because of
topography, drainage, road design or other considerations, the placement of a
tree at such a location would result in the creation of a safety, maintenance
or health problem for the village.



      (6)   Trees to be planted in parkways shall be selected from a
list of authorized tree species as approved by the Public Works Director.



      (7)   Safeguarding trees. The following safeguards of parkway
trees are hereby established.



         (a)   Construction. During any type of construction
work, the owner or contractor shall place guards around all nearby trees on
the parkway to prevent injury to such trees.



         (b)   Electrical wires. No person shall attach or
connect any electric or other wire to any tree on a parkway, nor permit any
such wire to come in contact with a parkway tree.



         (c)   Signs, placards and the like. No person shall
attach any sign, placard or poster to any tree growing in a parkway.



         (d)   Materials around trees. No person shall place or
maintain upon the ground around a parkway tree any surfacing or materials
other than grass.



   (C)   Once installed, a tree shall be the property of the village.
It shall be within the absolute discretion of the village as to whether a
tree once planted shall be permitted to remain at a particular location,
shall be replaced if it should die and the extent to which the tree is
trimmed. Where an existing tree in a parkway has died, the owner of the
adjacent property may apply to the village to replace the tree. The request
shall be accompanied by the requisite fee. Where an existing tree line exists
on a street, the tree line shall be preserved in the location of new trees.
Upon a petition, the provision of this section may be varied by the Plan
Commission, but no variance may be granted to allow the placement of a tree
in a parkway which is less than ten feet in width.



   (D)   It shall be a violation of this code for any person to plant a
tree in a parkway or damage a parkway tree. A violation of the provisions of
this section shall be punishable in accordance with § 1-1-9 of this code. In
addition to seeking the payment of a fine in accordance with § 1-1-9, the
village, when it believes that a violation of this section has occurred, may
remove any tree or other unauthorized planting placed within the parkway and
take any other legal action to enforce its property rights.



(Ord. 92-06-71, passed 6-23-1992)



§ 12-3-17  PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PRESERVATION BOND.



   (A)   When any person applies to the Community Development
Department for a building permit, the Village Engineer, or his or her
designee, shall determine whether the applicant for that permit shall be
required to submit to the village a bond or other security to guarantee to
the village that the applicant shall repair or replace any pipes, drainage
structures, pavement, curbs, gutters, street lights, fire hydrants or other
public improvements appurtenant to any street, road, highway or easement
owned, dedicated or granted to the village which is injured, damaged or
destroyed during the course of construction undertaken under the building
permit to be issued. If the Village Engineer, or his or her designee,
determines that a bond is required, he or she shall establish the amount of
that bond with regard to the possible damage to public property inherent in
the type of construction or work sought to be performed within the request
for the building permit, and shall so advise the Community Development
Department in writing. No building permit shall be issued by the Community
Development Department until the Village Engineer, or his or her designee,
determines that no bond is needed, or in the event that a bond is needed,
until such time as a public improvement preservation bond from a surety
approved by the Village Attorney shall have been posted with the village.
Building permits may, however, be issued by the Community Development
Department in any area in which the Village Engineer, or his or her designee,
shall have indicated in writing to the Community Development Department that
an adequate bond or other security has previously been posted by the
applicant.



   (B)   The form of the public improvement preservation bond shall be
in a form as approved by the Village Attorney.



(Ord. 92-06-71, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)



ARTICLE 4:  DITCHES, DRAINS AND DRAINAGE STRUCTURES



Section



   12-4-1   Definitions



   12-4-2   Alteration of ditches, drains and drainage structures



   12-4-3   Alteration of contour of land



   12-4-4   Application; permit



   12-4-5   Maintenance of ditches, drains, drainage structures or
property causing damage



   12-4-6   Private complainants



§ 12-4-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DITCH or DRAIN. Any watercourse or conduit, whether open, covered or
enclosed, natural or artificial, by which waters coming or falling upon lands
are carried away.



   DRAINAGE STRUCTURES. Those structures other than ditches, drains or
pumping plants which are intended to promote or aid drainage. Such structures
may be independent from other drainage work or may be part of or incidental
to such work. The term includes, but is not restricted to, dams, catchbasins,
bulkheads, walls, spillways, flumes, dropboxes, pipe outlets, junction boxes
and structures, and the primary purpose of which is to prevent the erosion of
soil into a drain.



   PERSON. Any natural person, partnership, trust, unincorporated
association, corporation or joint venture.



§ 12-4-2  ALTERATION OF DITCHES, DRAINS AND DRAINAGE STRUCTURES.



   No person shall construct, alter, relocate, remove or destroy any
ditch, drain or drainage structure upon any real property within the village,
whether subdivided or not, without obtaining and complying with the permit
provided for in this code.



§ 12-4-3  ALTERATION OF CONTOUR OF LAND.



   No person shall alter the contours of any real property within the
village, whether subdivided or not, so as to change the flow of water into or
through any ditch, drain or drainage structure without obtaining and
complying with the permit provided for in this code.



§ 12-4-4  APPLICATION; PERMIT.



   (A)   Any person desirous of obtaining a permit required by this
article shall make application therefor to the village on a form provided.
Such application shall be accompanied by a fee of $10 and plans, calculations
and specifications showing the proposed alteration and the effect such
alteration will have upon existing ditches, drains, drainage structures and
other properties. The application shall be transmitted to the Village
Manager, who shall process the application using such village personnel as
shall be necessary to reach a decision upon whether the permit shall be
granted. If the Village Manager determines that an analysis of the
application is required by the Village Engineer, he or she shall collect in
advance from the applicant a permit fee, which shall equal the estimate of
costs presented by the Engineer to review the application. If the services of
the Village Engineer are not required, the permit shall be processed without
further charge. The Village Manager, after such review and after considering
the standards hereinafter set forth in this article, shall determine whether
the permit shall be issued.



   (B)   No permit shall be issued for any proposed alteration which
will:



      (1)   Increase the amount or rate, or adversely affect the
quality, of surface water draining onto other properties;



      (2)   Damage other properties; or



      (3)   Does not conform to the general drainage law of the
state.



   (C)   Any person denied a permit under this section shall have the
right to appeal such denial to the Village Board.



§ 12-4-5  MAINTENANCE OF DITCHES, DRAINS, DRAINAGE STRUCTURES OR PROPERTY
CAUSING DAMAGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain upon any real property
in the village, whether subdivided or not, any ditch, drain, drainage
structure or real property which has been altered, constructed or contoured
in such a manner as to cause damage to other properties by the drainage of
surface waters. Any person determined to be in violation of this article by
the Village Engineer shall be notified of such violation in writing and shall
be given 15 days to correct such violation before any prosecution is
commenced by the village. Notice shall be made either by personal service, or
by certified mail, return receipt requested.



§ 12-4-6  PRIVATE COMPLAINANTS.



   In the event that a person is aggrieved by an alleged violation of this
article, such person may request the village to commence quasi-criminal
proceedings. If the village staff is unable to determine whether a violation
has taken place, the private complainant may be required to submit
engineering data as evidence of the alleged violation.



ARTICLE 5:  CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY



Section



   12-5-1   Purpose and scope



   12-5-2   Definitions



   12-5-3   Annual registration required



   12-5-4   Permit required; applications and fees



   12-5-5   Action on permit applications



   12-5-6   Effect of permit



   12-5-7   Revised permit drawings



   12-5-8   Insurance



   12-5-9   Indemnification



   12-5-10   Security



   12-5-11   Permit suspension and revocation



   12-5-12   Change of ownership or owner’s identity or legal status



   12-5-13   General construction standards



   12-5-14   Traffic control



   12-5-15   Location of facilities



   12-5-16   Construction methods and materials



   12-5-17   Vegetation control



   12-5-18   Removal, relocation or modifications of utility facilities



   12-5-19   Clean-up and restoration



   12-5-20   Maintenance and emergency maintenance



   12-5-21   Variances



   12-5-22   Enforcement



   12-5-23   As-built drawings



   12-5-24   Penalty



§ 12-5-1  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this article is to establish
policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within
the village's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with
the preservation of the integrity, safe usage and visual qualities of the
village rights-of-way and the village as a whole.



   (B)   Intent.  In enacting this article, the village intends to
exercise its authority over the rights-of-way located within the village and,
in particular, the use of the public ways and property, by establishing
uniform standards to address issues presented by the presence of facilities
in the public ways and property, including without limitation:



      (1)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks,
alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;



      (2)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions
and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;



      (3)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations
of the village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in
rights-of-way or public property;



      (4)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage
to trees, from the installation of utility facilities;



      (5)   Protect against increased storm water run-off due to
structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;



      (6)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which
facilities are installed;



      (7)   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined
parkways that characterize the village's residential neighborhoods;



      (8)   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of
facilities in the rights-of-way; and



      (9)   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private
properties adjacent to facilities locations.



   (C)   Facilities subject to this article.  This article applies to
all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the
rights-of-way within the jurisdictional boundaries of the village. A facility
lawfully established prior to the effective date of this article may continue
to be maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently
constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any
applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.



   (D)   Franchises, licenses or similar agreements. The village, in
its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the village
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such
an agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent
with this article.



   (E)   Effect of franchises, licenses or similar agreements.



      (1)   Utilities.  In the event that a utility provider has
entered into a franchise, license or similar agreement with the village, such
franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the
term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.



      (2)   Telecommunications providers.  In the event of any
conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this article and
the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the
village and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such
franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the
term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.



   (F)   Conflicts with other articles.  This article supersedes all
articles or parts of articles adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.



   (G)   Conflicts with state and federal laws.  In the event that
applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the
requirements of this article, the utility shall comply with the requirements
of this article to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or
state laws or regulations.



   (H)   Sound engineering judgment.  The village shall use sound
engineering judgment when administering this article and may vary the
standards, conditions and requirements expressed in this article when the
village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability
of the village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009; Am. Ord. 2017-03-08, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-5-2  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this article and unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section.  Any term not defined in this section shall have the
meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.



   AASHTO.  American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials.



   ANSI.  American National Standards Institute.



   APPLICANT.  A person applying for a permit under this article.



   ASTM.  American Society for Testing and Materials.



   BACKFILL.  The methods or materials for replacing excavated material
in a trench or pit.



   BORE or BORING.  To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.



   CABLE OPERATOR.  That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(5).



   CABLE SERVICE.  That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).



   CABLE SYSTEM.  That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7).



   CARRIER PIPE.  The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.



   CASING.  A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices
such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors and fiber optic devices.



   CLEAR ZONE.  The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of
the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may
consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope and a
clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes
and speeds, and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the
AASHTO Roadside Design Guide.



   COATING.  Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe
for protection against external corrosion.



   CODE.  The Code of Ordinances of the Village of Carol Stream.



   COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR. The Village Director of Community
Development or his or her designee.



   CONDUCTOR. Wire carrying electrical current.



   CONDUIT. A casing or encasement for wires or cables.



   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCT. The installation, repair, maintenance,
placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment
in place of facilities.



   COVER. The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or
conductor.



   CROSSING FACILITY. A facility having tracks or rails, wires, lines,
cable, fiber optic cable, conduit, ducts or pipes located either above or
below ground that cross one or more right-of-way lines of a right-of-way.



   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Village Director of Public Works or his
or her designee.



   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY. For the purposes of this article, any work
that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the
use of the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices or structures;
damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not
include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not
materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.



   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by
the general public, a corporation or a certain person or persons for a
specific purpose or purposes.



   EMERGENCY. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the
safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or
immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general
public served by the utility.



   ENCASEMENT. Provision of a protective casing.



   ENGINEER. The Village Engineer or his or her designee.



   EQUIPMENT. Materials, tools, implements, supplies and/or other items
used to facilitate construction of facilities.



   EXCAVATION. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or
laying bare by digging.



   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.



   FACILITY. All structures, devices, objects and materials (including,
but not limited to, tracks and rails, wires, lines, ducts, fiber optic cable,
antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles,
conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables and appurtenances thereto) located
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within rights-of- way under
this article. For purposes of this article, the term FACILITY shall not
include any facility owned or operated by the village.



   FREESTANDING FACILITY. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, pole, transformer, pump or meter
station.



   FRONTAGE ROAD. Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land
adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a
highway.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance or material which, due to its
quantity, form, concentration, location or other characteristics, is
determined by the Village Engineer or Director of Public Works or designee to
pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of
persons or property or to the ecological balance of the environment,
including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum
or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents,
flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic
under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.



   HIGHWAY. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. HIGHWAY includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and
appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.



   HIGHWAY CODE. The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as
amended from time to time.



   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable
and Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21- 401.



   IDOT. Illinois Department of Transportation.



   ICC. Illinois Commerce Commission.



   JACKING. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical
means with or without boring.



   JETTING. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.



   JOINT USE. The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two
or more utilities.



   J.U.L.I.E. The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators
utility notification program.



   MAJOR INTERSECTION. The intersection of two or more major arterial
highways.



   OCCUPANCY. The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.



   PARALLEL FACILITY. A facility having tracks or rails, wires, lines,
cable, fiber optic cable, conduit, ducts or pipes either above or below
ground, that generally are located parallel or longitudinal to the centerline
of a right-of-way.



   PARKWAY. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or
sidewalk, trail, path or driveway apron.



   PAVEMENT CUT. The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility
or for the construction of a facility.



   PERMITTEE. That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to
§§ 12-5-4 and 12-5-5.



   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES. Pipelines carrying crude or refined
liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline,
distillates, propane, butane or coal-slurry.



   PRACTICABLE. That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather
than that which is simply convenient.



   PRESSURE. The internal force acting radially against the walls of a
carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).



   PRIVATE LINE.  A dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single
customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a
communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more
specified locations to one or more other specified locations.



   PROMPT. That which is done within a period of time specified by the
village. If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.



   PUBLIC ENTITY. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the
government, whether at local, state or federal level.



   RESTORATION. The repair of a right-of- way, highway, roadway or other
area disrupted by the construction of a facility.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Any street, alley, other land or
waterway, dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
other similar purposes, including utility easements, in which the village has
the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of
facilities other than those of the village. RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY
shall not include any real or personal village property that is not
specifically described in the previous two sentences and shall not include
village buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless
of whether they are situated in the right-of-way.



   ROADWAY. The part of the highway that includes the pavement, curb and
gutter and shoulders.



   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and
its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not
greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.



   SECURITY FUND. The amount of security required pursuant to § 12-5-10.



   SHOULDER. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing
lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency
vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.



   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT. A decision(s) consistent with generally
accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. This term includes, but is not limited to, messages
or information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service,
computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services,
cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging
service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way
communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by
electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and
protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunications provider for use as a component part of the service
provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or
terminates the end-to-end communications. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not
include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in
the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 and following), as
now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services subject to
an open video system fee payable to the village through an open video system
as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.F.R.
§ 76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Any person that installs, owns, operates
or controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to
transmit telecommunications in any form.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER. Includes every person engaged in making
sales of telecommunications at retail, as defined herein.



   TRENCH. A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.



   UTILITY.  Any individual or entity owning or operating any facility,
as defined in this article, within the right-of-way.  The term UTILITY
includes any public utility as defined in the Public Utility Act, 220 ILCS
5/3-105, any telecommunications retailer or provider, and any public entity
other than the village.



   VENT. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or
vapors from an underground casing.



   VIDEO SERVICE. That term as defined in the Illinois Cable and Video
Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 5/21-201(v).



   VILLAGE. The Village of Carol Stream.



   VILLAGE MANAGER. The Village Manager or his or her designee.



   WATER LINES. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.



   WET BORING. Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to
soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.



(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009; Am. Ord. 2017-03-08, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-5-3  ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the village shall
register on January 1 of each year with the Engineer, providing the
utility’s name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy
numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the
utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility’s facilities
in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such person, and
evidence of insurance as required in § 12-5-8, in the form of a certificate
of insurance. No permit shall be issued to any utility without meeting the
regulation requirements of this section.



(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 12-5-4  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES.



   (A)   Permit required. No person shall construct (as defined in this
article) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within
any village right-of-way which changes the location of the facility, adds a
new facility, disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this article), or
materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on,
over, above, along, under, across or within the right- of-way, without first
filing an application with the Village Engineer and obtaining a permit from
the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this article. No permit
shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to
customers’ premises where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way.



   (B)   Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to
this article shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be
filed in such number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The
applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it
reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as
“proprietary” or “confidential” by clearly marking each page of such
materials accordingly.



   (C)   Minimum general application requirements. The application
shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall
contain, at a minimum, the following:



      (1)   The utility’s name and address and telephone and
telecopy numbers;



      (2)   The applicant’s name and address, if different than
the utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address and its interest
in the work;



      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers
and email addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the
applicant with respect to the application;



      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the
purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will
be put. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the
nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on
those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;



      (5)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the
village:



         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the
protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the
Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or
damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient
pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and



         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify
the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation,
construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response
by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the
village and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the
public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans
constitutes compliance with this section unless the village finds that
additional information or assurances are needed.



      (6)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work
proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings,
plans, and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules and regulations;



      (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in § 12-5-8;



      (8)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in
§ 12-5-10;



      (9)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions
of this article (see § 12-5-21); and



      (10)   Such additional information as may be reasonably
required by the village.



   (D)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of
utilities. In addition to the requirements of division (C) of this section,
the permit application shall include the following items, as applicable to
the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:



      (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service
or natural gas distribution system, evidence that any “certificate of
public convenience and necessity” or other regulatory authorization that
the applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected
to obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;



      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed
pipe size, design, construction class and operating pressures;



      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all
requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of
Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied;



      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that
the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control and Wheaton Sanitary
District, have been satisfied; or



      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the
type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure and
the design standard to be followed.



   (E)   Applicant’s duty to update information. Throughout the
entire permit application review period and the construction period
authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit
application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the village
within 30 days after the change necessitating the amendment.



   (F)   Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this
article shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $115 as compensation
for regulatory and administrative costs incurred in processing the
application. No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity
utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance
fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, or by any
telecommunications retailer that is paying the municipal telecommunications
infrastructure maintenance fee or the optional state telecommunications
infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Telecommunications Municipal
Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.



(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009; Am. Ord. 2017-03-08, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-5-5  ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Village review of permit applications. Completed permit
applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the
Village Engineer within a reasonable time after filing. If the application
does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws,
rules and regulations, the Village Engineer shall reject such application in
writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the Village Engineer is satisfied
that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this article and
applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, the Village
Engineer shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all
instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the Village Engineer, that the construction proposed under
the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this
article.



   (B)   Additional village review of applications of
telecommunications retailers.



      (1)   Pursuant to the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the village that it intends to
commence work governed by this article for facilities for the provision of
telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose
and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications
retailer to the village not less than ten days prior to the commencement of
work requiring no excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the
commencement of work requiring excavation. The Village Engineer shall specify
the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used
and constructed.



      (2)   In the event that the Village Engineer fails to provide
such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within
either ten days after service of notice to the village by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for
new construction or 25 days after service of notice by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the
telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit
under this article.



      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the village,
where a permit is required for work pursuant to § 12-5-4 the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an application for a
permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject
to the requirements of division (A) above.



   (C)   Additional village review of applications of holders of state
authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted 45 days after
submission to the village, unless otherwise acted upon by the village;
provided, the holder has complied with all applicable village codes,
ordinances and regulations.



(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 12-5-6  EFFECT OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Authority granted; no property right or other interest
created. A permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only
certain activities in accordance with this article on village rights-of-way,
and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to
impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the
rights-of-way.



   (B)   Duration. No permit issued under this article shall be valid
for a period longer than six months unless construction is actually begun
within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.



   (C)   Pre-construction meeting required. No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this article prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any
work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction
meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the village
with such village representatives in attendance as the village deems
necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under
the permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where
work will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other
utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid
disruption of other utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during
construction, and access and egress by adjacent property owners. The Village
Engineer may waive the mandatory attendance requirement for a
pre-construction meeting.



   (D)   Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by
the village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other
requirements of the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations.



(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 12-5-7  REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.



   Any deviation from the permit shall require approval of the Village
Engineer or designee prior to the work being performed. The Village Engineer
may require revised plans, drawings and specifications as necessary to allow
for the proper review and approval of the deviation.



(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 12-5-8  INSURANCE.



   (A)   Required coverages and limits.



      (1)   Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or
similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any
facility in the right-of-way not including utility easements, shall secure
and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the utility
as named insured and naming the village, and its elected and appointed
officers, officials, agents and employees as additional insureds on the
policies listed in divisions (A)(1)(a) and (A)(1)(b) below:



         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance, including
premises-operations, explosion, collapse and underground hazard (commonly
referred to as “X”, “C” and “U” coverages) and products-completed
operations coverage with limits not less than:



            1.   Five million dollars for bodily injury or
death to each person;



            2.   Five million dollars for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and



            3.   Five million dollars for all other types of
liability;



         (b)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and
hired vehicles with a combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury
and property damage for each accident;



         (c)   Worker’s compensation with statutory limits; and



         (d)   Employer’s liability insurance with limits of
not less than $1,000,000 per employee and per accident.



      (2)   If the utility is not providing such insurance to
protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such
contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this section and shall meet
with the approval of the Village Manager.



   (B)   Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this
section may be in any combination of primary, excess and umbrella policies.
Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying
insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the
primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or
umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.



   (C)   Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of
the policies required by this section to the village within ten days
following receipt of a written request therefor from the village.



   (D)   Maintenance and renewal of required coverages.



      (1)   The insurance policies required by this section shall
contain the following endorsement:



“It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled
nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt
by the village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt
requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village Manager of such
intent to cancel or not to renew.”



      (2)   Within ten days after receipt by the village of said
notice, and in no event later than ten days prior to said cancellation, the
utility shall obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement
insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.



   (E)   Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of
the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by division (A) of
this section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of
such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of
additional insureds under division (A) of this section, or the requirements
of divisions (B), (C) and (D) of this section. A utility that elects to
self-insure shall provide to the village evidence sufficient to demonstrate
its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit
requirements required under division (A) of this section, such as evidence
that the utility is a “private self-insurer” under the Worker’s
Compensation Act, being 820 ILCS 305/1 et seq.



   (F)   Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility’s
liability. The legal liability of the utility to the village and any person
for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or
self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such
insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts
thereunder.



   (G)   Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this
section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by
insurers legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of
Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated
“A-” or better and of a class size “X” or higher by A.M. Best Company.



(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 12-5-9  INDEMNIFICATION.



   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility
shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its
elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and
representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable
attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting
from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or
wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its
affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the
construction, maintenance and/or repair of facilities or occupancy of the
rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities,
whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this
article or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however,
that, the utility’s indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any
injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out
of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this article by
the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.



(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009; Am. Ord. 2017-03-08, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-5-10  SECURITY.



   (A)   Purpose. The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a
form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall
be continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the
permittee’s sole cost and expense until the completion of the work
authorized under the permit. The Security Fund shall serve as security for:



      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the
requirements of this article;



      (2)   Any expenditure, damage or loss incurred by the village
occasioned by the permittee’s failure to comply with any codes, rules,
regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the village issued
pursuant to this article; and



      (3)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages,
claims, costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by permittee in violation of this article
including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration
work the permittee is required by this article to perform that the village
must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the
permittee’s failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the
village from the permittee pursuant to this article or any other applicable
law.



   (B)   Form. The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the
village in the form, at the permittee’s election, of cash or an irrevocable
in a form acceptable to the village in a form acceptable to the village. Any
letter of credit provided pursuant to this division (B) shall be provided on
the village’s form.



   (C)   Amount. The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be
sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the
right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the
construction under the permit, as determined by the Village Engineer, and may
also include reasonable, directly related costs that the village estimates
are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration.
Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be
performed in phases in multiple locations in the village, with each phase
consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group
of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken
prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or
phases, the Village Engineer may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow
the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable
to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the
Security Fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount
that would have been required under the provisions of this division (C) for
any single phase.



   (D)   Withdrawals. The village, upon ten days’ advance written
notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise
withdrawal rights under this division (D), may withdraw an amount from the
Security Fund; provided that, the permittee has not reimbursed the village
for such amount within the ten day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if
the permittee:



      (1)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the
permittee hereunder;



      (2)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that
are due and unpaid or if any of the improvements have been or are likely to
be, the subject of liens or other claims by contractors, subcontractors or
third parties;



      (3)   Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims,
costs or expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by
reason of any action or non-performance by the permittee;



      (4)   Fails to comply with any provision of this article that
the village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the
Security Fund;



      (5)   Fails to satisfactorily complete or carry on the work of
the installation, construction and restoration of the permitted work in
accordance with its permit, the village’s rules and regulations and a
schedule approved by the village, or if no schedule is approved or even if no
one is set out, in accordance with the faster pace as deemed necessary by the
village for the installation of the improvement;



      (6)   Fails to provide a new letter of credit or amendment of
the letter of credit, containing equivalent terms, within 60 days of the
actual expiration of the original letter of credit; or



      (7)   If the sums remaining within the letter of credit are
believed to be insufficient.



   (E)   Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice
from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund,
the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in
division (C) of this section.



   (F)   Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest
accrued on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by
the village, upon written request for said withdrawal to the village,
provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the
minimum balance required in division (C) of this section.



   (G)   Closing and return of Security Fund. Upon completion of the
work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the
return of the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit,
within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to
compensate the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any
provisions of this article or other applicable law. In the event of any
revocation of the permit, the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest
therein, shall become the property of the village to the extent necessary to
cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the village as a
result of said revocation; provided that, any amounts in excess of said
costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee.



   (H)   Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the village with
respect to the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the
village, whether reserved by this article or otherwise authorized by law, and
no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund
shall affect any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery
with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise
violated.



(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 12-5-11  PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   Village right to revoke permit. The village may revoke or
suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article for one or more of the
following reasons:



      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting or materially
incomplete statements in the permit application;



      (2)   Non-compliance with this article;



      (3)   Permittee’s physical presence or presence of
permittee’s facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or
within the rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public
health, safety or welfare; or



      (4)   Permittee’s failure to construct the facilities
substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.



   (B)   Notice of revocation or suspension. The village shall send
written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to
this article stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension
and the alternatives available to permittee under this section.



   (C)   Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or
suspension.



      (1)   Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or
suspension from the village, the permittee shall have the following options:



         (a)   Immediately provide the village with ample
documented evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;



         (b)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the
village, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, and provide written
proof of such correction to the village within five working days after
receipt of the written notice of revocation; or



         (c)   Immediately remove the facilities located on,
over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-way and
restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the village and provide
written proof of such removal to the village within ten days after receipt of
the written notice of revocation.



      (2)   The village may, in its discretion, for good cause
shown, extend the time periods provided in this division (C).



   (D)   Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of
revocation or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately
upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within division
(A) of this section.



   (E)   Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. If the
permittee fails to comply with the provisions of division (C) of this
section, the village or its designee may, at the option of the village:
correct the deficiencies; upon not less than 20 days notice to the permittee,
unless deemed by the village an emergency, remove the subject facilities or
equipment; or after not less than 30 days notice to the permittee of failure
to cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and property of the village.
The permittee shall be liable in all events to the village for all costs of
removal.



(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 12-5-12  CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER’S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS.



   (A)   Notification of change. A utility shall notify the village no
less than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the
utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed
by the former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations, including this article, with respect to
the work and facilities in the right-of-way.



   (B)   Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current
permit and registration be amended to show current ownership. If the new
owner fails to have a new or amended permit and registration issued in its
name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be
bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit and registration if the new
owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village’s
right-of-way.



   (C)   Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or
bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.



(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 12-5-13  GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   (A)   Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way
shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and
regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and
construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable,
the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as
amended from time to time:



      (1)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;



      (2)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special
Provisions;



      (3)   Highway Design Manual;



      (4)   Highway Standards Manual;



      (5)   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;



      (6)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92
Ill. Adm. Code § 545);



      (7)   Flagger’s Handbook; and



      (8)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance
Operations.



   (B)   Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a
discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards
required by this article, the Village Engineer shall determine, in the
exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such
decision shall be final. If requested, the Village Engineer shall state which
standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance or
operation of a facility in the future.



(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 12-5-14  TRAFFIC CONTROL.



   (A)   Minimum requirements. The village’s minimum requirements for
traffic protection are contained in IDOT’s Illinois Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices and this code.



   (B)   Warning signs, protective devices and flaggers. The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices
and flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility’s workers when
performing any work on the rights-of-way.



   (C)   Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that
there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.



   (D)   Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any
residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident,
business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of
such work; provided, however, that, in cases involving emergency repairs
pursuant to § 12-5-20, the utility shall provide such notice as is
practicable under the circumstances.



   (E)   Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct
any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility’s attention by the village.



(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 12-5-15  LOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   General requirements.  In addition to location requirements
applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities,
regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of
this division (A).



      (1)   Facilities to be located underground. All new facilities
shall be located underground, unless not technically practicable.



      (2)   Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust
the capacity of a right-of-way or utility easement to reasonably accommodate
future facilities, a permitee may be required to provide additional ducts,
conduits, manholes and other facilities for non-discriminatory access to
future permitees.



      (3)   No interference with the public ways. No facilities
shall be placed in any location if the Village Engineer determines that the
proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the
village’s facilities or proposed village facilities or will otherwise
interfere with use of the right-of-way by the general public or the operation
or maintenance of any of the village’s facilities, proposed village
facilities, or any other existing facilities.  The village may require any
facilities causing such interference to be moved, as determined by the
Village Engineer.



      (4)   Minimum interference and impact.  The proposed location
shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the
right-of-way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and
interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners
who adjoin said right-of-way.  Underground telecommunications facilities
shall be installed within an existing underground duct or conduit whenever
excess capacity exists within such duct or conduit.



      (5)   No interference with travel. No utility facility shall
be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such
right-of-way.



      (6)   No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall
be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the
right-of-way.



      (7)   Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation
shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power
pedestals and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of
location, for the particular application.



      (8)   No interference with drainage. No utility facility shall
be placed in any location that interferes with storm water drainage, storage
or conveyance or blocks overland flow routes.



   (B)   Parallel facilities located within highways.



      (1)   Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel
facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:



         (a)   Wires, lines or cable are located as near as
practicable to the right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the
right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment will permit;



         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as
practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet behind the back
of the curb, where available;



         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote
from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet outside
the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;



         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway;
and



         (e)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within
one foot of the right-of- way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way
line.



      (2)   Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel
facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:



         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way
line as practicable;



         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved
portion of a highway only if other underground locations are impracticable or
inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be
installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and



         (c)   In the case of underground power or
telecommunications wires, lines or cable, the facility shall be located as
near the right-of-way line as practicable and any above- grounded
appurtenance shall be located within one foot of the right-of-way line or as
near as practicable.



   (C)   Facilities crossing highways.



      (1)   No future disruption. The construction and design of
crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of
village highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections
(such as encasement or additional cover) as deemed necessary by the village
to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed resulting from the
installation of such crossing facilities.



      (2)   Ninety-degree crossing required. Crossing facilities
shall cross at or as near to a 90-degree angle to the centerline as
practicable.



      (3)   Overhead power or telecommunication facility. An
overhead power or telecommunication facility may cross a highway only if:



         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as
required by ICC’s rules entitled, Construction of Electric Power and
Communication Lines (83 Ill. Adm. Code 305);



         (b)   Poles are located within one foot of the
right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and



         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are
avoided.



      (4)   Underground power or telecommunication facility. An
underground power or telecommunication facility may cross a highway only if:



         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will
provide maximum maintenance-free service life; and



         (b)   Capacity for the permitee’s foreseeable future
expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.



      (5)   Markers. The village may require the permitee to provide
a marker at each right- of-way line where an underground facility other than
a power or telecommunication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall
identify the type of facility, the permitee and an emergency phone number.
Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49
C.F.R. § 192.707 (1989)).



   (D)   Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The
village may require that facilities be located within particular
rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways.



   (E)   Freestanding facilities.



      (1)   The village may restrict the location and size of any
freestanding facility located within a right-of-way.



      (2)   The village may require any freestanding facility
located within a right-of-way to be screened from view.



   (F)   Facilities installed above ground. Aboveground facilities may
be installed only if:



      (1)   No other existing facilities in the area are located
underground;



      (2)   New underground installation is not technically
practicable;



      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location,
and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest
protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without
adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to,
self-supporting armless, single- pole construction with vertical
configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light
standards shall be used wherever practicable; the installation of additional
utility poles is strongly discouraged; and



      (4)   The facility meets all the Zoning Code requirements of
§§ 16-5-7, 16-12-1, 16- 12-2, 16-16-3, 16-16-8, 16-16-9 and 16-18-1.



   (G)   Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.



      (1)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or
roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other
means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall
include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles,
cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from
the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are
volatile, flammable, corrosive or energized, especially those under
significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such
installations are not permitted.



      (2)   An applicant shall include in its request to accommodate
a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data
demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or
disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway
structure will be based upon the following considerations:



         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the
commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to
persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility;



         (b)   The type, length, value and relative importance of
the highway structure in the transportation system;



         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility
and their comparative practicability;



         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;



         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased
load of the proposed facility;



         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance
and painting;



         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure;
and



         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility
service as compared to the risk involved.



   (H)   Appearance standards.



      (1)   The village may prohibit the installation of facilities
in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.



      (2)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction
does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features
visible to the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property
owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being
traversed.



      (3)   The facility must meet all the Zoning Code requirements
of §§ 16-5-7, 16-12-1, 16- 12-2, 16-16-3, 16-16-8, 16-16-9 and 16-18-1.



(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009; Am. Ord. 2017-03-08, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-5-16  CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS.



   (A)   Standards and requirements for particular types of
construction methods.



      (1)   Boring or jacking.



         (a)   Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under
rights-of-way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance
specified by the Village Engineer from the edge of the pavement. Pits for
boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of
boring or jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or
jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly
marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected,
supported, braced and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical
and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.



         (b)   Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall
not be permitted under the roadway.



         (c)   Borings with diameters greater than six inches.
Borings over six inches in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside
diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch.



         (d)   Borings with diameters six inches or less. Borings
of six inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking,
guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method.



         (e)   Tree preservation. Any facility located within the
drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected
shall be bored under or around the root system.



      (2)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair
or maintenance on rights- of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of § 603 of IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, and only with the approval of the Village Engineer.



         (a)   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to
the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing.
Only one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the Village Engineer.



         (b)   Open trench and excavated material. Open trench
and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by Ch. 6 of
the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable,
the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench
as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the
paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for
windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated
material shall be hauled to an off-road location.



         (c)   Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench
within the drip line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.



      (3)   Backfilling.



         (a)   Any pit, trench or excavation created during the
installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth and
length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT’s Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. When excavated material is
hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall
be used.



         (b)   For a period of three years from the date
construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to
remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction
of the facility. If so ordered by the Engineer, the utility, at its expense,
shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed
facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new
pavement, sidewalk, curbs and driveways to the proper grades, as determined
by the Engineer.



      (4)   Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation
or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if allowed by the Village
Engineer and only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic. If a
variance to the limitation set forth in this division (A)(4) is permitted
under § 12-5-21, the following requirements shall apply.



         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled
and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA- 10
gradation, as designated by the Engineer.



         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be
accomplished as soon as practicable and temporary repair with bituminous
mixture shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the
temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the
village.



         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.



         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been
reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last ten years, or
resurfaced in the last seven years, permits shall not be issued unless such
work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered
necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a
pavement cut is necessary for a J.U.L.I.E. locate.



      (5)   Encasement.



         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the
load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be
continuous either by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed
installation approved by the village.



         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall
extend within one foot of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes
shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that particular
section of the highway.



         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing,
encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or
village approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be
omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier
pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the
village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of
installation method.



         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.



         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products
pipelines with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be
eliminated only if: extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future
maintenance or repair and cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.



         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum
products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that
construction does not disrupt the right-of-way.



      (6)   Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be
provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following
table for minimum cover for the type of facility:



 


   Type of Facility

 
   Minimum Cover


Communication, cable or video service lines
 
24 inches (or as determined by village)


Electric lines
 
30 inches


Gas or petroleum products
 
30 inches


Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line
 
Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection


Water line
 
Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection - 66 inches minimum



 



   (B)   Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities.



      (1)   Electric power or telecommunication lines.



         (a)   Code compliance. Electric power or
telecommunications facilities within village rights-of-way shall be
constructed, operated, and maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83
Ill. Adm. Code Part 305 (formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce
Commission) entitled Rules for Construction of Electric Power and
Communications Lines, and the National Electrical Safety Code.



         (b)   Overhead facilities. Overhead power or
telecommunication facilities shall use single pole construction and joint use
of poles shall be required unless not practicable. Utilities shall make every
reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be
needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no practicable alternative and
if guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.



         (c)   Underground facilities. Cable may be installed by
trenching or plowing, when approved by the Village Engineer; provided that,
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads. If a crossing is installed by
boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits.
Encasement may be eliminated only if: the crossing is installed by the use of
“moles”, “whip augers” or other village approved method which
compress the earth to make the opening for cable installation or the
installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to
roadway construction. Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.



         (d)   Burial of drops. All temporary service drops
placed between November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year,
also known as snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year,
weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather
permitting, utilities shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops,
within ten business days after placement.



      (2)   Underground facilities other than electric power or
telecommunication lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or
telecommunication lines may be installed by:



         (a)   The use of “moles”, “whip augers” or other
village approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the
pipe;



         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided
between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;



         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between
ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway
construction; or



         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if
installation is not possible by other means.



      (3)   Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas
pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated
in a village approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the
Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192
- Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 C.F.R. part 192), IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations.



      (4)   Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products
pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of
ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation
Piping Systems ANSI-B31.4).



      (5)   Waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, storm water sewer
lines or drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines
and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the
recommendations of the current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Illinois.



      (6)   Ground-mounted appurtenances. Ground-mounted
appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a
right-of-way, shall be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one
foot in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free
area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty
plastic or similar material approved by the Engineer. With the approval of
the Community Development Director, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance
may be used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted
appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the
surroundings. The facilities meet all the Zoning Code requirements of §§
16-5-7, 16-12-1, 16-12-2, 16-16-3, 16-16-8, 16-16-9 and 16-18-1.



   (C)   Materials.



      (1)   General standards. The materials used in constructing
facilities within rights- of-way shall be those meeting the accepted
standards of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT’s
Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, the requirements
of the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other
official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.



      (2)   Material storage on right-of- way. No material shall be
stored on the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Village
Engineer. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles,
cross arms or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way
prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the
public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the
right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way,
prior approval must be obtained from the village.



      (3)   Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility
to the village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in
the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.



   (D)   Operational restrictions.



      (1)   No permitee or any person acting on a permitee’s
behalf shall take any action or permit any action to be done which may impair
or damage any village property, right-of-way, or other property located in,
on or adjacent to the facilities being constructed.



      (2)   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the
discretion of the village, be required to be discontinued when such
operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety and
welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or
restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in
extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property.



      (3)   These restrictions may be waived by the Engineer when
emergency work is required to restore vital utility or telecommunication
services.



      (4)   Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of
construction are those set forth in § 14-2-17(H) of this code of ordinances.



   (E)   Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to
construct facilities in the village shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain
the presence and location of existing above-ground and underground facilities
within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The
village will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose
of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when
requested by the village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and
physically mark its underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding
weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities
Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.)



(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009; Am. Ord. 2017-03-08, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-5-17  VEGETATION CONTROL.



   (A)   Electric utilities - compliance with state laws and
regulations. An electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and
vegetation control activities in the right-of-way in accordance with
applicable Illinois laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local
franchise or other agreement with the village as permitted by law.



   (B)   Other utilities - tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming
that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and
that is not performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations
specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance
operation, but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a
permit, in addition to any other permit required under this article.



      (1)   Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for
tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be
accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are experienced in
accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall be issued by the
Director of Public Works and shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.



      (2)   Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in
damaged or misshapen trees as determined by the Director of Public Works will
not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the tree trimming
permit and for assessment of damages. The village will require compensation
for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without authorization.
The formula developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be
used as a basis for determining the compensation for damaged trees or
unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the removal and
replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave them in an
unacceptable condition.



   (C)   Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The Director
of Public Works may require that special measures be taken to preserve
specimen trees or trees of special significance. The required measures may
consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.



   (D)   Chemical use.



      (1)   Except as provided in the following division, no utility
shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or
vegetation in the village for any purpose, including the control of growth,
insects or disease.



      (2)   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not
be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Works that such spraying is the only
practicable method of vegetation control.



(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 12-5-18  REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES.



   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the
village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily
or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of
any utility facilities within the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the
village whenever the corporate authorities have determined that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the
construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any village improvement
in or upon, or the operations of the village in or upon, the rights-of-way.



   (B)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following
written notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls or maintains
any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way
shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject
to removal in the following circumstances:



      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee’s
license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;



      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the
prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;



      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without
prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this article; or



      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a
location not permitted by the permittee’s license or franchise or permit.



   (C)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The village
retains the right and privilege to remove or relocate or alter any facilities
located within the rights-of-way of the village, as the village may determine
to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or
safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to
notify the utility, if known, prior to removing or relocating or altering a
facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a
facility.



   (D)   Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility
within the rights-of-way of the village, the utility shall notify the village
within 90 days. Following receipt of such notice, the village may direct the
utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Village Engineer
determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the village. In
the event that the village does not direct the utility that abandoned the
facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the village, the
abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of
all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person. All
vegetation screening shall also be removed and the disturbed area properly
restored if requested by the Community Development Director.



(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 12-5-19  CLEAN-UP AND RESTORATION.



   The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and
terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the
rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or
maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This
includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway
surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the Village
Engineer. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling,
regrading, reseeding, resodding or any other requirement to restore the
right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed
prior to the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this
section may be extended by the Village Engineer for good cause shown.



(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 12-5-20  MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under,
across or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in
a manner satisfactory to the village and at the utility’s expense.



   (B)   Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify
non-compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit.



      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion
of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all
necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the
right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a
hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is
such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in
repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on
the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means
of access to the facility is available.



      (2)   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible,
notify the Village Engineer or his or her duly authorized agent of the
emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for
protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the
necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere
with the free movement of traffic, the village police shall be notified
immediately.



      (3)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand
to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least
inconvenience to the traveling public.



   (C)   Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the
village a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48
hours after an emergency repair.



(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 12-5-21  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one
or more of the provisions of this article must do so in writing to the
Village Engineer, Director of Public Works or the Community Development
Director as appropriate and as a part of the permit application. The request
shall identify each provision of this article from which a variance is
requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.



   (B)   Authority to grant variances. The Village Board shall decide
whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this article
identified in the variance request on an individual basis.



   (C)   Conditions for granting of variance. The Village Board may
authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:



      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the
utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a
special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable,
given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and



      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or
facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is
requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach.



   (D)   Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a
condition for authorizing a variance, the Village Engineer, Director of
Public Works or the Community Development Director as appropriate may require
the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and
conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this article but
which carry out the purposes of this article.



   (E)   Right to appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order,
requirement, decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made
by the Village Engineer under the provisions of this article shall have the
right to appeal to the Village Board, or such other board or commission as it
may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to
the Village Clerk within 30 days after the date of such order, requirement,
decision or determination. The Village Board shall commence its consideration
of the appeal at the Board’s next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at
least seven days after the filing of the appeal. The Village Board shall
timely decide the appeal.



(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 12-5-22  ENFORCEMENT.



   Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting any additional
or further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this article.



(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 12-5-23  AS-BUILT DRAWINGS.



   Upon the completion of the permitted work and prior to the release of
any security or insurance certificate, the utility shall provide the village
with as-built drawings depicting the actual locations and sizes of all
improvements within 30 days of the installation of the improvements.



(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)



§ 12-5-24  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to fine in
accordance with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when
the village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims,
because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit
and this article. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the
cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall
bear the village’s costs of damages and its costs of installing,
maintaining, modifying, relocating or removing the facility that is the
subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may
review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the village.
Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs
apportioned to it.



(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)



ARTICLE 6:  MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY



Section



   12-6-1   Definitions



   12-6-2   Compliance with J.U.L.I.E.



   12-6-3   Interference with the public ways



   12-6-4   Damage to property



   12-6-5   Notice of work



   12-6-6   Repair and emergency work



   12-6-7   Maintenance of facilities



   12-6-8   Relocation or removal of facilities



   12-6-9   Removal of unauthorized facilities



   12-6-10   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities



   12-6-11   Damage to grantee’s facilities



   12-6-12   Restoration of public ways, other ways and village property



   12-6-13   Facilities maps



   12-6-14   Duty to provide information



   12-6-15   Leased capacity



   12-6-16   Coordination of construction activities



   12-6-17   Revocation or termination of grant



   12-6-18   Notice and duty to cure



   12-6-19   Hearing



   12-6-20   Standards for revocation or lesser sanctions



§ 12-6-1  DEFINITIONS.



   Except as provided herein, the words and terms used within this article
shall have the same meanings as ascribed to them as set forth herein or as
set forth in Article 5, Construction of Facilities in the Rights-of-Way of
this Chapter 12.



   GRANTEE.  Any person allowed to construct facilities in the
rights-of-way pursuant to a franchise, license or permit granted by the
village.



(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-6-2  COMPLIANCE WITH J.U.L.I.E.



   All grantees shall, before commencing any construction in the public
ways, comply with all regulations of J.U.L.I.E.



(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-6-3  INTERFERENCE WITH THE PUBLIC WAYS.



   No grantee shall maintain its facilities so as to unreasonably
interfere with the use of the public ways by the village, by the general
public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the
public ways. All such facilities causing unreasonable interference shall be
moved by the grantee, temporarily or permanently, as determined by the
Village Engineer.



(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-6-4  DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.



   No grantee nor any person acting on a grantee's behalf shall take any
action or permit any action to be done which may impair or damage any village
property, public ways of the village, other ways or other property located
in, on or adjacent thereto.



(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-6-5  NOTICE OF WORK.



   Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, no
grantee, nor any person acting on the grantee's behalf, shall commence any
non-emergency work in or about the public ways of the village or other ways
without ten working days' advance notice to the village.



(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-6-6  REPAIR AND EMERGENCY WORK.



   In the event of an unexpected repair or emergency, a grantee may
commence such repair and emergency response work as required under the
circumstances, provided the grantee shall notify the village as promptly as
possible, before such repair or emergency work or as soon thereafter as
possible if advance notice is not practicable.



(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-6-7  MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES.



   Each grantee shall maintain its facilities in good and safe condition
and in a manner that complies with all applicable federal, state and local
requirements.



(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-6-8  RELOCATION OR REMOVAL OF FACILITIES.



   Within 30 days following written notice from the village, a grantee
shall at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change
or alter the position of any facilities within the public ways whenever the
corporate authorities shall have determined that such removal, relocation,
change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:



   (A)   The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
village or other public improvement in or upon the public ways; and



   (B)   The operations of the village or other governmental entity in
or upon the public ways.



(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-6-9  REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED FACILITIES.



   Within 30 days following written notice from the village, any person
that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized facility or related
appurtenances within the public ways of the village shall, at its own
expense, remove such facilities or appurtenances from the public ways of the
village. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following
circumstances:



   (A)   Upon expiration or termination of a grantee's license or
franchise;



   (B)   Upon abandonment of a facility within the public ways of the
village;



   (C)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior
grant of a license or franchise;



   (D)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior
issuance of a required permit; and/or



   (E)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the grantee's license or franchise.



(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-6-10  EMERGENCY REMOVAL OR RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   The village retains the right and privilege to move any facilities
located within the public ways of the village, as the village may determine
to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or
safety emergency.



(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-6-11  DAMAGE TO GRANTEE'S FACILITIES.



   Unless directly and proximately caused by the willful, intentional or
malicious acts by the village, the village shall not be liable for any damage
to or loss of any facility within the public ways of the village as a result
of or in connection with any public works, public improvements, construction,
excavation, grading, filling, or work of any kind in the public ways by or on
behalf of the village.



(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-6-12  RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS, OTHER WAYS AND VILLAGE PROPERTY.



   (A)   When a grantee, or any person acting on its behalf, does any
work in or affecting any public ways, other ways or village property, it
shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and
restore such ways or property to as good a condition as existed before the
work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the village.



   (B)   If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete
restoration required by this section, the grantee shall temporarily restore
the affected ways or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the
grantee's sole expense and the licensee shall promptly undertake and complete
the required permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no
longer prevent such permanent restoration.



   (C)   A grantee or other person acting in its behalf shall use
suitable barricades, flags, flagmen, lights, flares and other measures as
required for the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent
injury or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in
or affecting such ways or property.



(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-6-13  FACILITIES MAPS.



   Each grantee shall provide the village with an accurate map or maps
certifying the location of all facilities within the public ways. Each
grantee shall provide updated maps annually.



(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-6-14  DUTY TO PROVIDE INFORMATION.



   Within ten days of a written request from the Village Manager, each
grantee shall furnish the village with information sufficient to demonstrate:



   (A)   The grantee has complied with all requirements of this chapter;



   (B)   All municipal sales, message, telecommunications taxes or
other taxes required to be paid by the grantee in connection with the
services and facilities provided by the grantee have been properly collected
and paid by the grantee; and



   (C)   All books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by
the grantee with respect to its facilities within the public ways shall be
made available for inspection by the village at reasonable times and
intervals.



(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-6-15  LEASED CAPACITY.



   A grantee providing telecommunications shall have the right, without
prior village approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its
customers; provided:



   (A)   The grantee shall furnish the village with a copy of any such
lease or agreement; and



   (B)   The customer or lessee has complied, to the extent applicable,
with all village ordinances and requirements.



(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-6-16  COORDINATION OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   All grantees are required to cooperate with the village and
with each other.



   (B)   By February 1 of each year, grantees shall provide the village
with a schedule of their proposed construction activities in, around or that
may affect the public ways.



   (C)   Each grantee shall meet with the village, other grantees and
users of the public ways annually or as determined by the village to schedule
and coordinate construction in the public ways.



   (D)   All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be
coordinated, as ordered by the Village Engineer, to minimize public
inconvenience, disruption or damages.



(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-6-17  REVOCATION OR TERMINATION OF GRANT.



   A license, franchise or permit granted by the village to use or occupy
public ways of the village may be revoked for the following reasons:



   (A)   Construction or operation in the village or in the public ways
of the village without a license or franchise grant of authorization;



   (B)   Construction or operation at an unauthorized location;



   (C)   Unauthorized substantial transfer of control of the grantee;



   (D)   Unauthorized assignment of a license or franchise;



   (E)   Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of grantee's
franchise or license assets or a substantial interest therein;



   (F)   Misrepresentation or untruthfulness by or on behalf of a
grantee in any application to the village;



   (G)   Abandonment of facilities in the public ways;



   (H)   Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this
chapter;



   (I)   Failure to pay taxes, compensations fees or costs when and as
due the village;



   (J)   Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee;



   (K)   Violation of material provisions of this chapter; and/or



   (L)   Violation of the material terms of a license or franchise
agreement.



(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-6-18  NOTICE AND DUTY TO CURE.



   In the event that the Village Manager believes that grounds exist for
revocation of a license, franchise or permit, he or she shall give the
grantee written notice of the apparent violation or non-compliance, providing
a short and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the
violation or non-compliance, and providing the grantee a reasonable period of
time not exceeding 30 days to furnish evidence that:



   (A)   Corrective action has been, or is being actively and
expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or non-compliance;



   (B)   Rebuts the alleged violation or non-compliance; and/or



   (C)   It would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or
sanction less than revocation.



(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-6-19  HEARING.



   In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence reasonably
satisfactory to the Village Manager as provided in § 12-6-18, the Manager
shall refer the apparent violation or non-compliance to the corporate
authorities. The corporate authorities shall provide the grantee with notice
and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter.



(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 12-6-20  STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION OR LESSER SANCTIONS.



   If persuaded that the grantee has violated or failed to comply with
material provisions of this chapter, or of a franchise, license agreement or
permit, the corporate authorities shall determine whether to revoke the
license, franchise or permit, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure,
considering the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation as
reflected by one or more of the following factors:



   (A)   Whether the misconduct was egregious;



   (B)   Whether substantial harm resulted;



   (C)   Whether the violation was intentional;



   (D)   Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or
other requirements;



   (E)   Whether there is a history of overall compliance; and/or



   (F)   Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or
cured.



(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)



ARTICLE 7:  SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES



Section



   12-7-1   Purpose



   12-7-2   Interaction with other code provisions and laws



   12-7-3   Definitions



   12-7-4   Zoning



   12-7-5   Permits; application process



   12-7-6   Construction



   12-7-7   Permit duration



   12-7-8   Height limitations



   12-7-9   General requirements



   12-7-10   Stealth, concealment and design standards



   12-7-11   Reservation of village utility pole space



   12-7-12   Applicability of existing agreements



   12-7-13   Collocation on village-owned infrastructure



   12-7-14   Notice of sale or transfer



   12-7-15   Abandonment



   12-7-16   Dispute resolution



   12-7-17   Indemnification



   12-7-18   Insurance



   12-7-19   Maintenance of small wireless facilities



   12-7-20   Revocation of permit



   12-7-21   Exceptions to applicability



§ 12-7-1  PURPOSE.



   Consistent with the requirements of the Small Wireless Facilities
Deployment Act (Public Act 100-585), and in anticipation of a continued
increased demand for placement of small wireless facilities of the type
regulated by the Act both within the public rights-of-way and in other
locations within the jurisdiction of the village, the Village Board has found
it to be in the best interests of the public health, safety and general
welfare of the village to adopt the code amendments set forth in this article
in order to establish generally applicable standards for the design,
permitting, location, construction, deployment, regulation, operation,
maintenance, repair and removal of such small wireless facilities both within
the public rights-of-way and in other locations within the jurisdiction of
the village so as to, among other things:



   (A)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
village’s utilities and of other utilities lawfully located both within
public rights-of-way and in other locations within the jurisdiction of the
village;



   (B)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which such
small wireless facilities are installed;



   (C)   Minimize any adverse visual impact of small wireless
facilities and prevent visual blight in the neighborhoods in which such
facilities are installed;



   (D)   Ensure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private
properties adjacent to small wireless facilities;



   (E)   Provide appropriate aesthetic protections to any designated
historic landmarks or districts within the village; and



   (F)   Ensure that the placement of small wireless facilities does
not negatively impact public safety and the village’s public safety
technology.



(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)



§ 12-7-2  INTERACTION WITH OTHER CODE PROVISIONS AND LAWS.



   (A)   Other code provisions. The provisions of this article are
intended to supplement general requirements and standards relative to the
siting of telecommunication facilities and generally applicable requirements
for construction within public rights-of-way set forth elsewhere within this
code, including but not limited to the regulations set forth in Chapter 12,
Article 5 of this code. In the event of a conflict, however, the provisions
of this article shall control in all matters involving small wireless
facilities, as defined below.



   (B)   State and federal laws. In the event that applicable federal
or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this article,
a wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this article to the
maximum extent possible without violating such federal or state laws or
regulations.



(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)



§ 12-7-3  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:



   ACT. The Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (Public Act 100-585).



   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.



   APPLICABLE CODES. Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.



   APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application and is a wireless
provider.



   APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant to the village for a
permit to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes
the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.



   AUTHORITY. The village or other unit of local government that has
jurisdiction and control for use of public rights-of-way as provided by the
Illinois Highway Code for placements within public rights-of-way or has
zoning or land use control for placements not within public rights-of-way.



   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate,
or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure
or utility pole, whether existing or new.



   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. §
522(6), as amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(24),
as amended; telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(53),
as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(33), as amended;
or wireless service other than mobile service.



   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. A cable operator, as defined in 47
U.S.C. § 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. § 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. § 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.



   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.



   FEE. A one-time charge.



   HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC LANDMARK. A building, property, or site,
or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either (i) listed in the
National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for
listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and
determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with
Section VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic
Agreement codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a
locally landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an
ordinance adopted by the village pursuant to a preservation program that
meets the requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the
Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of
the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office
is pending.



   LAW. A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation,
order, or local ordinance or resolution.



   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is not larger
in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in
height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.



   PERMIT. A written authorization required by the village or other
permitting authority to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete
a project.



   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization, including
an authority.



   PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY. The functional division of the federal
government, the state, a unit of local government, or a special purpose
district located in whole or in part within this state, that provides or has
authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other
emergency services to respond to and manage emergency incidents.



   PUBLIC UTILITY. As set forth in § 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act, 
220 ILCS 5/3-105.



   RATE. A recurring charge.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use. RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include authority-owned aerial lines.



   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of
no more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit
within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and (ii) all
other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with
the facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The
following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.



   STRUCTURAL ENGINEER. A person licensed under the laws of the State of
Illinois to practice structural engineering.



   UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in
part by a communications service provider or for electric distribution,
lighting, traffic control, or a similar function.



   VILLAGE.  The Village of Carol Stream.



   VILLAGE ENGINEER. That individual appointed as the Village Engineer or
his or her designee.



   VILLAGE UTILITY POLE. A utility pole owned or operated by the village
in public rights-of-way.



   WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network,
including: (i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii)
radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and
backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological
configuration. WIRELESS FACILITY includes small wireless facilities. WIRELESS
FACILITY does not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under, or
within which the equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul
facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support
structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is
otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna.



   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for
the application submitted to the village.



   WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider and/or a wireless
services provider. This does not include, and expressly excludes, any person
who is providing service to or for a private niche market.



   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided to the general public,
including a particular class of customers, and made available on a
nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a
fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.



   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.



   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a
monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other
existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting
wireless facilities. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a utility
pole.



(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)



§ 12-7-4  ZONING.



   (A)   Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted
uses and shall not be subject to zoning review, if collocated in
rights-of-way in any zoning district, or outside rights-of-way in the
following zoning districts:



      (1)   B-1 Local Business District;



      (2)   B-2 General Business District;



      (3)   B-3 Service District;



      (4)   B-4 Office, Research and Institutional Building District;



      (5)   I-1  Industrial District.



   (B)   In all other zoning districts, the village's normal zoning
approvals, processes and restrictions shall apply, if zoning approval,
processes or restrictions are required by the village's zoning ordinance.



(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)



§ 12-7-5  PERMITS; APPLICATION PROCESS.



   Unless otherwise specifically exempted in this article, a permit to
collocate a small wireless facility within the village is required in all
cases. Permits are subject to the following:



   (A)   Permit applications. Permit applications for the collocation
of small wireless facilities shall be made on a form provided by the village
for such purpose. In addition to any generally applicable information
required of other communications service providers or for other installations
in the public right-of-way, applicants must, when requesting to collocate
small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure,
provide the following information:



      (1)   Site specific structural integrity and, for a village
utility pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that
term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989;



      (2)   The location where each proposed small wireless facility
or utility pole would be installed and digital photographs of the location
and its immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on
which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location
where utility poles or structures would be installed. The photographs shall
include a digital photo simulation of the proposed location providing "before
and after" views demonstrating the true visual impact of the proposed small
wireless facilities on the surrounding environment;



      (3)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural
engineer, as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering
Practice Act of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by
the application as it is proposed to be installed;



      (4)   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas
and all other equipment associated with the small wireless facility;



      (5)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion
of each small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;



      (6)   Certification that, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge, the collocation complies with the written design standards
established by the village, and with the various other requirements set forth
in this article and code;



      (7)   Copies of all licenses, permits and approvals required
by or from the village (i.e., zoning approval, where required), other
agencies and units of government with jurisdiction over the design,
construction, location and operation of said small wireless facility. The
applicant shall maintain such licenses, permits and approvals in full force
and effect and provide evidence of renewal or extension thereof when granted;
and



      (8)   In the event the small wireless facility is proposed to
be attached to an existing utility pole or wireless support structure owned
by an entity other than the village, legally competent evidence of the
consent of the owner of such pole or wireless support structure to the
proposed collocation.



   (B)   Means of submission. Permit applications, along with all
supporting information, for the collocation of small wireless facilities
shall be submitted by personal delivery or by other means approved by the
village.



   (C)   Multiple applications for same location. Multiple applications
for collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support structure shall
be processed based on a first fully complete application, first-served basis.



   (D)   Permit application fees. All applications for collocation of
small wireless facilities shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application
fee in the following amounts:



 

Request to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the installation
of a new utility pole
 
$1,000


Request to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing utility
pole or wireless support structure
 
$650


Request to collocate multiple small wireless facilities on existing utility
poles or wireless support structures addressed in a single application
 
$350 per small wireless facility



 



   (E)   Permit review timelines.



      (1)   Completeness of application.



         (a)   Requests for the collocation of small wireless
facilities shall be reviewed for conformance with the requirements of the
Act, this article, and other applicable provisions of this code. Within 30
days after receiving an application, the village must determine whether the
application is complete and notify the applicant. If an application is
incomplete, the village must specifically identify the missing information.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the village sends a notice of
incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.



         (b)   An application shall be deemed complete if the
village fails to provide notification to the applicant within 30 days of the
date when all documents, information, and fees specifically enumerated in the
village's permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the
village.



      (2)   Existing pole or wireless support structure. Requests
for the collocation of small wireless facilities on an existing utility pole
or wireless support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis
and either approved or denied within 90 days of submission of a completed
application. A permit application shall be deemed approved if the village
fails to approve or deny the application within 90 days, subject to the
following: if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on
a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the village in writing of
its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 75 days
after the submission of a completed application. The permit shall be deemed
approved on the later of the ninetieth day after submission of the completed
application, or the tenth day after receipt of the deemed approved notice by
the village. Receipt of a deemed approved notice by the village shall not
preclude the village from denying the permit within the allowed time limit.



      (3)   New utility pole. Requests for the collocation of small
wireless facilities that include the installation of a new utility pole shall
be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and either approved or denied
within 120 days of submission of a completed application. A permit
application shall be deemed approved if the village fails to approve or deny
the application within 120 days, subject to the following: if an applicant
intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis,
the applicant shall notify the village in writing of its intention to invoke
the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 105 days after the submission of a
completed application. The permit shall be deemed approved on the later of
the one hundred twentieth day after submission of the completed application,
or the tenth day after receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village.
Receipt of a deemed approved notice by the village shall not preclude the
village from denying the permit within the allowed time limit.



   (F)   Tolling. The time limitations for approval or denial of
applications shall be tolled by notice to an applicant that its application
is incomplete as set forth above, upon mutual agreement of the parties, or by
a local, state or federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that
causes a delay.



   (G)   Pole replacement. Permit approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of a utility pole or wireless support structure at the
applicant's sole cost where such replacement is deemed necessary for
compliance with the requirements of this article or code relative to the
siting of small wireless facilities, or other applicable codes and
regulations that concern public safety.



   (H)   Denial. The village shall deny an application that does not
meet the requirements of this article. The reasons for any denial of a permit
shall be provided in a written notice of denial sent to the applicant, and
shall include the specific code provisions or application conditions on which
the denial is based.



   (I)   Resubmittal after denial. In the case of a permit denial, an
applicant may cure the deficiencies identified in the notice of denial and
resubmit a revised application once within 30 days after the notice of denial
is sent without payment of an additional application fee. The village shall
have 30 days to approve or deny the resubmitted application or it is deemed
approved, if the applicant has notified the village of its intention to
proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which
notification may be submitted with the resubmitted application. Review of a
resubmitted application is limited to the deficiencies cited in the original
notice of denial. This division (I) does not apply if a revised application
is not resubmitted within 30 days, or curing any deficiencies in the original
application requires review of a new location, new or different structure for
collocation, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the
small wireless facility. In such cases, a new application and application fee
are required.



   (J)   Consolidated applications. Consolidated applications for small
wireless facilities for the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities
shall be allowed if the collocations each involve substantially the same type
of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure. Each
consolidated application shall provide all the information required by this
article for each small wireless facility at each location.  If such an
application includes incomplete information for one or more small wireless
facility collocations, or includes requests for small wireless facilities
that do not qualify for consolidated treatment, or that are otherwise denied,
the village may remove such collocation requests from the application and
treat them as separate requests. Separate permits may be issued for each
collocation approved in a consolidated application.



   (K)   Alternate locations. If an applicant is seeking to install a
new utility pole as part of its application, the village may propose that the
small wireless facility be located on an existing utility pole or existing
wireless support structure within 100 feet of the proposed collocation. The
applicant shall accept the proposed alternate location so long as it has the
right to use the location on reasonable terms and conditions, unless the
alternate location imposes technical limits or additional material costs as
determined by the applicant. If the applicant refuses an alternate location
based on the foregoing, the applicant shall provide legally competent
evidence in the form of a written certification, under oath, describing the
property rights, technical limits or material cost reasons that prevent the
alternate location from being utilized. 



   (L)   Exemptions.



      (1)   No application, permit approval or fee shall be required
from a communications service provider authorized to occupy the right-of-way
when the work in question is for:



         (a)   Routine maintenance not requiring replacement of
wireless facilities if the wireless provider notifies the village in writing
at least 48 hours prior to the planned maintenance;



         (b)   The replacement of wireless facilities with
wireless facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller
if the wireless provider notifies the village in writing at least ten days
prior to the planned replacement and includes equipment specifications,
including (i) equipment type and model numbers, for the replacement of
equipment consistent with the equipment specifications information required
on a permit application for original installation; and (ii) information
sufficient to establish that the replacement is substantially similar. The
wireless provider shall provide all information necessary and requested by
the village to establish that the replacement is substantially similar. The
village has the sole right and responsibility to determine if a proposed
small wireless facility is substantially similar to the existing small
wireless facility; or



         (c)   The installation, placement, maintenance,
operation or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on
cables that are strung between existing utility poles in compliance with
applicable safety codes.



      (2)   The foregoing shall not exempt communications service
providers from village permitting requirements where traffic patterns are
affected or lane closures are required.



(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)



§ 12-7-6  CONSTRUCTION.



   Collocations for which permits are approved shall be completed within
180 days of issuance of the permit, unless the village agrees to extend the
period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a village utility pole or
by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site,
provided the applicant has made a timely request within 60 days after the
issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the
additional time to complete installation does not exceed 360 days after
issuance of the permit. Permits that are not completed within applicable
timelines shall be void absent an extension granted in writing by the village.



(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)



§ 12-7-7  PERMIT DURATION.



   Permits issued for small wireless facilities pursuant to this article
shall be for a period of five years. Permits are subject to renewal at the
end of the five-year permit period for a successive five-year term so long as
the installation complies with the applicable code provisions in force at the
time of renewal. A finding by the village at the time of a request for
renewal that an installation does not comply with the applicable code
provisions in force at the time of the renewal request shall be in writing.
If the Act is repealed or found unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, all permits granted by the village under this article shall
terminate at the end of their current term.



(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)



§ 12-7-8  HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   Antenna installations. The maximum permitted height of a small
wireless facility is ten feet above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.



   (B)   New poles. The maximum permitted height of new or replacement
utility pole or wireless support structure on which a small wireless facility
is collocated is the higher of:



      (1)   Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility
pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is
in place on the date the application is submitted, and that is located within
300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure
and that is in the same right-of-way within the village. The village may
designate which intersecting right-of-way within 300 feet of the proposed
utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height
limitation for such facility; or



      (2)   Forty-five feet above ground level.



   (C)   Waiver process. A wireless provider may receive a waiver from
the Village Engineer from the maximum permitted height of a new pole set
forth in this section, if the wireless provider can establish that:



      (1)   Because of a particular unusual condition, a particular
hardship or practical difficulty to the wireless provider would result, as
distinguished from a mere inconvenience, and such hardship or difficulty has
not been created by the wireless provider; and



      (2)   Existing utility poles or wireless support structures,
or a new utility pole at the maximum permitted height for a new pole allowed
by this section cannot accommodate the wireless facility at a height
necessary to function effectively, under reasonable terms and conditions; and



      (3)   The use of existing utility poles or other wireless
support structures, or a new utility pole at the maximum permitted height for
a new pole allowed by this section, is not technically feasible.



(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)



§ 12-7-9  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Public safety technology. A wireless provider's operation of a
small wireless facility may not interfere with the frequencies used by a
public safety agency for public safety communications. A wireless provider
must install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will
not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety agency's
communications equipment. Unacceptable interference is determined by and
measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations
addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other
spectrum licenses by a public safety agency. If a small wireless facility
causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been given written
notice of the interference by the public safety agency, the wireless
provider, at its own expense, shall take all reasonable steps necessary to
correct and eliminate the interference, including, but not limited to,
powering down the small wireless facility and later powering up the small
wireless facility for intermittent testing, if necessary. The village may
terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference
if the wireless provider is not making a good faith effort to remedy the
problem in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures
for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC,
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47
CFR 90.675. The burden to establish the good faith effort shall be on the
wireless provider, which shall timely deliver to the village all information
necessary to demonstrate its efforts to resolve the interference consistent
with the Code of Federal Regulations sections cited above. Failure to remedy
the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance and
the small wireless facility may be abated through the procedures for
abatement of such nuisances set forth in this code.



   (B)   A wireless provider shall not construct or maintain any small
wireless facility that:



      (1)   Obstructs, impedes or hinders the usual travel or public
safety on a right-of-way;



      (2)   Obstructs the legal use of right-of-way by utility users;



      (3)   Violates nondiscriminatory applicable codes;



      (4)   Violates or conflicts with Chapter 12, Article 7, or
other applicable regulations set forth in this code or otherwise adopted by
the village, except to the extent such chapters, sections or regulations may
be modified by the provisions of this article; or



      (5)   Violates the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990 (42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.)



   (C)   Contractual requirements. Wireless providers shall comply with
all requirements imposed by a contract between the village and any private
property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to
utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.



   (D)   Ground mounted equipment. Wireless providers shall comply with
the ground mounted equipment spacing requirements within rights-of-way as set
forth in Chapter 12, Article 5 of this code.



   (E)   Undergrounding.



      (1)   The wireless provider shall comply with village code
provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements, if any,
that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility
poles or equipment in the right-of-way.



      (2)   A wireless provider may receive a waiver from the
Village Engineer to allow small wireless facilities to be located above
ground in an area where village ordinances or regulations prohibit or
restrict above ground facilities if the wireless provider can establish that:



         (a)   Underground equipment is not technically feasible
and there is no reasonable alternative or location that is more aesthetically
favorable to adjacent property owners and to effective use and management of
the right-of-way; and



         (b)   An above ground small wireless facility at the
proposed location is necessary at the proposed location to provide coverage
in a specified area; and



         (c)   An above ground small wireless facility at the
proposed location will not disrupt traffic or pedestrian circulation or
constitute a safety hazard; and



         (d)   An above ground small wireless facility at the
proposed location will not interfere with public safety uses or frequencies;
and



         (e)   Space exists within the public right-of-way to
accommodate the above ground small wireless facility at the proposed
location; and



         (f)   An above ground small wireless facility at the
proposed location will not create a safety hazard; and



         (g)   The above ground small wireless facility is
located and designed in such a way so as to minimize its visual impact on
adjacent properties; and



         (h)   In any historical area, that the above ground
small wireless facility will not detrimentally affect the historical nature
of the area.



      (3)   Screening for ground mounted facilities. Where a ground
mounted facility is allowed, such equipment shall be screened around the
perimeter in accordance with a landscape plan sealed by a professional
landscape engineer.  Plant materials shall include a mixture of deciduous
and coniferous planting materials.  The owner or wireless provider shall be
responsible for maintenance of all landscaping as provided in the approved
landscape plan.



      (4)   Future undergrounding. The village may, from time to
time, make a decision to eliminate above ground utility poles of a particular
type generally, such as electric utility poles, in all or a significant
portion of the village. In the event that such a utility pole has a
collocated small wireless facility in place at the time of such a decision,
the village shall either:



         (a)   Continue to maintain the utility pole, or install
and maintain a reasonable utility pole or wireless support structure for the
collocation of the small wireless facility; or



         (b)   Offer to sell the utility pole to the wireless
provider at a reasonable cost, or allow the wireless provider to install its
own utility pole so it can maintain service from that location.



   (F)   Collocation limits.



      (1)   Wireless providers shall not collocate small wireless
facilities on village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution
or transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the
pole or the electric supply zone of the pole.



      (2)   However, the antenna and support equipment of the small
wireless facility may be located in the communications space on the village
utility pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the
wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top
of the pole.



      (3)   For purposes of this division (F), the terms
COMMUNICATIONS SPACE, COMMUNICATION WORKER SAFETY ZONE, and ELECTRIC SUPPLY
ZONE have the meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety
Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.



   (G)   Code compliance. Wireless providers shall comply with
applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public
safety.



(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)



§ 12-7-10  STEALTH, CONCEALMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS.



   Every small wireless facility installation shall comply with the
following standards:



   (A)   General stealth, concealment and design standards.
Installations shall comply with any stealth, concealment, design and
aesthetic standards applicable to utility installations in the public
right-of-way, as set forth in Chapter 12, Article 7 of this code, as well as
any written design standards that are generally applicable for decorative
utility poles, or reasonable stealth, concealment, design and aesthetic
requirements that are otherwise identified by the village in an ordinance,
written policy adopted by the Village Board of Trustees, in the village's
comprehensive plan, or in a written design plan that applies to other
occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a
historic district.



   (B)   Historic districts and landmarks. For areas designated as
historic districts, or on buildings or structures designated as historic
landmarks, in addition to the stealth, concealment and design requirements
referenced above, small wireless facilities shall be comprised of materials
that are consistent with the surrounding elements so as to blend
architecturally with any buildings or structures designated as historic
landmarks or located within a designated historic district, and shall be
designed to blend with the surrounding historical landmarks and/or district
in design and color.  Small wireless facilities shall also comply with any
additional design/stealth restrictions or conditions adopted for historic
landmarks.



   (C)   Limitations.



      (1)   Any stealth, concealment and design standards, including
restrictions on a specific category of utility poles, may not have the effect
of prohibiting any provider's technology. Such stealth, concealment and
design measures shall not be considered a part of the small wireless facility
for purposes of the size restrictions of a small wireless facility.



      (2)   This division (C) shall not be construed to limit the
village's enforcement of historic preservation in conformance with the
requirements adopted pursuant to the Illinois State Agency Historic Resources
Preservation Act or the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, 54 U.S.C.
§§ 300101 et seq., and the regulations adopted to implement those laws.



(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)



§ 12-7-11  RESERVATION OF VILLAGE UTILITY POLE SPACE.



   The village may reserve space on village-owned utility poles for future
public safety uses or for village electric utility uses. Such reservation may
preclude collocation of small wireless facilities if the village reasonably
determines that the village's utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.



(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)



§ 12-7-12  APPLICABILITY OF EXISTING AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   Existing installations. Subject to any applicable termination
provisions, where an existing agreement is in place between the village and a
wireless provider relating to the collocation of small wireless facilities on
village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such agreement shall remain in effect
for all small wireless facilities collocated on the village's utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted prior to June 1, 2018.



   (B)   Applications received between June 1, 2018 and June 1, 2020.
Subject to any applicable termination provisions, where an existing agreement
is in place between the village and a wireless provider relating to the
collocation of small wireless facilities on village utility poles on June 1,
2018, such agreement shall remain in effect for all small wireless facilities
collocated on the village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted
after June 1, 2018, but prior to June 1, 2020, until June 1, 2020 or receipt
by the village from the wireless provider of a notice that it is opting to
accept the rates, fees and terms of this article and the Act received after
June 1, 2020, whichever is later.



   (C)   Applications received after June 1, 2020. Subject to any
applicable termination provisions, where an existing agreement is in place
between the village and a wireless provider relating to the collocation of
small wireless facilities on village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such
agreement shall remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated
on the village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted after June
1, 2020, until receipt by the village of a notice from the wireless provider
that it is accepting the rates, fees, terms and conditions of this article.



(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)



§ 12-7-13  COLLOCATION ON VILLAGE-OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE.



   (A)   Fee. The annual fee to collocate a small wireless facility on
a village-owned utility pole located in a right-of-way shall be the higher of:



      (1)   Two hundred dollars per year per small wireless
facility; or



      (2)   The actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the
wireless providers use of space on the pole.



   (B)   Exception. Small wireless facilities collocated on
village-owned utility poles located outside of public right-of-way are not
subject to the rate limitations in this section.



   (C)   Attachment agreement. An attachment agreement in a form
approved by the village is required for any collocation upon any
village-owned utility pole or wireless support structure.



(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)



§ 12-7-14  NOTICE OF SALE OR TRANSFER.



   A wireless provider shall, prior to any sale or transfer of ownership
or control of a small wireless facility located within the jurisdiction of
the village, provide written notice to the village of such sale or transfer
of control. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the
new wireless provider.



(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)



§ 12-7-15  ABANDONMENT.



   (A)   A small wireless facility that is not operated for a
continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned and the owner of
the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after
receipt of written notice from the village notifying it of the abandonment.
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, by the village to the owner at its last known address. If the
small wireless facility is not removed within 90 days after receipt of such
notice, such wireless facility shall be deemed to be a nuisance and the
village may remove or cause the removal of such facility, and recover or
place a lien for its costs, pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment or
other agreement for village utility poles or through the procedures for
abatement of nuisances set forth in this code.



   (B)   In the event the village suspects that the wireless provider
is no longer using the small wireless facilities to provide wireless service,
it may send the wireless provider written notice that requires the wireless
provider to remove the small wireless facility or provide proof that the
small wireless facility is operational and still being used within 30 days,
and informs the wireless provider that failure to provide proof or to remove
the small wireless facility will result in the village removing the small
wireless facility at the wireless provider's cost.



(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)



§ 12-7-16  DISPUTE RESOLUTION.



   The Circuit Court of Du Page County shall have exclusive jurisdiction
to resolve all disputes arising under the Act. Pending resolution of a
dispute concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on
village utility poles within the right-of-way, the village shall allow the
collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than
$200 per year per pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of
the dispute.



(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)



§ 12-7-17  INDEMNIFICATION.



   Other than for liabilities and losses due to or caused by the sole
negligence of the village or its employees or agents, a wireless provider
shall indemnify and hold the village harmless against any and all liability
or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising out
of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the village infrastructure
or improvements, or right-of-way associated with such infrastructure or
improvements by the wireless provider or its employees, agents, or
contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this
article and the Act. A wireless provider proceeding under this article waives
any claims it may have against the village with respect to consequential,
incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of
liability.



(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)



§ 12-7-18  INSURANCE.



   At all times during the period in which a wireless provider's
facilities are located on village infrastructure, improvements or in
right-of-way, the wireless provider shall, at its own sole cost and expense,
carry the following insurance coverages:



   (A)   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against
all risks;



   (B)   Workers' compensation insurance within statutory limits as
required by law; and



   (C)   (1)   Commercial general liability insurance with respect
to its activities on the village infrastructure, improvements or
rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and property damage, with
limits not less than:



         (a)   Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to
each person;



         (b)   Five million dollars for property damage resulting
from any one accident; and



         (c)   Five million dollars for all other types of
liability.



      (2)   The wireless provider shall include the village as an
additional insured on the commercial general liability policy and shall
provide certificates of insurance and proof of inclusion of the village in a
commercial general liability policy to the village prior to the collocation
of any small wireless facility, and shall keep updated certificates and proof
of inclusion on file with the village at all times that the provider
maintains small wireless facilities within the village. 



   (D)   A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limits required by the village. A wireless provider
that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to
comply with the requirement that the village be named an additional insured.
A wireless provider that self-insures shall provide to the village evidence
sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance
limits required by the village.



(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)



§ 12-7-19  MAINTENANCE OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.



   (A)   A wireless provider shall maintain all small wireless
facilities installed within the village in a condition that maintains the
safety, integrity and aesthetics of such facilities. Small wireless
facilities shall not appear to be unkempt. In the event of a failure to
properly maintain such facilities, the village shall notify the wireless
provider, in writing, who shall have 30 days to correct the identified
maintenance violation. If not corrected within such period, the village
reserves the right to take such action as it deems necessary, including
revocation of the permit. Maintenance and replacement of small wireless
facilities shall be performed by the wireless provider at the wireless
provider's sole cost and expense.



   (B)   In the event of an emergency involving an imminent threat to
life or property, the village may take corrective action to eliminate such
emergency at the wireless provider's expense.



(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)



§ 12-7-20  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   A permit to collocate a small wireless facility may be revoked
for one or more of the following reasons:



      (1)   The wireless provider obtained approval by means of
fraud or made a misrepresentation of a material fact with respect to the
permit application, or any required documentation or submittal.



      (2)   The wireless provider failed to construct the small
wireless facility in accordance with the approved plans.



      (3)   The wireless provider failed to comply within any
material condition of a permit issued.



      (4)   The wireless provider substantially expanded or altered
the use or the structure of the small wireless facility beyond what was
requested in the permit application or approved, without the approval of the
village.



      (5)   The wireless provider failed to notify the village of
the replacement of small wireless facilities as required by this article.



      (6)   A substantial change of law has occurred affecting the
wireless provider's authority to occupy or use the property upon which the
small wireless facility is located.



      (7)   The small wireless facility interferes with vehicular or
pedestrian use of the public right-of-way.



      (8)   The wireless provider has failed to make a safe and
timely restoration of the right-of-way or the property upon which the small
wireless facility is located.



      (9)   The wireless provider has failed to properly maintain
the wireless facility as required by this article.



      (10)   The wireless provider has failed to abate interference
with public safety communications in a manner consistent with the abatement
and resolution procedures for interference with public safety spectrum
established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47
CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675.



      (11)   The small wireless facility has been abandoned and the
wireless provider has failed to remove the small wireless facilities as
provided in this article.



   (B)   Written notification of the permit revocation shall be sent by
certified mail or shall be personally delivered to the wireless provider
setting forth the basis for the revocation.  The wireless provider shall,
within 14 days of the notice of revocation, file a written response with the
Village Engineer setting forth the reasons why the permit should not be
revoked along with such evidence in opposition to the revocation as the
wireless provider determines necessary.  Failure to file a response with the
Village Engineer shall be deemed an admission of the facts set forth in the
notification of written notification and shall result in automatic revocation
of the permit. The Village Engineer shall render findings and a decision
within 21 days of the date of receipt of the wireless provider's response, if
any.



   (C)   If the Village Engineer revokes the permit, the wireless
provider may file a written notice of appeal with the Village Clerk within 21
days of notification of the permit revocation. Such notice shall contain a
response to the decision of the Village Engineer. The Village Board shall
hear the revocation appeal and render a decision on such appeal.



(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)



§ 12-7-21  EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY.



   This article does not apply to the collocation of small wireless
facilities on:



   (A)   Property owned by a private party;



   (B)   Property owned or controlled by a unit of local government
that is not located within rights-of-way (local governments are, however,
required to authorize the collocation of small wireless facilities on utility
poles owned or controlled by the local government or located within
rights-of-way to the same extent the local government permits access to
utility poles for other commercial projects or uses);



   (C)   A privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure,
without the consent of the property owner;



   (D)   Property owned, leased or controlled by a park district,
forest preserve district, or conservation district for public park,
recreation or conservation purposes, without the consent of the affected
district, excluding the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in
an affected district that are under the jurisdiction and control of a
different unit of local government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code
(605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.);



   (E)   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under § 18c-7201
of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/18c-7201), Metra Commuter Rail or
any other public commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in
§ 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/16-102), without the
consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail service, or electric
utility;



   (F)   Facilities of an electric or gas public utility or such
utility's wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and
maintained consistent with the provisions of § 16-108.5(i) of the Public
Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/16-108.5(i)); or



   (G)   Small wireless facilities owned by the village.



(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)



CHAPTER 13: WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS



      Article



         1.   ADMINISTRATION



         2.   WATER AND SEWER CONNECTIONS, CHARGES AND REGULATIONS



         3.   WATER SERVICE REGULATIONS, METERS, RATES AND
COLLECTIONS



         4.   SEWERS, SEWAGE DISPOSAL, DISCHARGE STANDARDS,
PRETREATMENT, WASTEWATER USE CHARGES AND COLLECTIONS



         5.   STORM DRAINAGE; ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND
ELIMINATION



ARTICLE 1:  ADMINISTRATION



Section



   13-1-1   Waterworks as combined utility



   13-1-2   Compliance with specifications required



   13-1-3   Village Manager to run combined system



   13-1-4   Superintendent, office created; appointment



   13-1-5   Reading meters, collecting bills and the like



   13-1-6   Records to be open



   13-1-7   Reports



   13-1-8   Waterworks and Sewerage Fund



   13-1-9   Records, accounts, audit



   13-1-10   Moneys to be held separate and apart



   13-1-11   Permit required for repairs



   13-1-12   Who may break seal



   13-1-13   Liability



   13-1-14   Enforcement



§ 13-1-1  WATERWORKS AS COMBINED UTILITY.



   The waterworks system of the village and the sanitary sewerage system
owned and operated by the village as a combined utility shall be known as the
“combined waterworks and sewerage system”.



§ 13-1-2  COMPLIANCE WITH SPECIFICATIONS REQUIRED.



   All service pipes and connections to the combined waterworks and
sewerage system shall comply with such specifications and rules. Any person
not complying with the specifications and rules for connection to the
waterworks and sewerage system shall be subject to a penalty as provided in
§ 1-1-9 of this code.



§ 13-1-3  VILLAGE MANAGER TO RUN COMBINED SYSTEM.



   The Village Manager shall have jurisdiction over the supervision,
management and control of the maintenance, enlargement and operation of the
combined waterworks and sewerage system subject to the control exercised by
the Village President and Board of Trustees.



§ 13-1-4  SUPERINTENDENT, OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT.



   There shall be a Superintendent of the waterworks and sewerage system.
Such Superintendent shall be appointed by the Village Manager to enforce all
of the provisions of this chapter and to observe and obey and carry out the
orders and directions of the Village Manager.



§ 13-1-5  READING METERS, COLLECTING BILLS AND THE LIKE.



   The Village Manager, or such officer or employees of the waterworks and
sewerage system as he or she shall direct, shall read water meters, prepare
and distribute bills, collect the water and sewer rates, issue water and
sewer permits, and shall perform such other duties as now are or may
hereafter be imposed upon him or her by law or the ordinances of the village.



§ 13-1-6  RECORDS TO BE OPEN.



   The Finance Director shall keep, or cause to be kept, full and complete
books of accounts relative to the combined system separate and apart from any
other records of the village, showing in detail all money received by him or
her with dates and sources and all matters pertaining to his or her office in
a clear and methodical manner. He or she shall also keep such other books
relative to such system as the Village President and Board of Trustees may,
from time to time, direct. All such books, accounts and papers pertaining to
such office shall, at all reasonable times, be open to the inspection of the
Village President and Board of Trustees, any member thereof, the holder of
any outstanding waterworks and sewerage revenue bonds, or any duly authorized
agent or agents of such holder.



§ 13-1-7  REPORTS.



   (A)   The Village Manager, together with the Finance Director, shall
submit a monthly report to the Village President and Board of Trustees,
listing therein, but not limited to, the following data received to the
combined system:



      (1)   Billings for services rendered;



      (2)   Collections;



      (3)   Expenditures and accounts charged; and



      (4)   Cash balances at beginning and end of period.



   (B)   In addition to the filing of a monthly report, the Village
Manager and the Finance Director shall file an annual report, listing, in
addition to the above divisions (A)(1) through (A)(4), the following:



      (1)   Applications for service approved and fees received;



      (2)   Volume of water purchased, billed and unaccounted for;



      (3)   Number of metered and unmetered customers connected to
the system at the beginning and at the end of period; and



      (4)   Details of any major repairs and extensions to mains or
other pertinent facts.



§ 13-1-8  WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE FUND.



   The Finance Director shall receive all revenues from the combined
waterworks and sewerage system and all other funds and moneys incident to the
operation of such system as the same may be delivered to him or her and
deposit the same in a separate fund designated as the “Waterworks and
Sewerage Fund of the Village of Carol Stream”, and the Finance Director
shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by the
provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-139-1 et seq., and all laws amendatory thereof and
supplementary thereto.



§ 13-1-9  RECORDS, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT.



   The Finance Director shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the combined waterworks
and sewerage system and, at regular annual intervals, he or she shall cause
to be made an audit of the books by an independent auditing concern to show
the receipts and disbursements of the combined waterworks and sewerage system.



§ 13-1-10  MONEYS TO BE HELD SEPARATE AND APART.



   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the combined
waterworks and sewerage system shall be held by the Village Treasurer
separate and apart from his or her private funds and separate and apart from
all other funds of the village.



§ 13-1-11  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR REPAIRS.



   No person shall repair any sanitary building sewer or water main or
service without first obtaining a written permit for such work from the
Public Works Department.



§ 13-1-12  WHO MAY BREAK SEAL.



   No seal placed by the village for the protection of any meter, valve,
fitting or other water connection shall be defaced or broken, except on
written authority from the Village Manager or his or her designated
representative.



§ 13-1-13  LIABILITY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the village
by reason of such violation.



§ 13-1-14  ENFORCEMENT.



   The following officers or employees of the village are granted police
powers for the purpose of seeing to compliance and enforcement of sections of
Ch. 13 of this code: the Superintendent of the combined waterworks and
sewerage system, the Wastewater Treatment Plant Foreperson and the Water and
Sewer System Forepersons.



ARTICLE 2:  WATER AND SEWER CONNECTIONS, CHARGES AND REGULATIONS



Section



   13-2-1   When connection to system is required for new construction



   13-2-2   Application; permit



   13-2-3   Classes of building sewer permits



   13-2-4   Adequate capacity of sewerage system required for permit
issuance



   13-2-5   Construction by licensed plumber required; inspection



   13-2-6   Liability for costs joint and severable



   13-2-7   Insurance required for water or sewer connection, extension



   13-2-8   Performance security for sewer connection, extension



   13-2-9   Indemnification for harm done



   13-2-10   Cost of water and sewer service



   13-2-11   Establishing a connection fee; when assessed; determination



   13-2-12   Water connection tap-on fee



   13-2-13   Sewer connection tap-on fee



   13-2-14   Water and sewer expansion connection fee; residential



   13-2-15   Water and sewer expansion connection fee; commercial,
institutional, industrial



   13-2-16   Report required



   13-2-17   Disposition of revenue



   13-2-18   Acceptance of donations in lieu of fees



   13-2-19   Connections to conform to prescribed method



   13-2-20   Discharge in compliance with federal, state and local
requirements



   13-2-21   Inspection of connections of sewer and water services



   13-2-22   Excavations to be lighted, guarded; restoring property



   13-2-23   Excavations; backfill



   13-2-24   Cross-connections with system prohibited



   13-2-25   Service lines and curb stops for multi-unit commercial
buildings or incubator-type buildings



   13-2-26   Separate building sewer for each building required;
exception



   13-2-27   When old building sewers may be used



   13-2-28   Prohibition of connection of surface runoff or ground
water to a sewer



   13-2-29   Size, slope, materials, joints and the like of building
sewers



   13-2-30   Depth, grade and alignment of sewer



   13-2-31   Connection of building sewer service to sewer main



   13-2-32   Use of water pressure ejectors, pumps and the like to
discharge sewage



§ 13-2-1  WHEN CONNECTION TO SYSTEM IS REQUIRED FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION.



   It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or party or parties in
possession of any house, structure, factory, industrial or commercial
establishment, or any other building of any other character located on
property abutting on the public waterworks and sewerage system, to cause such
house, structure, factory, industrial or commercial establishment, or any
other building of any other character to be connected with the combined
waterworks and sewerage system within 90 days from the date that water or
sewerage facilities become available to such property.



§ 13-2-2  APPLICATION; PERMIT.



   No person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use,
alter or disturb the water mains or the sewer mains of the combined
waterworks and sewerage system of the village without a permit from the
Community Development Department.



§ 13-2-3  CLASSES OF BUILDING SEWER PERMITS.



   (A)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:



      (1)   For users producing sanitary waste-water; and



      (2)   For service to establishments producing industrial
wastes.



   (B)   In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make
application on a form furnished by the village. The application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information reasonably
required by the Village Engineer. Connection fees for a residential or
commercial building sewer permit shall be paid to the village at the time the
application is filed. An industrial applicant, as a condition of permit
authorization, must provide such information describing its wastewater
constituents, characteristics and type of activity, as the Engineer may
reasonably require.



§ 13-2-4  ADEQUATE CAPACITY OF SEWERAGE SYSTEM REQUIRED FOR PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection
shall only be allowed if the downstream sewerage facilities, including
sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient
reserve capacity adequately and efficiently to handle the additional
anticipated waste load.



§ 13-2-5  CONSTRUCTION BY LICENSED PLUMBER REQUIRED; INSPECTION.



   The construction work in connection with the water and sewer service
shall be performed by a licensed plumber who shall file a copy of a current
license with the Community Development Department when requested to do so.



§ 13-2-6  LIABILITY FOR COSTS JOINT AND SEVERABLE.



   The liability of the owner or occupant of any premises for the cost of
constructing, maintaining and repairing water or sewer service shall be both
joint and severable.



§ 13-2-7  INSURANCE REQUIRED FOR WATER OR SEWER CONNECTION, EXTENSION.



   No permit for a water or sewer connection or a water or sewer extension
shall be issued by the Village Manager or his or her designee unless the
person applying therefor, or the contractor, shall have first procured public
liability insurance, in a form acceptable to the village, in an amount not
less than $1,000,000 for injuries, including accidental death, to any one
person and subject to the same limit for each person in an amount not less
than $1,000,000 on account of one accident, and property damage insurance in
an amount not less than $1,000,000. The persons to be indemnified and saved
harmless in such insurance policy shall be the village, its officers, agents
and employees, and the applicant for water or sewer connection or extension.
A certificate of such insurance shall be filed with the village naming the
Village of Carol Stream as an additional insured on the general liability
policy.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010)



§ 13-2-8  PERFORMANCE SECURITY FOR SEWER CONNECTION, EXTENSION.



   No permit for a water or sewer connection or extension shall be issued
by the Village Manager or his or her designee unless the person applying
therefor, or the contractor, shall have provided cash, an irrevocable letter
of credit or a surety bond in an amount equal to the cost of the improvements
as estimated by the Village Engineer or his or her designee and conditioned
upon the completion and acceptance by the Village Engineer of all work
required by the permit. Such performance surety shall be approved by the
Village Attorney, conditioned upon the applicant indemnifying, saving
harmless and agreeing to pay for the costs of defense incurred by the
village, for all damage to underground utilities, or to the water and sewer
mains and laterals of the village, and from any failure to restore any road,
ditch, pavement or portion thereof damaged during the construction of the
sewer connection, or the sewer extension to the condition existing at the
commencement of construction.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010)



§ 13-2-9  INDEMNIFICATION FOR HARM DONE.



   The owner shall indemnify the village for any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building
sewer or water service on his or her premises.



§ 13-2-10  COST OF WATER AND SEWER SERVICE.



   All applicants for water and sewer service shall provide and pay the
costs of construction, maintenance and repair, both labor and material, of
the water service from the main to the premises to be served.



§ 13-2-11  ESTABLISHING A CONNECTION FEE; WHEN ASSESSED; DETERMINATION.



   (A)   Pursuant to authority granted in 65 ILCS 5/11-150-1, there is
hereby established within the village a charge for connection to the
waterworks or sewerage systems of the village, such a charge to be assessed
against new or additional users within connections to the sewerage collection
and treatment system or the water system of the village and to be known as a
connection charge.  The charge shall be as prescribed in § 6-13-8.



   (B)   For the connection charge, the village will inspect the water
service to determine that the construction hereof is in accordance with
specifications established by the village for the regulations of the water
and sewerage system.



   (C)   The connection charge shall be determined by adding together
three subcharges, as prescribed in § 6-13-8, the sum of which shall
constitute the total connection fee for entrance into the water and/or sewer
system. The three subcharges shall be known as:



      (1)   The water connection tap-on fee;



      (2)   The sewer connection tap-on fee; and



      (3)   The water and sewer expansion connection fee.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010)



§ 13-2-12  WATER CONNECTION TAP-ON FEE.



   The water connection tap-on fee shall be as prescribed in § 6-13-8.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010)



§ 13-2-13  SEWER CONNECTION TAP-ON FEE.



   The sewer connection tap-on fee shall be as prescribed in § 6-13-8.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010)



§ 13-2-14  WATER AND SEWER EXPANSION CONNECTION FEE; RESIDENTIAL.



   The water and sewer expansion connection fee shall be as prescribed in
§ 6-13-8.



(Ord. 91-02-14, passed 2-26-1991; Ord. 99-12-68, passed 12-6-1999; Ord.
2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010)



§ 13-2-15  WATER AND SEWER EXPANSION CONNECTION FEE; COMMERCIAL,
INSTITUTIONAL, INDUSTRIAL.



   The water and sewer expansion connection fee for commercial,
institutional and industrial users shall be as prescribed in § 6-13-8.



(Ord. 91-02-14, passed 2-26-1991; Ord. 99-12-68, passed 12-6-1999; Ord.
2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010)



§ 13-2-16  REPORT REQUIRED.



   The Village Manager shall be required to report to the corporate
authorities on at least an annual basis as to whether the amount of the water
and sewer expansion connection fee is sufficient to cause the reproduction of
the amount of water and sewer capacity taken up by connections to the system.



§ 13-2-17  DISPOSITION OF REVENUE.



   (A)   The revenue received by the village from the water connection
tap-on fee and sewer connection tap-on fee shall be deposited in the existing
Waterworks and Sewerage Fund of the village.



   (B)   The revenue received by the village from the “water and
sewer expansion connection fee” shall be used by the village for its
general corporate purposes, with primary application thereof being made by
the necessary expansion of the works of the system to meet the requirements
of the new users thereof; such funds shall be placed (until they are used)
into a fund which shall be known as the Waterworks and Sewer Expansion
Connection Fund. The moneys to the credit of such fund may be invested from
time to time by the Village Treasurer.



§ 13-2-18  ACCEPTANCE OF DONATIONS IN LIEU OF FEES.



   The village may accept a donation of construction, expansion or
extension of the works of its system in lieu of all or part of connection
fees established in § 6-13-8.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010)



§ 13-2-19  CONNECTIONS TO CONFORM TO PRESCRIBED METHOD.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to make any connection or opening with
the waterworks and sewerage system in any manner different from the method
prescribed for such opening or connection.



   (B)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer and
the water service into the water main shall conform to the requirements of
the village’s Building Code and Plumbing Code, and other applicable rules
and regulations of the village, and the procedures set forth in that
publication entitled Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois, published by the Standard Specifications Committee
of the Illinois Society of Professional Engineers, and other similar
organizations, third edition. All such connections shall be made gas-tight
and water-tight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials
must be approved in writing by the Village Engineer before installation.



§ 13-2-20  DISCHARGE IN COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL, STATE AND LOCAL
REQUIREMENTS.



   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful, except
those discharges in compliance with regulations promulgated under federal law
or more stringent state and local standards, pursuant to the State
Environmental Protection Act or this chapter.



§ 13-2-21  INSPECTION OF CONNECTIONS OF SEWER AND WATER SERVICES.



   The applicant for the building permit shall notify the Community
Development Department when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the Village Engineer or his or her designee.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010)



§ 13-2-22  EXCAVATIONS TO BE LIGHTED, GUARDED; RESTORING PROPERTY.



   All excavations for building sewer installations undertaken by private
parties shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to
protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public
property disturbed in the course of work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the village.



§ 13-2-23  EXCAVATIONS; BACKFILL.



   All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall
be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the village. Pipe laying and
backfill shall be performed in accordance with the latest ASTM
specifications; except that, no backfill shall be placed until the work has
been inspected.



§ 13-2-24  CROSS-CONNECTIONS WITH SYSTEM PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Whenever a system of water supply piping, either inside or
outside of any building, receives its supply from any source other than the
waterworks system of the village, such system shall be kept entirely separate
from and no cross-connections or connections of any kind shall be made with
any pipe or system of piping which receives its supply from the village
waterworks system.



   (B)   Water which has once been used for any purpose whatsoever
shall not be returned to the building’s water supply system.



§ 13-2-25  SERVICE LINES AND CURB STOPS FOR MULTI-UNIT COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS
OR INCUBATOR-TYPE BUILDINGS.



   No multi-unit commercial building or incubator-type building shall be
constructed with only one service line and one curb stop. An INCUBATOR-TYPE
BUILDING is defined as a commercial or industrial structure which is built
with the intention of dividing the usage among a number of tenants. Each unit
within a multi-unit commercial building or incubator-type building shall be
served with a separate meter and service line with a curb stop on each
service. The separate meter and service line shall be located outside of the
building near the supply line in a location where the meter can be easily
read. A common header main shall run for the entire length of the building on
the outside of the structure with individual service lines branching from the
common header main to each separate unit; provided, however, that, a single
meter is allowed to serve a multi-unit commercial building or incubator-type
building where the building is in single ownership or in unified control so
that the owner of the building or the managing agent of the building is
responsible for paying the unified water bill, and the property owner agrees
to place a covenant on the title of the property running to the benefit of
the village whereby, upon the sale of the property to more than one
individual, firm or corporation, or upon the partition of the property into
more than one parcel, separately needed water services in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter will be installed.



§ 13-2-26  SEPARATE BUILDING SEWER FOR EACH BUILDING REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.



   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except that, where one stands at the rear of another on an interior
lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear
building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.



§ 13-2-27  WHEN OLD BUILDING SEWERS MAY BE USED.



   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found by the Village Engineer to meet all requirements of this
code.



§ 13-2-28  PROHIBITION OF CONNECTION OF SURFACE RUNOFF OR GROUND WATER TO A
SEWER.



   No person shall make connection of roof down-spouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or
ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.



§ 13-2-29  SIZE, SLOPE, MATERIALS, JOINTS AND THE LIKE OF BUILDING SEWERS.



   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
joining, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the
requirements of the Building Code and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules
and regulations of the village. In no event shall the diameter of the pipe be
less than six inches. The slope of such six inch pipe shall not be less than
one-eighth inch per foot. In the absence of code provisions or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois, published by the Standard Specification Committee
of the Illinois Society of Professional Engineers and other similar
organizations, third edition, shall apply.



§ 13-2-30  DEPTH, GRADE AND ALIGNMENT OF SEWER.



   (A)   No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three
feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be
sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer shall be laid
at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in
direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings.



   (B)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is not four feet above the top of the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means
which is approved by the Village Engineer and discharged by the building
sewer.



§ 13-2-31  CONNECTION OF BUILDING SEWER SERVICE TO SEWER MAIN.



   (A)   The building sewer shall generally enter the sewer main or
lateral by way of an existing “Y” or tee. In the event of absence of the
“Y” or tee, the connection to the sewer main or lateral shall be made by
the following methods:



      (1)   Installation of a manhole;



      (2)   Circular saw cut of sewer main by proper tools and
proper installation of hub “Y” saddle or hub tee saddle in accordance
with manufacturer’s recommended instructions; and



      (3)   Use of pipe cutter to neatly and accurately cut out the
desired length of pipe for inserting a “Y” or tee fitting. Use stainless
steel shear rings and band seal couplings for connecting sewer pipes together.



   (B)   Indiscriminate breaking of the sewer main pipe for break-in
connection is expressly prohibited. The invert of the building sewer at the
point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the
invert of the public sewer.



§ 13-2-32  USE OF WATER PRESSURE EJECTORS, PUMPS AND THE LIKE TO DISCHARGE
SEWAGE.



   Water pressure ejectors, siphons or pumps of any nature shall not be
installed for discharging any sewage or waste, unless adequately protected
against back-siphonage, without the permission of the Village Engineer, and
such permission shall be revocable at will.



ARTICLE 3:  WATER SERVICE REGULATIONS, METERS, RATES AND COLLECTIONS



Section



   13-3-1   Turning on water supply



   13-3-2   Water to be supplied through meters; exception



   13-3-3   Meters property of village



   13-3-4   Type of meters



   13-3-5   Cost of meters



   13-3-6   Location of meters



   13-3-7   Removal and repair of meters; meter stop



   13-3-8   Maintenance cost; damage to meter



   13-3-9   Damages; notice of defective meter



   13-3-10   Use of water without meter; temporary meter



   13-3-11   No interest paid on deposit; return of deposit



   13-3-12   Rate making method



   13-3-13   Rates



   13-3-14   Estimated bills



   13-3-15   Joint, several liability for charges



   13-3-16   When charges are payable; penalty



   13-3-17   Delinquent accounts; lien claims; foreclosure



   13-3-18   Discontinuation of service for non-payment; obstructing
access to equipment; reinstatement



   13-3-19   Meter reading required upon entering or vacating premises



   13-3-20   Payment of previous charges prior to commencement of new
service



   13-3-21   Waste of water; misrepresentation, fraud



   13-3-22   Supplying water to other persons



   13-3-23   Use of water from fire hydrants



   13-3-24   Sale of water outside village prohibited



   13-3-25   Obstructing access to equipment



   13-3-26   Use of water for cleaning sanitary sewer mains prohibited



   13-3-27   Practices regulated; lawn sprinkling



   13-3-28   Emergency provisions



   13-3-29   Special provisions for new lawns, existing lawns, new and
restorative landscaping



   13-3-30   Exemptions



   13-3-31   Enforcement authority



   13-3-32   Penalties



§ 13-3-1  TURNING ON WATER SUPPLY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person not duly authorized to turn on any
service cock, or use water therefrom when so turned on, and the person so
using or wasting in such unlawful manner shall be liable to pay for all water
used; and, in addition, any person who violates any provision of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $50, nor more than
$750.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-2  WATER TO BE SUPPLIED THROUGH METERS; EXCEPTION.



   All water consumers supplied by the village shall be supplied through
meters. However, where it is temporarily impractical to set a meter, the use
and consumption of water shall be governed by other applicable provisions of
this chapter.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-3  METERS PROPERTY OF VILLAGE.



   All water meters used in connection with the waterworks and sewerage
system shall be and remain for all time the property of the village.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-4  TYPE OF METERS.



   The Village Manager or his or her designee shall, in all cases,
determine the kind and pattern of water meters to be installed, and no other
kind shall be installed at any time.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-5  COST OF METERS.



   The water meter shall be furnished by the village and a charge made to
cover the cost of the meter.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-6  LOCATION OF METERS.



   Water meters shall be located at such places and in such manner as the
Village Manager or his or her designee shall direct, within the premises to
be served or in boxes or vaults as he or she shall determine, and all such
installations shall be made in accordance with the specifications to be
prescribed by the Village Manager or his or her designee, and such meter
locations must be so situated as to prevent freezing or water flowing through
such meters.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-7  REMOVAL AND REPAIR OF METERS; METER STOP.



   After any water meter is placed, only officers or employees of the
Public Works Department shall be allowed to repair, remove or in any manner
interfere with such meter. A meter stop or valve shall be placed on each side
of the meter.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-8  MAINTENANCE COST; DAMAGE TO METER.



   The ordinary cost of keeping each meter in repair shall be paid by the
village. The person upon whose application any meter is installed, or the
then owner and/or occupant of the premises served, shall be jointly and
severally liable for any breakage or damage done to such meter, including
damage by freezing, hot water or breakage and also for the theft thereof, and
the cost of making good such loss or damage shall be paid by the owner and/or
the occupant of the premises in which such meter was installed as soon as the
bill for same is presented and the amount therefor shall be a lien against
the premises for which such meter was installed to the extent and with the
same effect as water rates.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-9  DAMAGES; NOTICE OF DEFECTIVE METER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, deface, mar, destroy or
in any manner to interfere with any water meter. It shall be the duty of the
owner or occupant to promptly notify the Public Works Department of defects
in any such meter, or of its failure to properly register the quantity of
water passing through the same.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-10  USE OF WATER WITHOUT METER; TEMPORARY METER.



   (A)   Before a permit for the use of water shall be issued where
meters cannot be conveniently used, the person applying for such permission
shall deposit $100 as a payment on account of water to be used by him or her.
On or before 30 days from the date of the permit, the person to whom such
permit is issued shall file with the Public Works Department a statement in
writing, verified by his or her affidavit, showing fully the purpose for
which the water was used by him or her for that time, and the amount and
location of all work done by him or her during that time in connection with
which any water was used, or required. The Village Manager shall ascertain
from such statement and any other information the amount due for water so
used. If the amount so found to be due, with all other fees and costs
chargeable against such person, is less than the sum deposited, the surplus
shall be paid back to the depositor. If the amount due for water so used is
more than the sum deposited, then the excess shall be paid at once to the
Finance Department by such person. If such person desires to continue to use
the water after he or she shall have filed his or her statement, he or she
shall again deposit $100 with the Finance Department and shall continue to
make deposits thereafter, and in the same manner as is provided herein with
respect to the first deposit, and the method of determining the amount of
water used and the charge for the same shall be the same as the provisions
respecting the first deposit as hereinbefore provided.



   (B)   Where water is furnished to a consumer through a temporary
meter hook-up, there shall be added to the cost of the actual water used a
charge to be determined from time to time by the Village Manager such that
the village shall recover the cost of the installation and removal of the
temporary water meter.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-11  NO INTEREST PAID ON DEPOSIT; RETURN OF DEPOSIT.



   The village shall pay no interest on the waterworks and sewerage
deposit charge moneys required of the users of the combined waterworks and
sewerage system of the village.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-12  RATE MAKING METHOD.



   All consumers, users or properties in the village shall pay such rates
for the use and service of the waterworks and sewerage system in such manner
and amounts as may be prescribed by ordinance from time to time by the Board
of Trustees.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-13  RATES.



   (A)   There are hereby established rates or charges for the use of
and for the service supplied by the combined waterworks and sewerage system
of the village based upon the amount of water consumed, as shown by the water
meters, as set forth in this article.



   (B)   For each residential single-family, commercial or industrial
user of the combined waterworks and sewerage system within the corporate
limits, the charge for water and sewer service shall be as follows: the
charge shall be $12.80 per each 1,000 gallons or a fraction thereof.



   (C)   For each residential single-family and multi-family,
commercial or industrial user of water service only, within the corporate
limits, the charge for water service only shall be as follows: for each 1,000
gallons, the charge shall be $8.14 per each 1,000 gallons or fraction thereof.



   (D)   For each residential single-family and multi-family,
commercial or industrial user of the sewer service only, within the corporate
limits, the charge for sewer service only shall be as follows: for each 1,000
gallons, the charge shall be $4.66 for each 1,000 gallons or fraction thereof.



   (E)   The payment of such rate for all metered users shall cover all
reasonable usage, but not any other usage which the Mayor and Board of
Trustees determines to be unreasonable. In cases where the character of
sewage from an industrial plant, building or premises shall be such as to
impose a burden upon the sewage treatment plant system, in addition to the
burden imposed by the average sewage entering into the sewerage system of the
village, or in cases where a private water supply is used and returned to the
sewerage system of the village, then the Mayor and Board of Trustees reserve
the right to enter into separate contracts with such industrial plant,
building or premises for special rates and charges where the particular
circumstances render the regular rates for service inadequate or unjust.



(Ord. 91-10-76, passed 10-22-1991; Ord. 94-06-50, passed 6-14-1994; Ord.
97-10-69, passed 10-6-1997; Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000; Ord.
2001-11-54, passed 11-5-2001; Ord. 2003-04-15, passed 4-7-2003; Ord.
2003-07-45, passed 7-21-2003; Ord. 2004-02-09, passed 2-2-2004; Ord.
2005-02-10, passed 2-22-2005; Ord. 2005-05-21, passed 5-2-2005; Ord.
2008-04-08, passed 4-7-2008; Ord. 2009-02-02, passed 2-2-2009; Ord.
2010-01-03, passed 1-19-2010; Ord. 2010-03-11, passed 3-15-2010; Ord.
2011-04-07, passed 4-4-2011; Ord. 2011-12-40, passed 12-5-2011; Ord.
2012-12-43, passed 12-17-2012; Ord. 2013-12- 50, passed 12-16-2013; Ord.
2014-12-55, passed 12-15-2014; Ord. 2016-03-15, passed 3-21-2016; Ord.
2017-04-12, passed 4-3-2017; Ord. 2018-4-11, passed 4-2-2018; Ord.
2019-04-12, passed 4-1-2019)



§ 13-3-14  ESTIMATED BILLS.



   The water used for which rates and methods of measurement are not
specifically provided for by ordinance or this code shall be estimated by the
Finance Director or by such officer as may be designated by the Village
Manager.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-15  JOINT, SEVERAL LIABILITY FOR CHARGES.



   The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the
water and sewer service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the
service on such premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the
village only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and
user of the service are jointly and severally liable therefor to the village.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-16  WHEN CHARGES ARE PAYABLE; PENALTY.



   (A)   Charges for water and sewer service shall be payable 20 days
after the billing date as shown on the bill or on the next regularly
scheduled business day if the due date falls on a Saturday or Sunday. If
payment of the full amount of the bill is not made within such period, then a
late charge penalty of 10% of the amount of the bill shall be added thereto.
An administrative fee of $15 shall be charged each time a notice of shut-off
is issued.



   (B)   An additional administrative fee of $50 shall be charged each
time Public Works is dispatched out to turn the water off for non-payment
(administrative shut-off fee).



(Ord. 92-10-111, passed 10-13-1992; Ord. 2001-04-16, passed 4-2-2001; Ord.
2001-04-16, passed 4-2-2001)



§ 13-3-17  DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS; LIEN CLAIMS; FORECLOSURE.



   In the event the charges for water and sewer are not paid within 44
days after rendition of the bill for such monthly service, such charges shall
be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent, and there-after such
delinquencies shall constitute liens upon the real estate for which such
service is supplied, and the Finance Director is authorized and directed to
file sworn statements showing such delinquencies in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of DuPage County, Illinois, and the filing of such
statements in such office shall be deemed notice for the payment of such
charges for such service.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-18  DISCONTINUATION OF SERVICE FOR NON-PAYMENT; OBSTRUCTING ACCESS
TO EQUIPMENT; REINSTATEMENT.



   (A)   If the rates or charges for water and sewer services are not
paid within 44 days after rendition of the bill for monthly service, such
services shall be discontinued and shall not be reinstated until any previous
balance and penalties or fees, and administrative fees  thereon, are paid in
full, together with payment made of $50 for the administrative shut-off fee.
If water has been shut off and payment is received after 3:30 p.m., the water
will remain off until the following day unless, for an additional fee of $50,
the customer chooses to have it turned on prior to the following day.



   (B)   Water service may be discontinued by the village if access to
equipment, including the meter, is obstructed or prevented.



   (C)   Provided, however, that, where a customer disputes the
accuracy of the charges for water and sewer services, or the determination
that the equipment has been obstructed, the village will offer the customer
an opportunity to have a meeting with regard to the matters in dispute.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2001-04-16, passed 4-2-2001)



§ 13-3-19  METER READING REQUIRED UPON ENTERING OR VACATING PREMISES.



   Any person who shall vacate any premises shall immediately, before
vacating such premises, notify the Finance Department, and secure reading of
the water meter for final billing purposes.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-20  PAYMENT OF PREVIOUS CHARGES PRIOR TO COMMENCEMENT OF NEW SERVICE.



   No person owing water charges and moving to other premises where there
are water connections or where connections shall afterwards be made shall be
supplied with water until such charges in arrears are paid in full.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-21  WASTE OF WATER; MISREPRESENTATION, FRAUD.



   If, after the water supply shall have been turned on to any building,
structure or premises, it shall be found by any officer or employee of the
village that fraudulent representations have been made by the applicant for
such water supply, or that water is being used in or upon such building,
structure or premises for purposes not set forth in the application made for
such water supply, or that there is willful and unreasonable use or waste of
water, the Village Manager, or such employee of the village as he or she
shall designate, shall have the authority and it shall be his or her duty to
cut off and stop the supply of water to such building, structure or premises
forthwith, and the water shall not be turned on to such building, structure
or premises until the person or persons responsible for such fraudulent
representation or for such use of water or willful or unreasonable waste
thereof, shall pay the village such additional sum of money for such water
supply or on account of such unreasonable waste of water as the Mayor and
Board of Trustees shall find properly to be due the village. Except in the
case of an emergency, the village shall give the customer an opportunity to
have a meeting with regard to the matters in dispute.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-22  SUPPLYING WATER TO OTHER PERSONS.



   No person, whether the owner or occupant in possession or control of
any building, structure or premises into which water is supplied through the
village waterworks and sewerage system, shall be allowed, without written
permission from the Village Manager, to supply other persons or families or
to supply water from such building or premises to any other building
structure or premises. The supply of water to a building, structure or
premises or any person who violates this section shall be shut off and
stopped forthwith, and the water shall not again be turned on to such
building, structure or premises from which it was cut off until there shall
have been paid to the village such sum of money as the Mayor and Board of
Trustees shall deem properly due the village.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-23  USE OF WATER FROM FIRE HYDRANTS.



   (A)   No person, other than members of the Fire Department of the
village, shall use water from any fire hydrant connected with the village
waterworks and sewerage system, except for extinguishing fires or unless
especially authorized by the Village Manager or his or her designee.



   (B)   Persons who receive authorization by the Village Manager or
his or her designee may receive water from a hydrant at the Public Works
Center. A minimum fee of $25 will be charged. This fee is for consumption
during a calendar month. Each month will require a new $25 fee. The water
will be metered and, if the cost of the water purchased is more than $25, the
balance will be billed to the purchaser. If the cost of consumption is less
than the $25 fee, there will be no refund. Any balance due must be paid prior
to receiving any additional water. This fee will be waived for contractors
who are working on a village project.



   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $50, nor more than $750.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2004-06-36, passed 6-21-2004)



§ 13-3-24  SALE OF WATER OUTSIDE VILLAGE PROHIBITED.



   The village shall not sell water to an applicant for property outside
its corporate boundaries, except that water may be sold on an emergency basis
and as part of an emergency interconnection agreement with other
municipalities.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-25  OBSTRUCTING ACCESS TO EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   The Public Works Director, and all persons authorized by him
or her, shall be given ready access to the premises wherein water meters are
located for the purpose of reading, examining, testing, repairing and
replacing such meters and appurtenant wires and reading devices.



      (1)   They may, if necessary, remove or replace meters for
such purpose or for testing the consumption, use and flow of water.



      (2)   Should any person unreasonably refuse to allow entry of
a duly-authorized representative of the village for the purpose of reading,
examining, testing, repairing or replacing water meters and appurtenant wires
and reading devices, then the village shall have the right to disconnect and
refuse further service to the premises.



   (B)   (1)   If water meters require removal or replacement and
the work cannot be accomplished by the village due to defects in the interior
plumbing of the premises, the owner of the premises shall make the necessary
repairs required to allow for the removal or replacement of the water meters.



      (2)   In the event the owner does not complete the required
repairs in a reasonable time, as determined by the Public Works Director,
then the village shall have the right to disconnect and refuse further
service to the premises until the repairs have been completed.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2003-07-45, passed 7-21-2003)



§ 13-3-26  USE OF WATER FOR CLEANING SANITARY SEWER MAINS PROHIBITED.



   Neither the village nor any person, whether the owner or occupant in
possession or control of any building, structure or premises into which water
is supplied through the village waterworks and sewerage system, shall be
allowed to use village potable water for flushing or cleaning sanitary sewer
mains.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-27  PRACTICES REGULATED; LAWN SPRINKLING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sprinkle or water lawns within
the corporate limits of the village, except in accordance with the following
guidelines.



   (A)   All persons owning or controlling property bearing an
odd-numbered street address may use water for sprinkling or watering lawns on
days having an odd-numbered calendar date.



   (B)   All persons owning or controlling property bearing an
even-numbered street address may use water for sprinkling or watering lawns
on days having  an even-numbered calendar date.



   (C)   The sprinkling or watering of lawns, trees and other
vegetation is prohibited between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
daily.  New lawns may be exempted from this provision, subject to the
approval of the Director of Engineering Services in accordance with the
provisions of § 13-3-29.



(Ord. 91-03-20, passed 3-12-1991; Ord. 92-01-04, passed 1-14-1992; Ord.
93-03-36, passed 2-9-1993; Ord. 94-02-19, passed 2-22-1994; Ord. 98-03-18,
passed 3-2-1998; Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2015-10-21, passed
10-19-2015)



§ 13-3-28  EMERGENCY PROVISIONS.



   Whenever it is determined that there is a serious water shortage in the
village as to endanger the health, safety and welfare of its residents, the
use of village water for sprinkling or watering of lawns, landscaping  and
gardens, filling of swimming pools, washing of vehicles and for water toys
requiring connection to or use of the village water system may be prohibited
in the following manner.



   (A)   The Village Manager may, by administrative decree, prohibit
such use of village water for a maximum period of three days or until the
next Village Board meeting, whichever is less. However, the Village Manager
shall not exercise this emergency power until after he or she has signed a
statement under oath finding that a water shortage exists that endangers the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the village, setting forth
facts to substantiate such finding. Such statement shall be filed with the
Village Clerk as soon as practicable.



   (B)   The Mayor may, by executive order, prohibit such use of
village water for a maximum period of two weeks or until the next Village
Board meeting, whichever is less. However, the Mayor shall not exercise this
emergency power until after signing a statement under oath finding that a
water shortage exists that endangers the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the village, setting forth facts to substantiate such finding.
Such statement shall be filed with the Village Clerk as soon as practicable.



   (C)   The Village Board, by resolution, may establish limits on the
use of water, or extend, expand or shorten limits already in place as
declared by the Village Manager or by the Mayor, for any time period deemed
necessary to remedy the water shortage situation.



   (D)   Any limitation in the use of water declared by the Village
Manager, Mayor or Board of Trustees shall supersede the provisions of this
code regarding the use of water.



(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-29  SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR NEW LAWNS, EXISTING LAWNS, NEW AND
RESTORATIVE LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   Except during an emergency called in the manner provided for
in § 13-3-28, the area of an existing lawn being restored, but not replaced,
newly sodded or seeded areas or the replacement of an entire lawn may be
sprinkled all day on the date of installation until midnight and then each
consecutive day for a period up to two weeks following the date of
installation.



   (B)   The Engineering Services Department shall maintain a “Sod
List” which contains the name, address and lawn installation/restoration
date of persons wishing to water new or existing lawns. Any person wishing to
water a new or existing lawn under the provisions of this section must
contact the Engineering Services Department to request to have their name
placed on the “Sod List” prior to watering their lawn outside of the
odd-even daily restrictions.



(Ord. 92-01-04, passed 1-14-1992; Ord. 94-02-19, passed 2-22-1994; Ord.
98-03-18, passed 3-2-1998; Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-30  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   If exceptional circumstances result in a significant increase
in the village’s water supply, such as, but not limited to, weather
conditions, sufficient to accommodate additional demands upon water usage, or
in any other instance where the strict application of this code would be
grossly inequitable, the Village Manager may grant an exemption from the
restrictions imposed in this article.



   (B)   A person desirous of relief must submit to the Village Manager
a written request for an exemption setting forth the relief requested and the
reasons therefor. Any party granted an exemption shall be subject to the
conditions stated in the exemption.



   (C)   Governmental bodies, where the use of water is inherent or
necessary to the delivery of programs or services to its customers, are
eligible for a waiver from the surcharge upon a written request to the
Village Manager stating the types of programs or services which would be
subject to the surcharge and the period of time within which those programs
or services are provided.



   (D)   The Village Manager shall report any exemptions granted at the
next regular meeting of the Village Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 92-01-04, passed 1-14-1992; Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-31  ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.



   In addition to other village officers with police powers, the Village
Code Enforcement Officers and Engineering Inspectors, and any other designee
of the Village Manager, shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of
§§ 13-3-27 through 13-3-32 pertaining to regulation of water usage, and to
issue ordinance citations to persons found violating such provisions.



(Ord. 92-01-04, passed 1-14-1992; Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-3-32  PENALTIES.



   The owner or occupant of the premises where any violation of §§
13-3-27, 13-3-28 or 13-3-29 of this article has occurred or any other person
violating these provisions of the article shall be responsible for such
violation and subject to a fine of not less than $50, nor more than $750;
and, if the offense is of a continuing nature, each day that such violation
shall continue or each occasion during a single day when such violation
occurs after a person has been cited for a violation shall constitute a
separate offense.



(Ord. 92-01-04, passed 1-14-1992; Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)



ARTICLE 4:  SEWERS, SEWAGE DISPOSAL, DISCHARGE STANDARDS, PRETREATMENT,
WASTEWATER USE CHARGES AND COLLECTIONS



Section



   13-4-1   Abbreviations and definitions



   13-4-2   Use of public sewers required



   13-4-3   Private sewage disposal



   13-4-4   Discharge standards



   13-4-5   Sewer use standards



   13-4-6   Protection of sewage works from damage



   13-4-7   Wastewater service charges



   13-4-8   Measurement of flow



   13-4-9   Reserved



   13-4-10   Reserved



   13-4-11   Reserved



   13-4-12   Flow measuring and sampling devices



   13-4-13   Rate calculations



   13-4-14   Incorporation of National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards



   13-4-15   Final National Categorical Pretreatment Standards



   13-4-16   Pretreatment



   13-4-17   Excessive discharge



   13-4-18   Spill containment



   13-4-19   Prohibition of discharges without permit



   13-4-20   Permits



   13-4-21   Permit conditions



   13-4-22   Change in conditions



   13-4-23   Duration



   13-4-24   Transfer



   13-4-25   Denial of permit and appeal procedures



   13-4-26   Reporting requirements for permittees



   13-4-27   Compliance date report



   13-4-28   Periodic compliance reports for all significant industrial
users



   13-4-29   Monitoring facilities



   13-4-30   Inspection, sampling and records keeping



   13-4-31   Confidential information



   13-4-32   Public notification of significant violations



   13-4-33   Compulsory compliance procedures



   13-4-34   Revocation of permit



   13-4-35   Order to show cause regarding disconnection



   13-4-36   Immediate disconnection of service



   13-4-37   Elimination of discharge; reinstatement



   13-4-38   Injunctive relief



   13-4-39   Additional remedies



   13-4-40   Enforcement of upset



   13-4-41   Penalties and costs



   13-4-42   Falsification



   13-4-43   Bills



   13-4-44   Delinquent bills



   13-4-45   Lien, notice of delinquency



   13-4-46   Foreclosure of lien



   13-4-47   Revenues



   13-4-48   Accounts



   13-4-49   Access to records



Cross-reference:



   Pollution control facilities, see Ch. 15, Art. 9



§ 13-4-1  ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the
designated meanings.



 



BOD
 
Biochemical oxygen demand


C.F.R.
 
Code of Federal Regulations


COD
 
Chemical oxygen demand


FOG
 
Fats, oils and grease


IEPA
 
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency


mg/l
 
Milligrams per liter


NCPS
 
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards


NPDES
 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System


POTW
 
Publicly owned treatment works


PSES
 
Pretreatment Standards for Existing Sources


PSNS
 
Pretreatment Standards for New Sources


RCRA
 
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act


SIC
 
Standard Industrial Classification


TDS
 
Solids capable to passing through a glass fiber filter and dried


TSS
 
Total suspended solids


TTO
 
Total toxic organics


U.S.C.
 
United States Code


USEPA
 
United States Environmental Protection Agency




 



   (B)   Definitions. The following words, expressions and terms,
wherever used in these rules and regulations shall be defined and construed
to mean as follows.



      A. As in “Cyanide-A”, means amenable to alkaline chlorination.



      ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.



      AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER. A principal
executive officer of at least the level of vice president, if the industrial
user is a corporation; a general partner of proprietor if the industrial user
is a partnership or proprietor-ship, respectively; or a duly authorized
representative of the individual designated above. A person is a DULY
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE only if the authorization is made in writing to the
village by a person described above.



      BASELINE REPORT. The report required by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(B)(1)
through (7).



      BASIC USER CHARGE. The basic assessment levied on all users of
the public sewer system.



      BOARD OF TRUSTEES or TRUSTEE. The Board of Trustees of the
Village of Carol Stream.



      BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.



      BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which received the discharge from soil, wastes and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, being five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.



      BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.



      CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD). The quantity of oxygen consumed
from a chemical oxidant (standard potassium dichromate solution) under
standard laboratory procedures as described in Standard Methods.



      COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.



      COMBINED WASTE STREAM FORMULA. The formula as found in 40 C.F.R.
§ 403.6(e).



      COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen
demand, FOG, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria.



      COMPOSITE SAMPLE. A sample of wastewater based on a flow
proportional or time proportional method.



      CONSISTENT POTW TREATMENT WORKS REMOVAL, POLLUTANT REMOVAL or
REMOVAL. Reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature
or concentration of a pollutant in the influent of the POTW to a less
incompatible or concentrated state in the effluent. CONSISTENT VILLAGE
REMOVAL efficiency shall be the difference between the average concentration
of the pollutant in the influent of the treatment plant and the average
concentration of the pollutant in the effluent of the treatment plant divided
by the average concentration of the pollutant in the influent.



       CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure located on a site from which
industrial wastes are discharged. Where feasible the manhole shall have an
interior drop. The purpose of a CONTROL MANHOLE is to provide access for the
village representative to sample and/or measure discharges.



      COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, to which the only pollutant added is
heat.



      ENGINEER. The Public Works Director of the Village of Carol
Stream or his or her designee.



      EXISTING SOURCE. Any building, structure, facility or
installation from which there is or may be a discharge, which is not a new
source.



      FATS, OIL OR GREASE (FOG). Any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps,
fats, waxes, oils and any other material that is extracted by
trichlorotrifluoroethane solvent.



      FECAL COLIFORM. Any number of organisms common to the intestinal
tract of humans and animals whose presence in sanitary sewage is an indicator
of pollution.



      FEDERAL ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§§ 551251 et seq.), as amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972 (Pub. Law No. 92-500 and Pub. Law No. 93-242).



      FEDERAL GRANT. The United States Government participation in the
financing of the construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II
- Grants for Construction of Treatment Works of the Federal Act and
Implementing regulations.



      FLOW. Volume of wastewater per unit of time.



      GARBAGE. Solid waste from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage
and sale of produce.



      GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a
one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and without
consideration of time.



      INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Any pollutant not a compatible pollutant.



      INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants
into a POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under § 307(b), (c) or
(d) of the Federal Act.



      INDUSTRIAL CLASS. Shall be the total of all industrial users.



      INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGE PERMIT or DISCHARGE PERMIT. The document or
documents allowing discharge to the village POTW, issued to a significant
industrial user by the village in accordance with the terms of this article.



      INDUSTRIAL USER. A source of indirect discharge, including, but
not limited to, a manufacturing, commercial or process facility, or other
facility engaged in the purchase or sale of goods, transaction of business or
who otherwise renders services to the public.



      INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Any solid, liquid or gaseous waste resulting
from any process or excess energy resulting from a process of industry,
manufacturing trade or business or from the development, processing or
recovery, except for agricultural crop raising, or any natural resource.



      INTERFERENCE. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both:



         (a)   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and



         (b)   Therefore is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge
use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and
regulations or permits issued there-under (or more stringent state or local
regulations): § 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act
(SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) and including state regulations
contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D
of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq., the Toxic
Substances Control Act, being 15 U.S.C. § 201 et seq., and Marine
Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act, being 16 U.S.C. §§ 1431 et seq.
and 33 U.S.C. §§ 1401 et seq.



      MILLIGRAMS PER LITER. A unit of the concentration of water or
wastewater constituent. It is 0.001 grams of the constituent in 1,000
milliliters of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts
per million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the
results of water and wastewater analysis.



      NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREAT-MENT STANDARD. Any pretreatment
standard specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants which may be
discharged to a POTW by industrial users in specific industrial subcategories
as established in regulations promulgated by the USEPA in 40 C.F.R. Ch. I,
Subch. N.



      NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT (NPDES
PERMIT). A permit issued under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System for discharge of wastewaters to the navigable waters of the United
States pursuant to the Federal Act.



      NATURAL WATERCOURSE. Any pond, ditch, lake or body of surface or
ground water.



      NEW SOURCE. Any building, structure, facility or installation
from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of
which commenced after the publication of Proposed Pretreatment Standards
under § 307(c) of the Federal Act which will be applicable to such source if
such Standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section;
provided that:



         (a)   The building, structure, facility or installation
is constructed at a site which no other source is located;



         (b)   The building, structure, facility or installation
totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes
or the building, structure, facility of installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether
these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the
new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which
the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the
existing source should be considered.



      NPDES. The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System for
issuing, establishing conditions for, and denying permits under the
provisions of 33 U.S.C. § 1342. All terms used in connection with NPDES
which have been defined in the Federal Act or regulations adopted thereunder
shall have the meanings specified therein, unless specifically noted
otherwise.



      OTHER WASTES. Garbage, refuse, wood residues, sand, lime,
cinders, ashes, offal, night soil, silt, oil, tar, dye stuffs, acids,
chemicals and all other substances not sewage or industrial waste whose
discharge would cause water pollution or a violation of the effluent or water
quality standards.



      PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation).



      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
political subdivision, state agency or any other legal entity, or their legal
representative, agent or assigns.



      pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.



      POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment,
rock, sand, cellar dirt or industrial, municipal and agricultural waste
discharged into water.



      POPULATION EQUIVALENT. A term used to evaluate the impact of
industrial or other waste on a treatment works or stream. One POPULATION
EQUIVALENT is 100 gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD5
and 0.20 pounds of suspended solids. The impact on a treatment works is
evaluated as the equivalent of the highest of the three parameters.



      POTW TREATMENT PLANT. The portion of the POTW which is designed
to provide treatment (including recycling and reclamation) of municipal
sewage and industrial waste.



      ppm. Parts per million by weight.



      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard,
imposed on an industrial user.



      PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. For any specified pollutant, the village
prohibitive discharge standards as set forth in § 13-4-4, the state
pretreatment standards or the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
(when effective), whichever standards are most stringent.



      PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in
any dimension.



      PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.



      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works as
defined by § 212 of the Federal Act, owned by the Village of Carol Stream.
This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes
of a liquid nature that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant
regardless of ownership, but does not include sewers, pipes and other
conveyances not connected to the POTW treatment plant. The term also means
the VILLAGE OF CAROL STREAM, which has jurisdiction over the indirect
discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works.



      REGIONAL ADMINISTRATOR. The Regional Administrator for the USEPA
for Region V.



      REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of
the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such
works were designed and constructed. The term “operation and maintenance”
includes REPLACEMENT.



      RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL or NON-INDUSTRIAL USER. Any user of the
treatment works not classified as an industrial user or excluded as an
industrial user as provided for in this section.



      SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.



      SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried waste from residences,
business buildings, institutions, industrial establishments, together with
such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.



      SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.



      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory; MAY is permissive.



      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial user of the POTW’s
wastewater disposal system who:



         (a)   Has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per
average work day;



         (b)   Has in its wastewater incompatible pollutants as
defined pursuant to § 307 of the Federal Act or by state statutes;



         (c)   Is found by the POTW, IEPA or USEPA to have
significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing
industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the
system’s effluent quality or air emissions generated by the system; or



         (d)   Is subject to any National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard.



      SIGNIFICANT VIOLATION. A violation of this article which remains
uncorrected 45 days after notification of such non-compliance; which is part
of a pattern of non-compliance over a 12-month period; which involved failure
to accurately report non-compliance; or which resulted in the POTW exercising
its emergency authority under §§ 13-4-36, 13-4-37 or 13-4-39.



      SLUDGE. The settleable solids separated from the liquids during
the wastewater treatment processes.



      SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration
of any given pollutant, as measured by a grab sample, exceeds more than five
times the allowable concentrations as set forth in this article, or any
pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD and the like) released
in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause
interference with the POTW.



      STANDARD METHODS. The laboratory procedures set forth in the
latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater prepared and published jointly by the
American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, the
Water Pollution Control Federation and any other procedures recognized by the
USEPA and IEPA.



      STATE ACT. The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970, being 30
ILCS 405/1 et seq.



      STATE GRANT. The State of Illinois participation in the financing
of the construction of treatment works as provided by the Illinois
Anti-Pollution Bond Act.



      STORM DRAIN. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and
drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted
cooling water.



      STORM SEWER. A sewer intended to receive only land runoff.



      SURCHARGE. The assessment in addition to the basic user charge
and debt service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are
greater in strength than the concentration values established in this article.



      T. As in “Cyanide-T”, means total.



      TOTAL METALS. The sum of the concentration of all metals
regulated by this article.



      TOTAL SOLIDS. The sum of suspended and dissolved solids.



      TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). Total suspended matter expressed in
milligrams per liter, that either floats on the surface of, or is in
suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and is removable by
laboratory filtration using a Reeve Angel type 934A or 984H glass fiber
filter disc as prescribed in Standard Methods.



      TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS. The summation of all quantified values
greater than 0.01 milligrams per liter for the toxic organics as specified in
the applicable regulation.



      TRADE OR PROCESS WASTE. Any solid liquid or gaseous substance
discharged, permitted to flow escaping from any industrial, manufacturing,
commercial or business establishment or process or from the development,
recovery or process of any natural resource, shall be synonymous with
industrial waste and is distinct from sanitary or domestic sewage.



      UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria set forth in 35 Ill. Admin. Code part 304 or water that
would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards set forth in
35 Ill. Admin. Code parts 302 and 303 and would not be benefitted by
discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.



      UPSET. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional
and temporary non-compliance with applicable pretreatment standards because
of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An UPSET
does not include non-compliance to the extent caused by operational error,
improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities,
lack of preventive maintenance or careless or improper operation.



      USEFUL LIFE. The estimated period during which the collection
system or treatment works will be operated and shall be 30 years from the
date of start-up of any wastewater facilities constructed with a state grant.



      USER. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the village POTW.



      USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of treatment works for the
cost of operation and maintenance.



      USER CLASS. The type of user, either residential, commercial,
governmental, institutional, business or industrial, as defined herein.



      VILLAGE. The Village of Carol Stream.



      VILLAGE SEWER. Any sewer constructed, maintained or operated by
the village, including any and all manholes, intercepting chambers or other
appurtenances connected therewith.



      WASTEWATER. The combination of the liquid and water carrying
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions including polluted cooling water.



         (a)   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER. A combination of liquid and
water-carried waste, discharged from any industrial user, including the
wastewater from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water.



         (b)   SANITARY WASTEWATER. The combination of the liquid
and water-carried wastes discharged from toilet and other sanitary plumbing
facilities.



      WASTEWATER FUND. The principal accounting designation for all
revenues received in the operation of the wastewater system.



      WASTEWATER HAULER. Any person, partnership or corporation engaged
in transporting sanitary wastewater as a commercial venture.



      WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE. The charge per month levied on all
users of the wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be computed as
outlined in § 13-4-11, and shall consist of the total of the basic user
charge, the debt service charge and surcharge, if applicable.



      WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.



      WATERS OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS. All streams, lakes, ponds,
marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers,
irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through or border upon the State of Illinois
or any portion thereof.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2000-08-64, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-4-2  USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or
permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property
within the village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village any
human or animal excretion, garbage or other unsanitary waste.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any storm sewer, natural
watercourse within the village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
village, any sewage, industrial waste or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided.



   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



   (D)   The owner of any house, building or property used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose situated within the
village and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is
now located or may in the future be located any public sanitary sewer of the
village, is hereby required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer as required herein, within 90 days after date of written notice
to do so is served upon him or her by the village; provided that, such public
sewer is within 100 feet (30.48 meters) of the property line.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-3  PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.



   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the
provisions of § 13-4-2(D), the building sewer shall be connected to a
private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.



   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage
disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
Village Engineer. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the village, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications and other information as are reasonably deemed necessary by
the Engineer.



   (C)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed and approved by the Engineer.
The Engineer shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction and the applicant for the permit shall notify the Engineer when
the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions
are covered. The inspection shall be made within a reasonable time by the
Engineer after receipt of such notice.



   (D)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Private
Sewage Disposal Licensing Act (225 ILCS 225/1); the Private Sewage Disposal
Code promulgated thereunder, and all regulations of the State Environmental
Protection Agency. No permit shall be issued for any private disposal system
employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is
less than 43,560 square feet (4,046 square meters). No septic tank or
cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.



   (E)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in § 13-4-2(D), a
direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this
article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal
facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.



   (F)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to
the village.



   (G)   No statement contained in this article shall be construed to
supersede more stringent requirements that may be imposed by the DuPage
County Health Department.



   (H)   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer
shall be connected to the public sewer within 60 days of written notice from
the Engineer and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of
sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-4  DISCHARGE STANDARDS.



   Discharges from each separate discharge of a user, as measured under
the provisions of this article, shall not contain in excess of the following
concentrations based upon a 24-hour composite sample. Multiple industrial
wastewater discharges from a permitted facility may be combined in a flow
weighted manner to determine compliance with the following limitations for a
24-hour composite sample.



   (A)   As of the effective date of this article, no user shall
discharge the following described substances, materials, waters or waste to
the village’s sanitary sewer system and POTW having pollutant
concentrations in excess of those in the following list without an industrial
waste discharge permit issued by the village. Industrial waste discharge
permits may be issued by the village that specifically permit discharges of
greater concentration. In developing the maximum concentrations to be
included into industrial waste discharge permits, the village will give
consideration to such factors as the quantities of the subject waste in
relation to the flows and velocities in the sewers, the concentration of
materials in the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, the capacity
of the POTW, the degree of treatability of the waste at the POTW and the
maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The substances are:



      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150°F (65°C);



      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32
and 150°F (0 and 65°C);



      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
three-fourths horse-power (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Engineer;



      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron
pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not,
unless otherwise approved by the Engineer;



      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste
or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the Engineer as necessary after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of state, federal or other public
agencies for such discharge to the receiving waters;



      (6)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Engineer in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations;



      (7)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;



      (8)   Materials which exert or cause:



         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids
(such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues)
or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate);



         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited
to, dye wastes and vegetable canning solutions);



         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the
sewage treatment works; and/or



         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes
constituting slugs as defined herein.



      (9)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plan effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters; and



      (10)   Any waters or wastes containing substances exceeding
the following maximum concentrations:



 

Pollutant
 
Concentration (mg/l)




Arsenic
 
1.0


BOD
 
1,000


Cadmium
 
0.4


Chromium (hexavalent)
 
0.75


Chromium (trivalent)
 
1.0


Copper
 
2.5


Cyanide
 
0.2


FOG
 
100


Lead
 
0.5


Mercury
 
0.0015


Nickel
 
2.5


Silver
 
0.1


TSS
 
1,250


Zinc
 
4.0




 



   (B)   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly
or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the
operation or performance of the POTW or will pass through the POTW.



   (C)   The following general prohibitions shall apply to all users of
the village POTW whether or not a user is subject to National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment
standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances
to the village POTW:



      (1)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their
nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction
with other substances to cause fire or explosions or be injurious or
hazardous in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no
time shall two successive readings on a meter capable of reading L.E.L.
(lower explosive limit) at a point at the nearest accessible point to the
POTW in a sanitary sewer, at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any
point in the POTW be more than 5%, nor any single reading greater than 10%.
Materials for which discharge is prohibited under this division (C)(1)
include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene,
toluene, zylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates,
perchlorates, bromates, polychlorinated biphenyls, polybrominated biphenyls,
carbides, hybrides, stoddard solvents and sulfides;



      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous
solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment
plant;



      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works;



      (4)   Any solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such
size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, underground garbage, whole blood, paunch
manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers
and the like, either whole or ground by garbage grinders;



      (5)   Any pollutant including oxygen demanding pollutants
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which
will cause interference with the POTW;



      (6)   Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity
in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities
that the temperature at the POTW treatment plant exceeds 104°F (40°C)
unless the approval authority, upon request of the POTW, approves alternate
temperature limits; and



      (7)   All categorical and non-categorical industrial users
shall notify the POTW immediately of all discharges that could cause problems
to the POTW, including all slug loadings.



   (D)   In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the
POTW to be in non-compliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines
or regulations developed under § 405 of the Federal Act; any criteria
guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant
to the RCRA, SWDA, the Clean Water Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or
state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used.



   (E)   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES
permit or the receiving water quality standards.



   (F)   Any pollutants, including compatible pollutants released at a
flow or pollutant concentration which a user knows or has reason to know will
cause interference to the POTW or will pass through the POTW.



   (G)   Wastewater haulers are prohibited from discharging any
wastewater to the village sewer system.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2000-08-64, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-4-5  SEWER USE STANDARDS.



   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in § 13-4-4, and which in the
judgment of the Village Engineer may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Engineer may:



      (1)   Reject the wastes;



      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;



      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge; and/or



      (4)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the
provisions of §§ 13-4-7 through 13-4-13. If the Engineer permits the
pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of
the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Engineer, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances
and laws.



   (B)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the Engineer, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that, such interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Engineer, and
shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.



   (C)   Where preliminary treatment of flow-equalizing facilities is
provided, such facilities shall be continuously maintained in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.



   (D)   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole
and, when required by the Engineer, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole when required shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Engineer.
The manhole and equipment shall be installed by the owner at his or her
expense, and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.



   (E)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer
carrying industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and
analysis of waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this article and
any special conditions for discharge established by the village or regulatory
agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge. The number, type and
frequency of laboratory analysis to be performed by the owner shall be
stipulated by the village, but no less than twice per year the industry must
supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharged
to assure that compliance with the federal, state and local standards are
being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory
analysis to the Engineer at such times and in such manner as he or she
prescribes. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analysis
and reporting required by the village. At such time as deemed necessary, the
village reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis by
an outside laboratory service.



   (F)   All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be
determined in accordance with that publication entitled Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater, Fifteenth Edition, published by the
American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control
manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In
the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole
shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer
to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be
carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of
constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards
to life, limb and property. The particular analysis involved will determine
whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or
whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.



   (G)   No statement contained herein shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the village and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
accepted by the village for treatment, subject to payment therefore, in
accordance with §§ 13-4-7 through 13-4-13, by the industrial concern.



   (H)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm
water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
un-contaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any
sanitary sewer.



   (I)   Storm water, roof runoff and all other unpolluted drainage
shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm
sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Engineer. Industrial cooling
water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the
Engineer to a storm sewer or natural outlet.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-6  PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE.



   (A)   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the sewage works. A person violating this provision will be
subject to a charge of disorderly conduct.



   (B)   The Engineer and other duly authorized employees and officers
of the village, the State Environmental Protection Agency and United States
Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper credentials and
identification, are empowered to seek to enter all properties for testing in
accordance with the provisions of this article. In the event that such
persons are refused admission, they may apply for the issuance of a search
warrant. The Engineer or his or her representative shall have no authority to
inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining,
ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing
on the kind of source of discharge to the sewer or waterway or facilities for
waste treatment.



   (C)   While performing such inspections and other functions referred
to in division (B) of this section, the Engineer or duly authorized employees
of the village, the State Environmental Protection Agency and the United
States Environmental Protection Agency shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the company.



   (D)   The Engineer and other duly authorized employees of the
village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all village easements for the purpose of, but not limited to,
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any
portion of the sewage works lying within such easement.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-7  WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES.



   (A)   (1)   Basis for wastewater service charges. The wastewater
service charge for the use of a service supplied by the wastewater facilities
of the village shall consist of a basic user charge for operation and
maintenance plus replacement, and a surcharge, if applicable.



      (2)   Basic user charge. The basic user charge shall be based
on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes
not exceeding the following normal concentrations:



         (a)   A five-day, 20°C biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)
of 200 mg/l;



         (b)   A suspended solids (SS) content of 250 mg/l; and



         (c)   Fats, oil and grease (FOG) content of 100 mg/l.



   (B)   A treatment service surcharge shall be levied to all users
whose wastewater exceeds the normal concentrations listed in division (A) of
this section as determined by wastewater sampling. A basic surcharge will be
computer based upon normal operating cost of the POTW as proportioned to the
above constituents, based upon the design criteria of the POTW. Sewer users
whose wastewater exceeds 250% of the limit of pollutants indicated in
division (A) of this section shall be subject to a 100% increase in the
surcharge for that pollutant. Sewer users whose wastewater exceeds 500% of
the limit of any pollutants indicated in division (A) of this section shall
be subject to a 200% increase in the surcharge for that pollutant.



   (C)   A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed
the normal concentrations for BOD (200 mg/l) and SS (250 mg/l). The surcharge
will be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters
for all wastes which exceed the 200 mg/l and 250 mg/l concentration for BOD
and SS, respectively.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2000-08-64, passed 8-7-2000)



§ 13-4-8  MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.



   (A)   The flow used for computing basic user charges and surcharges
shall be the metered water consumption read to the lowest even increment of
1,000 gallons.



   (B)   If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers
procures any part, or all, of his or her water from sources other than the
public waterworks system, all or a part of which is discharged into the
public sewers, the person shall install and maintain, at his or her expense,
water meters of a type approved by the village for the purpose of determining
the volume of water obtained from these other sources.



   (C)   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be
required by the village if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from
the metered water consumption records.



   (D)   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed and owned by the owner. The village shall maintain the metering
device. Following approval and installation, such meters may not be removed,
unless service is canceled, without the consent of the village.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-9  RESERVED.



Editor’s note:



   This section was deleted by Ord. 2000-08-64, passed 8-7-2000.



§ 13-4-10  RESERVED.



Editor’s note:



   This section was deleted by Ord. 2000-08-64, passed 8-7-2000.



§ 13-4-11  RESERVED.



Editor’s note:



   This section was deleted by Ord. 2000-08-64, passed 8-7-2000.



§ 13-4-12  FLOW MEASURING AND SAMPLING DEVICES.



   Wastewater flow measuring and recording devices and wastewater sampling
devices may be required by the village in order to accurately determine the
volume and strength of industrial wastes. The devices, if required, shall be
enclosed in suitable housing that will provide heat, light and power inside
the structure with sufficient room for the flow measuring and sampling
equipment. The village shall have access to the equipment at all times and
shall be responsible for the daily maintenance of the flow measuring and
recording data and sampling of the industrial effluent. The industrial user
shall have access to all records obtained from the measuring and sampling
devices.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-13  RATE CALCULATIONS.



   The village shall determine annually the cost of the wastewater service
charges in accordance with § 13-3-16 for each 1,000 gallons of volume,
five-day BOD, and suspended solids for normal concentrations of domestic
wastes. The calculations shall be made available to any interested person.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-14  INCORPORATION OF NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   Upon the promulgation of the National Categorical Pretreatment Standard
for a particular industrial user, the standard, if more stringent than the
limitations imposed under this article for sources in that category, shall,
when effective, immediately supersede the limitations and conditions imposed
under this article and the standards shall be complied with by all industrial
users subject to each of the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. The
village shall notify all known affected users of the applicable reporting
requirements under the provisions of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-15  FINAL NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Job shop and independent printed circuit board manufacturers
regulated by the electroplating point source category (40 C.F.R. part 413, as
amended), have been given a compliance date of 4-27-1984. Integrated
electroplating facilities regulated by the electroplating point source
category, as amended, have been given a compliance date of 6-30-1984.



   (B)   Industrial users regulated by the metal finishing point source
category (40 C.F.R. part 433, as amended) have been given a compliance date
of 2-15-1986.



   (C)   Industrial users regulated by the copper forming point source
category (40 C.F.R. part 468, as amended) have been given a compliance date
of 8-15-1986.



   (D)   Industrial users regulated by the inorganic chemicals (Phase
I) point source category (40 C.F.R. part 415, as amended) have been given a
compliance date of 6-29-1985.



   (E)   Industrial users regulated by the porcelain enameling point
source category (40 C.F.R. part 466, as amended) have been given a compliance
date of 11-25-1985.



   (F)   Industrial users regulated by the pulp, paper and paperboard
point source category (40 C.F.R. parts 430 and 431, as amended) have been
given a compliance date of 7-1-1984.



   (G)   Industrial users regulated by the textile mills point source
category (40 C.F.R. part 410, as amended) have been given a compliance date
of 9-2-1985.



   (H)   Industrial users regulated by the timber products point source
category (40 C.F.R. part 429, as amended) have been given a compliance date
of 1-26-1984.



   (I)   Industrial users regulated by the coiling coating (Phase I)
point source category (40 C.F.R. part 465, as amended) have been given a
compliance date of 12-1-1985.



   (J)   Industrial users regulated by the leather tanning and
finishing point source category (40 C.F.R. part 425, as amended) have been
given a compliance date of 11-25-1985.



   (K)   Industrial users regulated by the coil coating (Phase II)
point source category (40 C.F.R. part 465, as amended) have been given a
compliance date of 11-17-1986.



   (L)   Industrial users regulated by the pharmaceutical manufacturing
point source category (40 C.F.R. part 439, as amended) have been given a
compliance date of 10-27-1986.



   (M)   Industrial users regulated by the electrical and electronic
components point source category (40 C.F.R. part 469, as amended) have been
given a compliance date for Subpart A - semiconductors and Subpart B -
electronic crystal manufacturing of 7-1-1984 for total toxic organics.
Subpart B electronic crystal manufacturing have been given a compliance date
of 11-8-1985 for arsenic. Subpart C - cathode ray tube have been given a
compliance date of 7-14-1986 for control of specified toxic metals, fluoride
and total toxic organics.



   (N)   Industrial users regulated by the aluminum forming point
source category (40 C.F.R. part 467, as amended) have been given a compliance
date of 10-24-1986.



   (O)   Industrial users regulated by the iron and steel manufacturing
point source category (40 C.F.R. part 420), as amended) have been given a
compliance date of 7-10-1985.



   (P)   Industrial users regulated by the petroleum refining point
source category (40 C.F.R. parts 419, as amended) have been given a
compliance date of 12-1-1985.



   (Q)   Industrial users regulated by the steam electric power plants
point source category (40 C.F.R. parts 125 and 423, as amended) have been
given a compliance date of 1-1-1986.



   (R)   Industrial users regulated by the battery manufacturing point
source category (40 C.F.R. part 416, as amended) have been given a compliance
date of 3-9-1987.



   (S)   Industrial users regulated by the inorganic chemicals (Phase
II) point source category (40 C.F.R. part 415, as amended) have been given a
compliance date for Subpart A, B, L, AL, AR, BA and BC of 7-20-1980; for
Subpart AJ, AU, BL, BM, BN and BO of 8-22-1987; and for all subparts not
listed of 6-29-1985.



   (T)   Industrial users regulated by the non-ferrous metal
manufacturing (Phase I) point source category (40 C.F.R. part 421, as
amended) have been given a compliance date of 3-9-1987.



   (U)   The USEPA will promulgate new categorical pretreatment
standards from time to time. This article shall be amended to include any new
standards applicable to this POTW.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-16  PRETREATMENT.



   All industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater pretreatment as
required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements within the time
limitations as specified by appropriate statutes, regulations and this
article. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall be added to this
article as amendments. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a
level acceptable to the POTW shall provided, properly operated and maintained
at the user’s expense. All industrial users shall obtain all necessary
construction-operating permits from the IEPA. Any subsequent significant
changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be
reported to and be accepted by the village POTW prior to the industrial
user’s initiation of the changes.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-17  EXCESSIVE DISCHARGE.



   (A)   Boiler blowdown streams, non-contact cooling streams and
demineralizer backwash streams; provided, however, that, when such streams
contain a significant amount of pollutant, and the combination of such
streams, prior to treatment with an industrial user, may exercise its
discretion to determine whether such streams should be classified as diluted
or unregulated.



   (B)   No user shall increase the use of process water or, in any
way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate pre-treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained
in the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards (NCPS) (when effective) or
in any other pollutant-specific limitations developed by the village.



   (C)   Flow proportioning must be used only where unregulated
wastestreams are added after treatment.



   (D)   No industrial users shall increase the use of process water,
or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate compliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirement. The control authority may impose mass limitations on industrial
users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-18  SPILL CONTAINMENT.



   (A)   Each industrial user having the ability to cause interference
with the POTW treatment plant or to violate the regulatory provisions of this
article shall provide protection from accidental discharge to the POTW of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article.
Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be
provided and maintained at the owner or user’s own cost and expense.



   (B)   In the case of an accidental or deliberate discharge of
compatible or incompatible pollutants which may cause interference at the
POTW or will pass through the POTW or violate requirements of this article,
it shall be the responsibility of the industrial user to immediately
telephone and notify the Village Police Department of the incident. The
notification shall include name of caller, location and time of discharge,
type of wastewater, concentration and volume.



   (C)   Within 15 days following such an accidental or deliberate
discharge the industrial user shall submit to the Village Public Works
Department a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge
and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future
occurrences. Follow-up reports may be required by the village as needed. Such
report, or reports, shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense,
loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage
to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person or property; nor shall
such report relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability
which may be imposed by this article or otherwise. Failure to report
accidental or deliberate discharges may, in addition to any other remedies
available to the village, result in the revocation of the discharger’s
industrial discharge permit.



   (D)   The industrial user shall control production or all discharges
to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with all applicable
regulations upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until
the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided.
This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the
primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.



   (E)   All industrial users whose wastewater includes or could
include compatible or incompatible pollutants in amounts great enough to
cause interference with the POTW must have detailed plans on file at the POTW
showing facilities and operating procedures to provide protection from
accidental discharge. All industrial users shall complete construction of
such facilities by 1-1-1986. No industrial user who begins contributing to or
could contribute such pollutants to the POTW after the effective date of this
article shall be permitted to introduce such pollutants into the POTW until
accidental discharge facilities and procedures, as appropriate, have been
installed by the industrial user. Review and approval of such plans and
operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the
responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements
of this article.



   (F)   A notice in English and the language of common use shall be
permanently posted on the industrial user’s bulletin board or other
prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental
or illegal discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who are in a
position to cause, discover or observe such discharge are advised of the
emergency notification procedures.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-19  PROHIBITION OF DISCHARGES WITHOUT PERMIT.



   It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user to discharge
wastewater to the village POTW without a permit, or contrary to the
conditions of a permit issued by the village POTW in accordance with the
provisions of this article.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-20  PERMITS.



   (A)   Industrial discharge permit. All significant industrial users
proposing to connect to or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain an
industrial discharge permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW.
All significant industrial users which are existing sources connected to or
contributing to the POTW shall obtain an industrial discharge permit within
180 days after the effective date of this article. All industrial users which
become significant industrial users after promulgation of this article shall
apply for a new industrial discharge permit within 180 days after becoming a
significant industrial user. (The latter includes, but is not limited to,
industrial users regulated by a newly promulgated National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard.)



   (B)   Industrial discharge permit application.



      (1)   Significant industrial users required to obtain an
industrial discharge permit shall complete and file with the village POTW an
application in a form to be prescribed and furnished by the village and
accompanied by a fee to be determined by the village.



      (2)   Existing significant industrial users shall apply for an
industrial discharge permit within 180 days after the effective date of this
article. Proposed significant industrial users which are new sources shall
apply at least 90 days prior to discharging to the POTW.



      (3)   In support of the application, the significant
industrial user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation,
information which is deemed by the village POTW as necessary to evaluate the
industrial wastewater discharge and the application.



      (4)   If additional pretreatment techniques or equipment
installation will be required to meet pre-treatment standards, the
application shall contain the shortest schedule by which the significant
industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-21  PERMIT CONDITIONS.



   Industrial discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges
and fees established by the village. Wastewater discharge permits shall
contain the following:



   (A)   The industrial discharge permit shall include the limits on
daily maximum and average pollutant concentrations from the applicable
pretreatment standard (which includes federal, state and local limits)
whichever is more stringent;



   (B)   (1)   Where the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
are modified by a removal allowance (40 C.F.R. § 403.7) or the combined
waste stream formula (40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e)) or net/gross calculations (40
C.F.R. § 403.15) or fundamentally different factor variance for non-toxics
(40 C.F.R. § 403.13), or the general pretreatment regulations, the limits as
modified shall be made a part of the industrial discharge permit and shall be
adjusted consistent with USEPA guidelines and regulations.



      (2)   Pollutant discharge limits in categorical pretreatment
standards will be expressed as concentration or mass limits. Whenever
possible, where concentration limits are specified in standards, equivalent
mass limits will be provided so that local, state or federal authorities
responsible for enforcement may use either concentration or mass limits.
Limits in categorical pretreatment standards shall apply to the effluent of
the process regulated by the standards or as otherwise specified in the
standard.



      (3)   When the control authority calculates equivalent mass
and concentration limits, they shall be deemed pretreatment standards.
Industrial users will be required to comply with the equivalent limitations
in lieu of the promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent
limitations were derived.



   (C)   Limits on maximum and average flow rate and time of discharge
or requirements for flow regulation and equalization for each separate
discharge of a user;



   (D)   Requirements for installation and operation of inspection,
sampling and monitoring facilities;



   (E)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for
tests and reporting schedule;



   (F)   Compliance schedule, if necessary;



   (G)   Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports;



   (H)   Requirements to retain for a minimum of three years any
records of monitoring activities and results relating to wastewater discharge
and for affording the village access to such records;



   (I)   Requirements for advance notification to the village of any
new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the
volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
wastewater treatment system pursuant to the terms of this section;



   (J)   Requirements for notification of slug discharges as defined in
this article;



   (K)   Requirements for reporting pretreatment sludge disposal
practices;



   (L)   The industrial user may change monitoring points only after
approval from control authority. The proposed change in monitoring locations
will not allow dilution to substitute for adequate pretreatment to achieve
compliance with applicable standards; and



   (M)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the POTW to ensure
compliance with this article, and pretreatment requirements and standards.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-22  CHANGE IN CONDITIONS.



   In the event the type, quality or volume of wastewater from the
property for which an industrial discharge permit was previously granted is
expected to materially and substantially change as reasonably determined by
the permittee or POTW, the permittee previously granted such permit shall
give 30 days notice in writing to the POTW and shall make a new application
to the POTW prior to such change, in the same manner and form as originally
made; provided that, information previously submitted and unchanged need not
be resubmitted by permittee. No permittee shall materially and substantially
change the type, quality or volume of its wastewater beyond that allowed by
its permit without prior approval of the POTW.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-23  DURATION.



   Industrial discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five years. The permittee shall file an application for
renewal of its permit at least 90 days prior to expiration of the user’s
permit. The significant industrial user shall apply, on a form provided by
the village POTW, for reissuance of the permit. Upon reissuance, any
applicable provisions of the industrial discharge permit shall be
incorporated as conditions of the new industrial discharge permit. The terms
and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the village
POTW during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as
identified in this code are modified or other just cause exists. The
significant industrial user shall be informed of any proposed changes in its
permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Where any
changes are made in the significant industrial user’s permit, a reasonable
time shall be given to achieve compliance.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-24  TRANSFER.



   Industrial discharge permits are issued to a specific significant
industrial user for the process activity specified in the permit. An
industrial discharge permit shall not be assigned, transferred or sold to a
new owner or new user in different premises or to a new or changed operation
in the same or different premises without the approval of the village. If the
premises are sold or otherwise transferred by the permittee to a new owner
who will maintain the operation in the same premises, then the permit held by
the seller shall be reissued by the village to the new owner as a temporary
permit; provided that, the new owner shall immediately apply for a new permit
in accordance with this article; and, further provided that, the temporary
permit shall only be effective for 90 days after the date of sale or
transfer. The village shall have the same remedies for violation of temporary
permits as it has for violation of other discharge permits.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-25  DENIAL OF PERMIT AND APPEAL PROCEDURES.



   (A)   No industrial discharge permit shall be issued by the village
to any person or significant industrial user whose discharge of material to
sewers, whether shown upon his or her application or determined after
inspection and testing conducted by the village POTW, under direction of the
Village Engineer, is not in conformity with the village ordinances and
regulations or whose application is incomplete or does not comply with the
requirements of §§ 13-4-20 through 13-4-24. The Engineer shall state the
reason or reasons for denial in writing, which shall be mailed or personally
delivered to the applicant within ten days after denial.



   (B)   If the application is denied by the Engineer, the applicant
may obtain review of the denial by the Village Board; provided that, the
applicant shall give written notice of this request within 30 days after
receipt of such denial. The Village Board shall review the permit
application, the written denial and such other evidence and matters as the
applicant and the Village Engineer shall present. The decision of the Village
Board shall be final.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-26  REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITTEES.



   (A)   Significant industrial users subject to National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards shall submit baseline reports to the POTW in a form
prescribed and furnished by the POTW.



   (B)   Within 180 days after the effective date of a National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, or 180 days after a final administrative
decision has been made upon a categorical determination submission in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, industrial
users which are existing sources subject to such National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards and currently discharging to the POTW shall submit a
properly completed baseline report.



   (C)   New sources, when subject to a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, shall submit a baseline report as part of their permit
application and also again no later than 180 days after discharging to the
POTW.



   (D)   In support of the baseline report, the significant industrial
user shall submit, in units and terms specified in the application, the
following information:



      (1)   Name and address of the facility including the name of
the operator and owners;



      (2)   List of any environmental control permits held by or for
the facility;



      (3)   Brief description of the nature, average rate of
production and standard industrial classification of the operations carried
out by such user. This description shall include a schematic process diagram
indicating points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes;



      (4)   Information showing the measured average daily and
maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from each of the
following:



         (a)   Regulated process streams; and



         (b)   Other streams as necessary to allow use of the
combined waste stream formula of 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e).



      (5)   The significant industrial user shall identify the
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards applicable to each regulated
process, and shall:



         (a)   The industrial user shall take a minimum of one
representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the
requirements of this standard;



         (b)   Sample the regulated waste stream for a two-week
period, taking three samples during this period if the flow is less than
250,000 GPD; and six samples if the flow is greater than 250,000 GPD;



         (c)   A minimum of four grab samples must be used for
pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organics.
For all other pollutants, 24-hour composite samples obtained through flow
proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible. The control
authority may waive flow proportional composite sampling techniques or
through a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this
will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged;



         (d)   Submit the results of sampling and analysis
identifying the nature and concentration of regulated pollutants in the
discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average
concentration shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations;



         (e)   Where feasible, obtain samples through the
flow-proportional composite sampling techniques specified in the applicable
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard. Where composite sampling is not
feasible, a grab sample is acceptable;



         (f)   Take the samples immediately downstream from
pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the
regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other waste-waters are mixed
with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, in order to evaluate
compliance with the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, the
industrial user shall measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow
use of the combined waste stream formula of 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e). Where an
alternate concentration has been calculated in accordance with 40 C.F.R. §
403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted
to the POTW;



         (g)   Perform sampling and analysis as required;



         (h)   Submit, only with POTW authorization, baseline
report which utilizes only historical data, so long as the data provides
information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment
measures; and



         (i)   Provide for each report the time, date and place,
of sampling and methods of analysis and certification that such sampling and
analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant
discharges to the POTW.



      (6)   The significant industrial user shall provide a
statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the significant
industrial user and certified by a qualified professional indicating whether
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards are being met on a consistent
basis, and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance measures
(O&M) or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet
the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards;



      (7)   If additional pretreatment or O&M will be required to
meet the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, the significant
industrial user will provide the shortest schedule which will provide such
additional pretreatment or O&M.



         (a)   Where the significant industrial user’s National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard has been modified by a removal allowance
(40 C.F.R. § 403.7) or the combined waste stream formula (40 C.F.R. §
403.6(e)), or net/gross calculations (40 C.F.R. § 403.15), at the time the
significant industrial user submits a baseline report the information
required in division (D)(6) above and this division (D)(7) shall pertain to
the modified limits.



         (b)   If the National Categorical Pretreatment Standard
for the significant industrial user is modified after the baseline report is
submitted, the significant industrial user shall make any necessary
amendments to information provided as a response to division (D)(6) above and
this division (D)(7) and submit them to the POTW within 60 days after the
modified limit is approved.



      (8)   The following conditions shall apply to any schedule
submitted in response to the provisions of division (D)(7) above.



         (a)   The schedule shall contain increments of progress
in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events
leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required
for the user to meet the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards (for example hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans,
completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing
construction, completing construction and the like).



         (b)   No increment referred to in division (D)(8)(a)
above shall exceed nine months.



         (c)   Not later than 14 days following each date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress
report to the POTW including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with
the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on
which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for
delay, and the steps being taken by the significant industrial user to return
the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than
nine months elapse between such progress reports to the POTW.



         (d)   New sources shall install and have in operating
conditions, and shall start-up all pollution control equipment required to
meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within
the shortest feasible time, new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment
standards.



      (9)   Notice of permission to bypass.



         (a)   If an industrial user knows in advance of the 
need for a bypass, it shall submit oral notice of unanticipated bypass that
exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the control authority within 24
hours from the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. A
written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the
industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall
contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the
bypass, including exact dates and times, and if the bypass has not been
corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken
or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The
control authority may waive the written report on a case by case basis if the
oral report has been received within 24 hours.



         (b)   Bypass is prohibited, and the control authority
may take enforcement action against an industrial user for a bypass unless:



            1.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of
life, injury or severe property damage;



            2.   There were no feasible alter-natives to the 
bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of
untreated wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime.
This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have
been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgement to prevent
a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventative maintenance; and



            3.   The industrial user submitted notices as
required under division (D)(9)(c) below.



         (c)   The control authority may approve an anticipated
bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the control authority
determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in 40 C.F.R. part
403 regulations pertaining to bypass restrictions.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-27  COMPLIANCE DATE REPORT.



   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source, within such time as
specified in its industrial discharge permit, but in any case not later than
one year following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the
POTW, any industrial user subject to pretreatment standards shall submit to
the POTW a report, on forms provided by the POTW, indicating the nature and
concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process
which are limited by pretreatment standards and the average and maximum daily
flow for these process units in the user’s facility which are limited by
such pretreatment standards. The report shall state whether the applicable
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what
additional operation and maintenance or pretreatment techniques or
installations are necessary to bring the user into compliance with the
applicable pretreatment standards. This statement shall be signed by an
authorized representative of the industrial user and certified to by a
qualified professional.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-28  PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS FOR ALL SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS.



   (A)   All significant industrial users subject to an applicable
pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such applicable
pretreatment standard or, in the case of a new source, after discharge of
waste-water to the POTW begins, shall submit to the POTW, in accordance with
the schedule contained in its industrial discharge permit, a certified report
indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which
are limited by such applicable pretreatment standards. For industrial users
subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the control
authority, this report shall obtain a reasonable measure of the user’s
long-term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production, this report shall include the user’s
actual production during the appropriate sampling period. This report shall
include a record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for
the reporting period.



   (B)   At the discretion of the POTW and in consideration of such
factors as a local high or low flow rate, holidays, budget cycles, the POTW
may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are submitted.



   (C)   The control authority shall require that the frequency of
monitoring necessary to assess and assure compliance by industrial users with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.



   (D)   If any industrial user subject to the reporting requirements
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the control
authority, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.



   (E)   If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a
violation, the user shall notify the control authority within 24 hours of
becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and
analysis to the control authority within 30 days of becoming aware of the
violation, except the industrial user is not required to resample if:



      (1)   The control authority performs sampling for the
industrial user at a frequency of once per month; or



      (2)   The control authority performs sampling at the user
location between the time when the user receives the results of the sampling.



   (F)   All analyses shall be performed in accordance with 
procedures established by the Administrator pursuant to § 304(h) of the
Federal Act and contained in 40 C.F.R. part 136 and amendments thereto or
with any other test procedures approved by the Administrator.



   (G)   Sampling and analysis may be performed by the control
authority in lieu of the industrial user. Where the POTW performs the
required sampling and analyses in lieu of the industrial user, the user will
not be required to submit the compliance certification required under 40
C.F.R. §§ 403.3(b)(6) and 403.12(d). In addition, where the POTW itself
collects all the information required for the report, including flow data the
industrial user will not be required to submit the report.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-29  MONITORING FACILITIES.



   (A)   The village shall require to be provided and operated at the
significant industrial user’s own expense monitoring facilities to allow
inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer or internal
drainage systems. The monitoring facility will normally be situated on the
user’s premises, but the village may, when such a location would be
impractical and cause undue hardship to the user, allow the facility to be
constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will
not be obstructed by landscaping, parked vehicles or other activities of the
user.



   (B)   Where required by the village POTW, additional control
manholes or sampling chambers shall be provided at the end of each industrial
process within an industrial user’s facility suitable for the determination
of compliance with pretreatment standards.



   (C)   Whenever required by an industrial discharge permit, any
significant industrial user shall install a large manhole or sampling chamber
for each separate discharge in the building sewer in accordance with plans
and specifications approved by the village, installed and maintained at all
times at the user’s expense, which shall have ample room in each sampling
chamber to permit the POTW to take accurate composite samples for analysis.
The chamber shall be safely, easily and independently accessible to
authorized representatives of the village at any time.



      (1)   Each sampling chamber shall contain a Palmer-Bowlus
flume unless a weir or similar device is approved by the POTW with a
recording and totalizing register for measurement of the liquid quantity; or,
at the discretion of the village, the metered water supply to the industrial
plant may be used as the liquid quantity where it is substantiated to the
village that the metered water supply and waste quantities are approximately
the same, or where a measurable adjustment agreed to by the POTW is made in
the metered water supply to determine the liquid waste quantity.



      (2)   When required, samples shall be taken as determined by
the village POTW and properly refrigerated and preserved in accordance with
the standard methods and shall be composited in proportion to the flow for a
representative 24-hour sample. Such sampling shall be done as prescribed by
the user’s industrial discharge permit.



      (3)   The sampling chamber, metering device and documentation
of the frequency of sampling, sampling methods and analyses of samples shall
be subject, at any reasonable time, to inspection and verification by the
POTW.



   (D)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
water and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be
determined and performed in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(g), as
amended from time to time.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-30  INSPECTION, SAMPLING AND RECORDS KEEPING.



   (A)   The village may inspect the facilities of users to ascertain
whether the purposes of this article are being met and if all requirements of
this article are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where
wastewater is discharged, a treatment system is located, or in which records
are kept shall allow the village or its representative ready access upon
presentation of credentials at reasonable times to all parts of such premises
where wastewater is generated or chemicals are stored for the purposes of
inspection, sampling, examination and photocopying of records required to be
kept by this article, and in the performance of any of their duties. The
village shall have the right to set up on the user’s property such devices
as are necessary to conduct sampling, monitoring and metering operations.
Where a user has security measures in force which would require suitable
identification necessary arrangements with their security guards shall be
made so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from
the village shall be permitted to enter immediately for the purposes of
performing their specific responsibilities. Such arrangements shall be made
by users with their security guards within 30 days of the passage of this
article. In the event that such persons are refused admission, they may apply
for the issuance of a search warrant.



   (B)   Users and the village shall maintain records of all
information resulting from any monitoring activities required by this article
or, in the case of industrial users, by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(n). The village
and industrial users shall maintain such records for a minimum of three
years. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any
unresolved litigation regarding the discharge of pollutants by the industrial
user of operation of the village pretreatment program or when requested by
the Regional Administrator of the Director of IEPA.



   (C)   Industrial users and the POTW shall maintain records of all
information resulting from any monitoring activities required by this article
and shall include:



      (1)   The date, exact place, method and time of sampling and
the names of the person or persons taking the samples;



      (2)   The dates analyses were performed;



      (3)   Who performed the analyses;



      (4)   The analytical techniques or methods used; and



      (5)   The results of such analyses.



   (D)   All industrial users shall promptly notify the POTW in advance
of substantial change in the volume of character of pollutants in their
discharge.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-31  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   To the extent permitted by law, information and data relating
to a user, obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications,
permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to
the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user
specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
village that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of
the user.



   (B)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, and until
such time as the village determines that the requested information is not
entitled to confidential treatment, the portions of a report which might
disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for
inspection by the public, but to the extent permitted by law shall be made
available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to
this article, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit, and for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.



   (C)   Information and data provided to the village which is effluent
data shall be available to the public without restriction.



   (D)   To the extent permitted by law, information accepted by the
village as confidential shall not be transmitted to the general public by the
village until and unless a 30-day notification is given to the user.



   (E)   The Village Engineer shall implement measures to prevent the
negligent release of confidential information; however, the Engineer, Public
Works Director and any other village officer or employee of the village shall
not be held legally responsible for release of information if they have acted
in good faith.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-32  PUBLIC NOTIFICATION OF SIGNIFICANT VIOLATIONS.



   The POTW shall annually publish in the largest daily newspaper
published in the village in which the POTW is located a list of industrial
users who committed significant violations of any pretreatment requirement or
standard during the previous 12 months. The notification shall also summarize
any enforcement actions taken against those industrial users during the same
12 months.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-33  COMPULSORY COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Notice of violation and compliance meeting. Should a violation
of this article by an industrial user occur, whether or not a significant
industrial user, the POTW shall notify the offending user, in writing,
through a notice of violation as to the particulars of such violation or
violations and set a time and place for a meeting (hereinafter called a
compliance meeting) to be attended by representatives of the POTW and the
industrial user. The purpose of such a meeting shall be to establish such
procedures, investigations, studies and compliance measures as the POTW deems
necessary and desirable to control and prevent violation of this article. The
industrial user shall cooperate fully with the POTW in making such
investigations and studies.



   (B)   Order.



      (1)   Following the completion of any procedures,
investigations or studies as described above, the village may issue an order
which may:



         (a)   Require compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements;



         (b)   Control the contribution to the POTW to ensure
compliance with applicable pre-treatment standards and requirements;



         (c)   Require:



            1.   The development of a compliance schedule for
the installation of technology required to meet applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements; and



            2.   The submission of all notices and
self-monitoring reports as are necessary to assess and assure compliance by
industrial users with pretreatment standards and requirements, including, but
not limited to, the reports required by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12.



      (2)   If the POTW has sufficient information at the time of
compliance meeting to determine necessary and desirable compliance measures,
it may, at the time of the compliance meeting, issue an order directing and
requiring the industrial user to take such action, including pretreatment,
without further investigation or study.



      (3)   Failure to comply with the order of the POTW shall be
deemed a violation of this article and may be grounds for revocation of the
significant industrial user’s industrial discharge permit and grounds for
such other actions as may be authorized for violation of this article.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-34  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Conditions for revocation. Any significant industrial user who
violates this article, an order issued pursuant to division (B) below, the
State Environmental Protection Act, or the Federal Act, or regulations
promulgated under either act, or any of the following, is subject to having
its industrial discharge permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of
this section:



      (1)   Failure of an industrial user to fully and accurately
report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its wastewater
discharge as deter-mined by the industrial user’s or POTW’s analysis;



      (2)   Failure of the industrial user to fully and accurately
report significant changes in process activity which could affect its
wastewater discharge or wastewater constituents and characteristics;



      (3)   Refusal of reasonable access to the industrial user’s
premises by POTW representatives for the purpose of inspection or monitoring;



      (4)   Tampering with, disrupting or destroying POTW equipment;



      (5)   Failure to report an accidental discharge of a pollutant;



      (6)   Failure to report an upset of the industrial user’s
treatment facilities; or



      (7)   Violations of any condition of the wastewater discharge
permit.



   (B)   Procedures for revocation.



      (1)   The village may order any significant industrial user
who causes or allows any action which is subject to revocation under division
(A) of this section to show cause before the Village Board why its industrial
discharge permit should not be revoked. A notice shall be served on the
significant industrial user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be
held by the Village Board regarding the violation, the reasons why the action
is to be taken, the proposed action and directing the significant industrial
user to show cause before the Village Board why its industrial discharge
permit should be revoked. The notice of hearing shall be served personally or
by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days
before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a
corporation.



      (2)   The Village Board may itself conduct the hearing and
take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or its attorney to:



         (a)   Issue in the name of the Village Board notices of
hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearing;



         (b)   Take the evidence; and



         (c)   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing,
including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to
the Village Board for action thereon.



      (3)   At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony
taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so
recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to
the hearing upon payment of the usual copying charges therefore.



      (4)   After the Village Board has reviewed the evidence, it
may issue an order to the significant industrial user responsible for the
discharge directing either:



         (a)   The industrial discharge permit be revoked and the
service be disconnected;



         (b)   Following a specified time, the industrial
discharge permit shall be revoked and sewer service discontinued unless
adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances have
been installed and operated properly to comply with the industrial discharge
permit;



         (c)   Direct the user to cease the un-authorized
discharge effective after a specified period of time; or



         (d)   Such other action as deemed necessary by the
Village Board to abate the discharge be done by the industrial user, further
orders and directives as are necessary may be issued.



      (5)   Following an order of revocation of its industrial
discharge permit, the significant industrial user shall cease discharging to
the POTW in accordance with the terms of such order. Failure to do so shall
be prima facie evidence of continuing harm to the POTW and provide grounds
for the granting of injunctive relief or temporary restraining orders.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-35  ORDER TO SHOW CAUSE REGARDING DISCONNECTION.



   The POTW may, upon discovering an ongoing or potential discharge to the
POTW which presents or may present a danger to the environment or which
threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, immediately issue an
order to the responsible industrial user to show cause before the Village
Board why the POTW should not disconnect service, revoke the significant
industrial user’s industrial discharge permit or seek injunctive relief to
prohibit the industrial user from making the discharge to the POTW.
Procedures to be followed by the Village Board in such show cause hearing
shall be in accordance with § 13-4-34(B).



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-36  IMMEDIATE DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE.



   (A)   Conditions for immediate disconnection of service. Any
industrial user is subject to immediate disconnection of service under either
of the following conditions:



      (1)   Whenever immediate disconnection is required to halt or
prevent any discharge of pollutants to the POTW which reasonably appears to
the Village Engineer to present an imminent endangerment to the health of
welfare of persons; or



      (2)   Whenever the significant industrial user’s industrial
discharge permit is revoked.



   (B)   Procedures for immediate disconnection. Notwithstanding §§
13-4-33, 13-4-34 and 13-4-35, the Village Engineer shall have the authority,
after informal notice to the user, to immediately and effectively halt or
prevent any discharge of pollutants to the POTW that reasonably appears to
present an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. When
the Engineer determines that such an emergency situation exists, he or she
shall issue a verbal order (followed immediately by a written order) to the
user stating the problem and requiring immediate cessation of the discharge.
The Engineer’s actions may include disconnection of wastewater collection
service. The Engineer shall obtain the concurrence of the Village Attorney
before initiating action. Methods of informal notice shall include, but not
be limited to, any of the following: personal conversation between user and
village employees, telephone calls, letters, hand-delivered messages or
notices posted at the user’s premises or point of discharge.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-37  ELIMINATION OF DISCHARGE; REINSTATEMENT.



   Any user notified of a disconnection of waste-water treatment service
under §§ 13-4-35 and 13-4-36 and/or revocation of its industrial discharge
permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event of a
failure of the user to comply voluntarily with the disconnection or
revocation order, the village shall take such steps as deemed necessary,
including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize
damage to the POTW system or danger to any individuals. The Village Engineer
shall reinstate the industrial discharge permit and/or the wastewater
treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the non-complying
discharge.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-38  INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.



   (A)   The village may institute a civil action for an injunction to
restrain violations of this article.



   (B)   The village may, upon discovering an ongoing or potential
discharge of pollutants to the village POTW which reasonably appears to
present an imminent danger to the health or welfare of persons, seek and
obtain from the Circuit Court of DuPage County a temporary restraining order
of preliminary injunction to halt or prohibit such discharge. Prior to the
filing of such petition, the discharger shall be given informal notice of the
village’s intention to file such action. Methods of informal notice shall
include but not be limited to any of the following: personal conversation
between discharger and village employees, telephone calls, letters,
hand-delivered messages or notices posted at the discharger’s premises or
point of discharge. Personal contact between village personnel and the
discharger shall be attempted, but shall not be condition precedent to the
village petitioning for and obtaining a temporary restraining order.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-39  ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.



   (A)   In addition to remedies available to the village set forth
elsewhere in this article, if the village is fined by the state or USEPA for
violation of the village’s NPDES permit or violation of water quality
standards as the result of a discharge of pollutants, then the fine,
including all village legal, sampling, analytical testing costs and any other
related costs shall be charged to the responsible user. Such charge shall be
in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other remedies the village may have
under this article, statutes, regulations, at law or in equity.



   (B)   If the discharge from any user causes a deposit, obstruction
or damage to any of the village wastewater facilities, the Village Engineer
shall cause the deposit or obstruction to be promptly removed or cause the
damage to be promptly repaired. The cost of such work, including materials,
labor and super-vision, shall be borne by the person causing such deposit,
obstruction or damage.



   (C)   The remedies provided in this article shall not be exclusive
and the village may seek whatever other remedies are authorized by statute,
at law or in equity against any person violating the provisions of this
article.



   (D)   In addition to any fine levied under the provisions of §
13-4-41, the village may, where the circumstances of the particular case so
dictate, seek injunctive relief to prohibit the user from discharging into
the sanitary sewer system, or to provide such other affirmative relief as may
be appropriate.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-40  ENFORCEMENT OF UPSET.



   (A)   An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative
defense of upset shall demonstrate through properly signed, contemporaneous
operating loss or other relevant evidence that:



      (1)   An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify
the cause of an upset;



      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent
and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation or
maintenance procedures; and



      (3)   The industrial user has submitted the following
information to the POTW and control authority within 24 hours of becoming
aware of the upset:



         (a)   A description of the indirect dis-charge and cause
of non-compliance;



         (b)   The period of non-compliance, including exact
dates and time, or if not corrected, the anticipated time the non-compliance
is expected to continue; and



         (c)   Steps being taken or planned to reduce, eliminate
and prevent reoccurrence of the non-compliance.



   (B)   In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-41  PENALTIES AND COSTS.



   Any user who is found to have violated an order of the Village Board of
Trustees or who has failed to comply with any provisions of this article and
the orders, rules and regulations and permits issued hereunder shall be fined
in an amount not less than $50, nor more than $750, for each violation. For
the purpose of this section, each day in which any such violation shall occur
shall be deemed a separate violation, and a separate violation shall be
deemed to have occurred for each constituent which has limitations listed in
§ 13-4-4 found to exceed the limits established in this article during any
such day. For each separate violation, each such person shall be fined an
amount not to exceed $750. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the
village may recover reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs, court reporter
fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the
person found to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations
and permits issued hereunder.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-42  FALSIFICATION.



   Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article or industrial
discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall
be subject to the penalties and costs provided in § 13-4-41 and shall in
addition be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be punished by a
fine of not more than $750 or shall be incarcerated in a penal institution
other than the penitentiary for a period not to exceed six months.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-43  BILLS.



   (A)   Rates or charges for service shall be payable monthly
depending on the classification of service for which bills are rendered.



   (B)   The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user
of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service
to such premises and the service is furnished to the premises by the village
only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of
the services are jointly and severally liable therefore to the village.



   (C)   Bills for sewer service shall be sent out by the Village
Treasurer monthly succeeding the period for which the service is billed.



   (D)   All sewer bills are due and payable 15 days after being sent
out. A penalty of 10% shall be added to all bills not paid by the fifteenth
day after they have been rendered.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-44  DELINQUENT BILLS.



   If the charges for such services are not paid within 30 days or 30 days
hereinabove mentioned after the rendition of the bill for such services, such
services may be discontinued by order of the Board of Trustees following a
notice and hearing to be provided in substantially the same manner as set
forth herein.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-45  LIEN, NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY.



   (A)   Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid for 45 days
for monthly service, the Village Treasurer shall file with the County
Recorder of Deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the
legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and
a notice that the village claims a lien for this amount.



   (B)   If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the
premises and the Village Treasurer has notice of this, notice shall be mailed
to the owner of the premises if his or her address be known to the Treasurer,
whenever such bill remains unpaid for the period of 45 days for a monthly
bill.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-46  FORECLOSURE OF LIEN.



   The Village Attorney is hereby authorized to institute proceedings to
foreclose the lien for unpaid charges in any court having jurisdiction over
such matters against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid 45
days.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-47  REVENUES.



   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the wastewater
system shall be deposited in the Wastewater Account of the Wastewater Fund.
The Treasurer shall administer such fund as provided by law.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-48  ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of
accounts and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete
and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the
wastewater system and, at regular annual intervals, he or she shall cause to
be made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the
receipts and disbursements of the wastewater system.



   (B)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual
audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the
waste-water facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer
service charges under the waste recovery system do in fact meet these
regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the
audit report shall include the following:



      (1)   Flow data showing total gallons received at the
wastewater plant for the current fiscal year;



      (2)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed;



      (3)   Number of users connected to the system;



      (4)   Number of non-metered users; and



      (5)   A list of users discharging non-domestic wastes
(industrial users) and volume of waste discharges.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



§ 13-4-49  ACCESS TO RECORDS.



   The State Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized
representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records
of the village which are applicable to the village system of user charges of
industrial waste cost recovery for the purpose of making audit, examination,
excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of
the special and general conditions to any federal and state grant.



(Ord. 92-04-38, passed 4-14-1992)



ARTICLE 5:  STORM DRAINAGE; ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION



Section



   13-5-1   Statutory authority



   13-5-2   Purposes



   13-5-3   Interpretation of terms and words



   13-5-4   Definitions



   13-5-5   Applicability



   13-5-6   Interpretation



   13-5-7   Participating communities



   13-5-8   Responsibilities for administration



   13-5-9   Duties of Director



   13-5-10   Representative capacity



   13-5-11   Prohibition of illicit discharges



   13-5-12   Prohibition of illicit connections



   13-5-13   Submission of NOI to the Department



   13-5-14   Notification of spills



   13-5-15   Enforcement; violations



   13-5-16   Notice to correct violations; Director may take action



   13-5-17   Emergency cease and desist orders



   13-5-18   Violations deemed a public nuisance



   13-5-19   Nuisance abatement



   13-5-20   Fines



   13-5-21   Remedies not exclusive



   13-5-22   Suspension of MS4 access due to detection of illicit
discharges



   13-5-23   Right to appeal



   13-5-24   Enforcement measures after appeal



   13-5-25   Severability



   13-5-26   Most restrictive provisions apply



   13-5-27   Ultimate responsibility



§ 13-5-1  STATUTORY AUTHORITY.



   (A)   This article shall be known, and may be cited, as the
“Village of Carol Stream Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination
Ordinance”.



   (B)   The Village Board promulgates this article pursuant to its
authority to adopt ordinances regulating the quality of all storm water
runoff channels, streams and basins in the village.



   (C)   As applicable, the village may promulgate and enforce this
article pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 65 ILCS 5/11-12-12, 65 ILCS 5/11-30-2,
65 ILCS 5/11-30-8, and 65 ILCS 5/11-31-2 and such other authority as
applicable to the village and its home rule powers.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-2  PURPOSES.



   (A)   The purpose of this article is to ensure the health, safety
and general welfare of the citizens of the village, and protect and enhance
water quality in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) through the regulation of
non-storm water discharges to the storm drainage system. This article
establishes methods for controlling the introduction of discharges other than
those occurring as a direct result of precipitation and/or snow melt into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and the storm drainage system in
order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) Phase II permit process. Other purposes of this
article include:



      (1)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4
and the storm drainage system by non-storm water discharges; and



      (2)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the
MS4 and the storm drainage system.



   (B)   The purposes of this article shall be implemented by its
provisions.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-3  INTERPRETATION OF TERMS AND WORDS.



   For the purposes of this article, the terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows.



   (A)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense.



   (B)   Words used in the singular number include the plural number
and words used in the plural number include the singular number.



   (C)   The words “shall”, “will” and “must” are
mandatory, not permissive.



   (D)   The phrase “Director” refers to the Director of Public
Works who is the individual responsible for the enforcement.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-4  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms shall
have the meanings set forth except where otherwise specifically indicated.
Words and terms not defined shall have the meanings indicated by common
dictionary definition.



   BUILDING. A structure that is constructed or erected partially or
wholly above ground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term BUILDING
includes manufactured homes and includes both the above-ground and the
below-ground portions of the structure.



   CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA). The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.



   COMMITTEE. The Storm Water Management Committee of the DuPage County
Board, authorized by 55 ILCS 5/5-1062.



   COMMUNITY. Any municipality, or the unincorporated county, within
DuPage County acting as a unit of local government.



   COUNTY. The County of DuPage, Illinois.



   DEPARTMENT. The Village of Carol Stream Department of Public Works or
successor agency.



   DIRECTOR. The Village of Carol Stream Director of Public Works or
successor position or his or her designee.



   DIVISION. The DuPage County Storm Water Management Division or
successor agency.



   DRAIN. Piping and appurtenances for conveying a fluid.



   FACILITY. Something that is built, installed or established to serve a
particular purpose.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material which may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial hazard to human health, safety, property or the
environment.



   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following:



      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface that allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drainage
system including, but not limited to, any conveyances that allow any
non-storm water discharge including sewage, process wastewater and wash water
to enter the storm drainage system and any connections to the storm drainage
system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or
connection had been previously allowed, permitted or approved by the
community; or



      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the storm drainage system that has not been documented
in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the community.



   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to
the storm drainage system, except as exempted in § 13-5-11.



   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to an industrial NPDES storm
water permit, as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14).



   LINE. A hollow conduit through which fluids are transported between two
or more points.



   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including, but not limited to, sidewalks, roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made
channels and storm sewers) owned or operated by a governmental entity and
designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water, and that is not
used for collecting or conveying sewage.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. A
permit issued by Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States,
whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group or general area-wide
basis.



   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drainage system
that is not the direct result of precipitation and/or snow melt in the
tributary drainage basin.



   NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI). Illinois Environmental Protection Agency notice
of intent to participate in coverage under the general permit to discharge
storm water associated with industrial activity.



   OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE. A committee appointed by the village by Ord.
2003-04-16 to oversee the implementation and enforcement of the village’s
storm water ordinance.



   PARCEL. Contiguous land under single ownership or control.



   PERSON. Any individual, association, partnership, public or private
corporation, municipality, political subdivision, government agency or any
other legal entity, including heirs, successors, agents, officers and assigns
of such entity.



   pH NEUTRAL. pH value between 6.5 and 9.0 standard units.



   PLAN. The DuPage County Storm Water Management Plan, adopted by the
DuPage County Board in September 1989, as amended from time to time.



   POLLUTANT. Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. POLLUTANTS
may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and
other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard
wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned
objects, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, wastewater, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that
result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.



   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.



   RUNOFF. The waters derived from precipitation and/or melting snow
within a tributary drainage basin that exceeds the infiltration capacity of
that basin.



   SEWAGE. Polluted storm water, wastewater or other refuse liquids
usually conveyed by sewers.



   SEWER. An artificial conduit to carry off sewage and/or surface water
(as from rainfall), including sanitation, storm water and/or combined sewers.



   SEWERAGE. A system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation, pumping and treatment of sewage.



   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. A facility by which storm water is collected
and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains,
pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or
altered drainage channels, reservoirs and other drainage structures.



   STORM WATER. Any surface flow, runoff and drainage from any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.



   STRUCTURE. Anything that is erected or constructed. The term STRUCTURE
includes, without limitation: buildings, manufactured homes, tanks, dams,
sewers, constructed channels, outfalls, parking lots, driveways, roads,
sidewalks and concrete patios.



   VILLAGE. The Village of Carol Stream, Illinois.



   WASTEWATER. Water that has been used and is not for reuse unless
treated by a wastewater treatment facility.



   WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES. As defined in the CWA, WATERS OF THE
UNITED STATES applies only to surface waters, rivers, lakes, estuaries,
coastal waters and wetlands. Not all surface waters are legally WATERS OF THE
UNITED STATES. Generally, those waters include the following:



      (1)   All interstate waters;



      (2)   Intrastate waters used in interstate and/or foreign
commerce;



      (3)   Tributaries of the above;



      (4)   Territorial seas at the cyclical high tide mark; and



      (5)   Wetlands adjacent to all the above.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-5  APPLICABILITY.



   This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage
system from any developed or undeveloped lands within the jurisdiction of the
Department, unless explicitly exempted by § 13-5-11, including any
amendments or revisions thereto.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-6  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   The provisions of this article shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, prosperity and general welfare and the environment of the
residents of the village, and to effectuate the purposes of this article and
enabling legislation.



   (B)   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this article
are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions
imposed by any other applicable statute, law, ordinance, regulation or rule,
the provision that is most restrictive or imposes the higher standards or
requirements shall apply.



   (C)   The provisions of this article shall be interpreted to be
cumulative of, and to impose limitations in addition to, all other
ordinances, laws, codes and regulations, in existence or which may be passed
governing any subject matter of this chapter. To the greatest extent
possible, the provisions of this article shall be construed to be consistent
with, and not in conflict with, the provisions of such other ordinances,
laws, codes and regulations, and with each other, to the end that all such
provisions may be given their fullest application.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-7  PARTICIPATING COMMUNITIES.



   (A)   The village shall promulgate and enforce this article in
accordance with the following participation levels. Participation levels
shall be established through the adoption of intergovernmental agreements.



   (B)   Duties of a full participant community include:



      (1)   Completion of an inter-governmental agreement for full
participation in the illicit discharge detection and elimination program;



      (2)   Provide the Division with a current storm sewer atlas.
An updated storm sewer atlas shall be provided to the Division annually;



      (3)   Provide assistance to the Division in acquiring access
to the storm drainage system as mutually deemed necessary;



      (4)   Provide timely prosecution of persons found to be in
violation of this article when necessary per §§ 13-5-15 through 13-5-21; and



      (5)   Provide the Division with documentation of any
enforcement action or prosecution from the previous one year for inclusion in
the IEPA annual facility inspection report.



   (C)   Duties of a partial participant community include:



      (1)   Completion of an inter-governmental agreement for
partial participation in the illicit discharge detection and elimination
program;



      (2)   Provide the Division with a current storm sewer atlas.
An updated storm sewer atlas shall be provided to the Division annually;



      (3)   Tracing discharges to their source when the Division
determines that an illicit discharge has been located within the jurisdiction
of the community;



      (4)   Provide timely prosecution of persons found to be in
violation of this article when necessary per §§ 13-5-15 through 13-5-21; and



      (5)   Provide the Division with documentation of any
enforcement action or prosecution from the previous one year for inclusion in
the IEPA annual facility inspection report.



   (D)   Duties of a non-participant community include:



      (1)   Responsible for developing and implementing an illicit
discharge detection and elimination program to ensure compliance with the
IEPA NPDES regulations within municipal limits on its own behalf; and



      (2)   If an inter-governmental agreement is not submitted to
the county for partial or full participation, the community will be
designated as a non-participant.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-8  RESPONSIBILITIES FOR ADMINISTRATION.



   The Department shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions
of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the Department may
be delegated in writing by the Director to persons or entities acting in the
beneficial interest, or in the employ of, the Department as representatives,
contractors, designees and/or assigns.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-9  DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.



   The duties and functions of the Director shall include:



   (A)   Determining policy related to and directing the enforcement of
this article, as applicable;



   (B)   Supervising the execution of this article; and



   (C)   Notifying the Division, and the IEPA, of any amendments to
this article.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-10  REPRESENTATIVE CAPACITY.



   In all cases when any action is taken by the Director, or his or her
duly appointed designee, to enforce the provisions of this article, such
action shall be taken in the name of and on behalf of the village, and
neither the Director, nor his or her designee, in so acting for the village
shall be rendered personally liable.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-11  PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT DISCHARGES.



   (A)   No person shall place, drain or otherwise discharge, cause or
allow others under their control to place, drain or otherwise discharge into
the storm drainage system or MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants, other than normal storm water unless specifically exempted in
division (C) below.



   (B)   The following discharges into the MS4 or the storm drainage
system shall be prohibited:



      (1)   Discharges that are not a direct result of precipitation
and/or snow melt within the drainage area of the MS4; and



      (2)   Discharges from an illicit connection.



   (C)   The following discharges are exempt from discharge
prohibitions established herein provided they do not cause an adverse effect
on water quality as determined by the Director:



      (1)   Discharges caused by governmental public works and storm
water management units as part of their standard operations in compliance
with all applicable regulations;



      (2)   Discharges required by law or authorized by permit,
including any non-storm water discharge permitted under an NPDES permit,
waiver or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered by
the USEPA and/or IEPA;



      (3)   Water line and fire hydrant flushing;



      (4)   Landscape irrigation water;



      (5)   Rising ground waters;



      (6)   Ground water infiltration;



      (7)   Pumped ground water;



      (8)   Discharges from potable water sources;



      (9)   Foundation drains;



      (10)   Air conditioning condensate;



      (11)   Irrigation water (except for wastewater irrigation);



      (12)   Springs;



      (13)   Water from crawl space pumps;



      (14)   Footing drains;



      (15)   Storm sewer cleaning water;



      (16)   Water from any outdoor residential, charitable or
automobile dealership premise car wash;



      (17)   Routine external building washdown which does not use
detergents;



      (18)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;



      (19)   Dechlorinated pH neutral swimming pool discharges;



      (20)   Residual street wash water;



      (21)   Discharges or flows from firefighting activities;



      (22)   Dechlorinated water reservoir discharges;



      (23)   Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or
hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spilled material has been
removed);



      (24)   Discharges associated with dye testing of water line,
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, private drains or septic systems; however,
this activity shall not take place until the discharger, or tester, has
provided notification to the Department at least two full business days prior
to the test date, unless an emergency situation does not allow time for such
notification; and



      (25)   Other discharges approved by the Department as being
substantially like any of the discharge types enumerated in this division (C).



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-12  PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of
illicit connections to the storm drainage system or MS4 is prohibited.



   (B)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of connection.



   (C)   A person is considered to be in violation of this article if
the person connects a line conveying sewage to the storm drainage system or
MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.



   (D)   Connections in violation of this article must be disconnected
and redirected, if necessary, to an approved wastewater management system or
the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the Department and the appropriate
sanitary treatment facility.



   (E)   Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans,
maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system or
MS4, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt
of written notice of violation from the Department requiring that such
locating be completed. Such notice shall specify a reasonable time period
within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined,
that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or
other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm
sewer system, MS4, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be
identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided
to the Department.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-13  SUBMISSION OF NOI TO THE DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   Any person operating a facility subject to the IEPA’s
general permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity
shall submit a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) to the Department at the
same time the operator submits the original notice of intent to the IEPA as
applicable.



   (B)   The copy of the notice of intent may be delivered to the
Department either in person or by mailing it to:



      Notice of Intent to Discharge



      Storm Water Department of Public Works



      124 Gerzevske Lane



      Carol Stream, IL 60188



   (C)   A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility
that is discharging storm water associated with industrial activity without
having submitted a copy of the notice of intent to do so to the Department.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-14  NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.



   (A)   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any
person owning, leasing or exercising control over a property, or responsible
for emergency response for a property, has information of any known or
suspected spill of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit
discharges or pollutants discharging into the MS4 or the storm drainage
system, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment and cleanup of such spill.



      (1)   In the event of such a spill, said person shall
immediately notify local emergency dispatch services and act in accordance
with Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA) and IEPA regulations.



      (2)   Said person shall notify the Department of the spill in
person or by phone, facsimile or email no later than the next business day.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the Department within three business days of the
phone notice.



      (3)   If the spill emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain
an on-site written record of the spill and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least five years.



   (B)   Proper notice, including containment and cleanup as outlined
in division (A) above, shall exempt the notifying parties from applicable
fines set forth in § 13-5-20.



   (C)   Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above
is a violation of this article.



   (D)   Notwithstanding the language of division (B) above, a party
causing a spill that contaminates or harms a storm sewer system shall not be
relieved of liability for damages resulting from such act.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-15  ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   The Director shall have primary responsibility for the
enforcement of the provisions of this article. The village may enter into
agreements with other governmental units for the purpose of implementing this
article.



   (B)   A person violates this article when that person:



      (1)   Performs any act expressly prohibited by any provision
of this article;



      (2)   Disobeys, neglects or fails to carry out or comply with
any provision of this article or of any order or notice issued by the
Director;



      (3)   Allows any condition or act that violates any provision
of this article to continue unabated on property owned, leased, managed or
under the control of such person; or



      (4)   Directs, orders, permits or allows a second person to do
any act expressly prohibited by any provision of this article, or to maintain
or continue unabated any condition or act that violates any provision of this
article on property owned, leased, managed or under the control of the first
person.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-16  NOTICE TO CORRECT VIOLATIONS; DIRECTOR MAY TAKE ACTION.



   (A)   The Director may issue a notice of violation ordering a person
to take action to achieve compliance with the provisions of this article
and/or to cease and desist from any action conducted in violation of this
article. Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of a notice of
violation and/or order to cease and desist shall constitute a violation of
this article.



      (1)   The Director shall set forth the form and content of any
notices issued under this article.



      (2)   The Director may issue a warning of violation ordering a
person to take action to achieve compliance with the provisions of this
article. If a person fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a
warning, the Director may, thereafter, issue a notice of violation.



      (3)   The Director may issue a warning of violation and
disburse educational materials outlining appropriate measures to minimize the
discharge of pollutants.



   (B)   If a person fails to comply with an order issued under this
section, the Director may direct the appropriate legal counsel to commence
any legal proceeding authorized by this article, under the law or equity,
necessary to enforce any provision of this article and/or to protect public
health and safety. Any legal action brought under this article shall be in
the name of the village.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-17  EMERGENCY CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.



   (A)   The Department may issue an emergency order in the event of
the following:



      (1)   Any person has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this article or any order issued hereunder, or that the
person’s past violations are likely to recur; and



      (2)   The person’s violation has caused or contributed to an
actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or storm drainage system and an
imminent threat of violation is present.



   (B)   The Department may issue the emergency order to the violator
directing that the violator:



      (1)   Immediately cease and desist all such violations;



      (2)   Immediately comply with all ordinance requirements; and



      (3)   Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed
to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
immediately halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.



   (C)   Any person notified of an emergency order under this division
(C) shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its endangering discharge.
In the event of a discharger’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily
with the emergency order, the Department may take such steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4, storm drainage system or
waters of the United States and/or endangerment to persons or to the
environment, including immediate termination of a facility’s water supply,
sewer connection or other municipal utility services. The Department may
allow the person to recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Department that the period of endangerment has passed,
unless further termination proceedings are initiated against the discharger
under this article. A person that is responsible, in whole or in part, for
any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed
written statement, describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the
measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Department within 15
days of receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an emergency cease and
desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the violator.



   (D)   The Department may also seek any appropriate judicial orders
to enforce its emergency orders.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-18  VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any
provision of this article shall constitute a threat to public health and
safety and is declared and deemed a public nuisance.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-19  NUISANCE ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Whenever a nuisance shall be found to exist on any premise,
the Director may order such nuisance to be abated upon determination that the
nuisance constitutes a threat to public health or safety.



   (B)   In the event of an emergency situation, as determined by the
Director, involving an immediate threat to public health and safety, the
Director may direct legal counsel to immediately commence any legal or
equitable proceeding necessary to restrain, abate and/or remedy said
situation. The Director may take such action without having to first issue a
notice of violation to the person(s) having control of, or acting as agent
for, such premise where the nuisance is located, or, waiting for such
person(s) to abate or remove such nuisance as previously ordered by the
Director.



   (C)   In all other cases, the Director may notify, in writing, the
person(s) having control of, or acting as agent for, such premises where the
nuisance is located and directing such person(s) to abate or remove such
nuisance within such time as is stated on the notice. Upon the failure or
refusal of such person(s) to comply with the notice, the Director may direct
that appropriate proceeding commence to compel the abatement, or removal, of
such a nuisance in any manner allowed by law, equity or this article and/or
authorizing the Department to act to abate, or remove, such nuisance. The
person(s) having control of such premises, in addition to the other remedies
provided by this article, shall be liable to the Department for any costs
incurred by the Department to effect such abatement, or removal, including
reasonable attorney’s fees and other costs of enforcement, to be recovered
by a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-20  FINES.



   Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon a
finding that a violation has occurred, be fined not more than $750 each day,
or any portion of a day, during which such violation is committed, continued
or permitted shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as
such.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-21  REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.



   The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other
remedy available under this article or under any applicable federal, state or
local law and do not supersede or limit, any and all other penalties provided
by law. The Director may seek, at his or her discretion, cumulative remedies.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-22  SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS DUE TO DETECTION OF ILLICIT DISCHARGES.



   (A)   Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article
may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or
reduce an illicit discharge. The Department shall notify a violator of the
proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the
Department for a reconsideration and hearing. A person commits an offense if
the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this
section, without the prior approval of the Department.



   (B)   In emergency situations, the Department may, without prior
notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which presents or may
present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health
or welfare of persons, or to the MS4, storm drainage system or waters of the
United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued
in an emergency, the Department may take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize damage to the MS4, storm drainage system or waters of the
United States, or to minimize danger to public health and safety. The
Department shall obtain an emergency court order authorizing such termination.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-23  RIGHT TO APPEAL.



   (A)   Every request for an appeal shall be made, in writing, to the
Director. The Director may delegate the hearing of appeals to the Oversight
Committee in the manner provided for below.



   (B)   Any person aggrieved by any decision, ruling or determination
by the Director, or by any interpretation or application of any provision of
this article, may appeal such matter. An appeal of any decision made by the
Director shall be made within seven days of the decision contested, excepting
an appeal involving the assessment charge or calculation of any fine or
penalty in which cases which an appeal shall be brought before said amount
becomes 30 days past due.



      (1)   The appeal procedure shall commence when the person
aggrieved notifies the Director, in writing, of the intent to appeal the
decision of the Director. Such notice shall contain a short, clear statement
stating the following:



         (a)   Identifying the decision of the Director which
such person is appealing and how this article has been misread,
misinterpreted or misapplied in this instance and/or any mistakes of fact the
aggrieved believes the Director to have relied upon; and



         (b)   The name and both a mailing address and a
telephone number of the person making the request, which contact information
shall be used for giving notices related to the appeal. The person making the
request shall attach all written materials on which he or she intends to rely
upon in support of the request.



      (2)   The Director may, without conducting a hearing, grant
relief sought by the appeal, or may set the matter over for a hearing in the
manner provided in division (B)(3) below.



      (3)   Upon receipt of such notice of appeal, if relief is not
granted by the Director in accordance with division (B)(2) above, the
Director shall set a date for a hearing. Such hearing shall take place no
fewer than 14 days, nor more than 30 days, from the date that the Director
receives such notice of appeal unless the Director and party requesting the
hearing agree to a different schedule. The Director shall notify the person
making the appeal of the date of such hearing.



      (4)   At the hearing, the person making the appeal may appear
in person or represented by counsel, or submit his case in writing. The
decision concerning the appeal shall be in writing, shall be communicated to
the person making the appeal and shall state a finding upon which the
decision is based.



   (C)   The Oversight Committee shall have the authority to reverse,
modify or affirm any decision, ruling or determination by the Director made
pursuant to this article upon appeal. The Oversight Committee shall not act
in a manner that would violate or in any way conflict with any federal or
state standard or requirement. The Village Board may adopt such additional
rules and procedures, as it deems appropriate for performing such matters.



   (D)   The decision of the Oversight Committee may be appealed to the
Village Board in accord with the Village Board rules. The Village Board may
determine that it wishes to advance a particular appeal directly to the
Village Board and to by-pass the process before the Oversight Committee. In
making such a determination, the Village Board shall establish the timing and
process for the direct appeal.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-24  ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.



   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements
set forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within
seven days of the decision of the Director, Oversight Committee or the
Village Board, in the case of a direct appeal, upholding the decision of the
Department, then representatives of the Department are authorized to take any
and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the
property. In no case shall an appeal stay or bar the village from commencing
a legal action seeking emergency relief.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-25  SEVERABILITY.



   The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If
any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this article or the
application thereof to any person, establishment or circumstances shall be
held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or
application of this article.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-26  MOST RESTRICTIVE PROVISIONS APPLY.



   (A)   The provisions of this article shall be interpreted to be
cumulative of, and to impose limitations in addition to, all other
ordinances, laws, codes and regulations in existence or which may be passed
governing any subject matter of this article. To the greatest extent
possible, the provisions of this article shall be construed to be consistent
with, and not in conflict with, the provisions of such other ordinances,
laws, codes and regulations, and with each other, to the end that all such
provisions may be given their fullest application.



   (B)   This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other
ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. Where any provision of
this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other
ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is
more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or
the environment shall control.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



§ 13-5-27  ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.



   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article
are minimum standards; therefore, this article does not intend or imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution or unauthorized discharge of pollutants.



(Ord. 2009-07-35, passed 7-20-2009)



CHAPTER 14: GENERAL OFFENSES



      Article



         1.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



         2.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS



         3.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER



         4.   MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES



ARTICLE 1:  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



Section



   14-1-1   Definitions



   14-1-2   Animals; injury to



   14-1-3   Criminal defacement to property; graffiti



   14-1-4   Destruction of property



   14-1-5   Defacing notices



   14-1-6   Criminal trespass



   14-1-7   Theft



   14-1-8   Retail theft prohibited



   14-1-9   Receiving stolen property



   14-1-10   Appropriation of lost or misdelivered property



   14-1-11   Extortion



   14-1-12   Reckless burning



   14-1-13   Vehicles; abandonment



   14-1-14   Vehicles; inoperable



   14-1-15   Vehicles; unauthorized use of



   14-1-16   Penalty



   14-1-17   Liability of parent or legal guardian of minor offender



§ 14-1-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE. All vehicles in a state of disrepair rendering the
vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition, or any vehicle that has
not been moved or used for seven consecutive days or more and is apparently
deserted.



   BUILDING. Any structure, vehicle, railway car, aircraft or watercraft
used for lodging, business or industry.



   CREDIT CARD. Any instrument or device, whether incomplete, revoked or
expired, whether known as a credit card, credit plate, charge plate, courtesy
card or by any other name, issued with or without fee for the use of the
cardholder in obtaining money, goods, services or anything else of value,
including satisfaction of a debt or the payment of a check drawn by a
cardholder, either on credit or in consideration of an undertaking or
guaranty by the issuer.



   DAMAGE. An injury or harm to property sufficient to lower its value or
involving significant inconvenience or loss of efficiency.



   DECEPTION.



      (1)   Occurs when a person knowingly:



         (a)   Creates or confirms another’s false impression
which the person previously has created or confirmed;



         (b)   Fails to correct another’s false impression
which the person previously has created or confirmed;



         (c)   Prevents another from acquiring information
material to the disposition of the property involved;



         (d)   Transfers or encumbers property without disclosing
a lien, adverse claim or other legal impediment to the enjoyment of the
property, whether that impediment is or is not valid, or is not a matter of
official record;



         (e)   Promises performance which the person does not
intend to perform or knows will not be performed; or



         (f)   Uses a credit card without authorization or which
he or she knows to be stolen, forged, revoked or canceled.



      (2)   The term DECEPTION does not include falsity as to
matters having no pecuniary significance.



   ENTER OR REMAIN UNLAWFULLY. An unlicenced, uninvited or otherwise
unprivileged entry into or remaining in or upon premises. A person who,
regardless of his or her intent, enters or remains in or upon premises which
are, at the time, open to the public does so with license and privilege
unless he or she defies a lawful order not to enter or remain, personally
communicated to him or her by the owner of the premises or some other
authorized person. Permission to enter or remain in a public building which
is only partly open to the public is not PERMISSION TO ENTER OR REMAIN in
that part of the building which is not open to the public.



   FULL RETAIL VALUE. The merchant’s stated or advertised price of the
merchandise.



   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicles from which, for a period
of at least 30 days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or
on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or
otherwise treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own
motor power. INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE shall not include a motor vehicle which
has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own power
in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations; nor to any motor
vehicles that are kept within a building when not in use; nor to historic
vehicles over 25 years of age; nor to a motor vehicle on the premises of a
place of business engaged in wrecking or junking of motor vehicles.



   LEGAL GUARDIAN. A person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor
by a Circuit Court of the state, but does not include a person appointed
guardian or given custody of a minor under the Juvenile Court Act, being 705
ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.



   MERCHANDISE. Any item of tangible personal property.



   MERCHANT. An owner or operator of any retail mercantile establishment
or any agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer, director, franchisee or
independent contractor of such owner or operator.



   MINOR. A person who is above the age of 11 years, but not yet 19 years
of age.



   OBTAIN.



      (1)   In relation to property, to bring about a transfer or
purported transfer to the obtainer or another of a legally recognized
interest in the property; or



      (2)   In relation to labor or service, to secure performance
thereof for the benefit of the obtainer or another.



   OBTAIN OR EXERTS UNAUTHORIZED CONTROL OVER PROPERTY. Includes, but is
not necessarily limited to, conduct heretofore defined or known as common law
theft by trespassory taking, common law theft by trick, theft by conversion,
embezzlement, extortion or obtaining property by false pretenses.



   OWNER. Any person, other than the person who has possession of or any
other interest in the property involved, and without whose consent the person
has no authority to exert control over the property.



   PEACE OFFICER. Any person who, by virtue of his or her office or public
employment is vested in law with a duty to maintain public order or to make
arrests for an offense whether that duty extends to all offenses or is
limited to specific offenses.



   PERMANENTLY TO DEPRIVE.



      (1)   To withhold property, or cause it to be withheld from a
person permanently or for so extended a period or under such circumstances
that the major portion of its economic value, or of the use and benefit of
such property, is lost to him or her;



      (2)   To dispose of the property so as to make it unlikely
that the owner will recover it;



      (3)   To retain the property with intent to restore it to the
owner only if the owner purchases or leases it back, or pays a reward or
other compensation for its return; or



      (4)   To encumber, sell, give, pledge or otherwise transfer
any interest in the property.



   PREMISES. A building or real property.



   PREMISES OF A RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT. Includes, but is not
limited to, the retail mercantile establishment, any common use areas in
shopping centers and all parking areas set aside by a merchant or on behalf
of a merchant for the parking of vehicles for the convenience of the patrons
of such retail mercantile establishment.



   PROPERTY. Any money, credit card, personal property, real property,
thing in action, evidence of debt or contract, public record or article of
value of any kind.



   RECEIVING. Includes, but is not limited to, acquiring title,
possession, control or a security interest in the property.



   RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT. Any place where merchandise is
displayed, held, stored or offered for sale to the public.



   RETAIL THEFT. Limited to knowingly taking possession of merchandise,
the full retail value of which does not exceed $150.



   SERVICE. Includes, but is not limited to, labor, professional service,
transportation service, the supplying of hotel accommodations, restaurant
services, entertainment, the supplying of equipment for use, and the
supplying of commodities of a public utility nature such as gas, electricity,
steam and water.



   SHOPPING CART. Those push carts of the type or types which are commonly
provided by grocery stores, drug stores or other retail mercantile
establishments for the use of the public in trans-porting commodities in
stores and markets and, incidentally, from the stores to a place outside the
store.



   STEAL.



      (1)   To knowingly obtain or exert unauthorized control over
the property of another with intent permanently to deprive him or her of such
property; or



      (2)   To knowingly obtain by deception control over property
of another with intent permanently to deprive him or her of such property.



   STOLEN. Obtained by theft, robbery, extortion or appropriating lost or
misdelivered property.



   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every
way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.



   THREAT. To communicate, directly or indirectly, the intent:



      (1)   To cause bodily injury in the future to another;



      (2)   To cause damage to property of another;



      (3)   To subject another person to physical confinement or
restraint;



      (4)   To accuse another person of a crime or cause criminal
charges to be instituted against another person;



      (5)   To expose a secret or publicize an asserted fact,
whether true or false, tending to subject another person to hatred, contempt
or ridicule;



      (6)   To reveal significant information sought to be concealed
by the person threatened;



      (7)   To testify or provide information sought to be concealed
by the person threatened;



      (8)   To take wrongful action as an official against anyone or
anything, or wrongfully withhold official action, or cause such action or
withholding; or



      (9)   To do any other act which is intended to harm
substantially any person with respect to his or her health, safety, business,
financial condition or personal relationship.



   TO CONCEAL MERCHANDISE. Although there may be some notice of its
presence, that merchandise is not visible through ordinary observation.



   UNDER-RING. To cause the cash register or other sales recording device
to reflect less than the full retail value of the merchandise.



   VEHICLE. A machine propelled by power other than human power designed
to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and
transport persons of property or pull machinery and shall include, without
limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon.



§ 14-1-2  ANIMALS; INJURY TO.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or wound, or attempt to
kill or wound, by use of a firearm, slingshot, bow and arrow or otherwise,
any animal other than vermin or an animal which is causing imminent danger to
the health of a person or of property.



§ 14-1-3  CRIMINAL DEFACEMENT TO PROPERTY; GRAFFITI.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      GRAFFITI. In addition to its usual and customary meaning of
defacing walls or structures with messages or slogans, GRAFFITI shall also
mean any letter, numeral, figure, emblem, insignia, picture, outline,
character, spectacle, delineation, announcement, word, phrase, diagram,
symbol, sketch, inscription or representation, wherein the contents thereof
are visible to any member of the general public and which contains references
to sexual activity, diagrams relating to sexual activity or sexual organs,
references to criminal activities or groups which promote or are involved in
criminal activity, swearing or fighting words, defamatory materials about any
person, references to relationships or any marking of any kind whatsoever
which results in damage to, defacing of, marring of or discoloring of any
sidewalk, street or other public surface, any vehicle, any equipment, lamp,
lamp post or other village property, or of the exterior surface of a wall,
fence, door, building or other structure, whether publicly or privately owned.



      OWNER. The owner of record of the subject property, whether
public or private, at the time of the placement or discovery of the graffiti
or at a subsequent time, the beneficial owner under a land trust, the
contract purchaser or that person or persons or trust in whose name the
general taxes for the last preceding year were paid; except that, OWNER shall
not include the Village of Carol Stream.



      PROPERTY. Any building, structure, wall, sidewalk, street or
other public or private road, vehicle, equipment, land, lamp post, sign or
any other real or personal property on which graffiti is placed.



   (B)   Conduct prohibited.



      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to inscribe, draw or
otherwise place or cause to be placed any graffiti upon the surface of any
property that is publicly or privately owned.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or legal guardian to
knowingly permit any minor child in his or her custody or control to violate
division (B)(1) of this section.



      (3)   The parent or legal guardian of a minor defendant who
resides with such parent or legal guardian at the time of the offense may be
held liable for any fine or condition of restitution or reparation imposed by
a court upon a minor for violation of this section; provided that, such minor
has not paid such fine or made restitution or reparation within the time
ordered by the court; and, further provided that, such parent or legal
guardian has been served with summons or notice to appear whether in the
original cause or in any subsequent proceedings arising therefrom, including
sentencing or collection actions, as provided by law.



   (C)   Removal by owner.



      (1)   Owner’s responsibility. It shall be the duty of the
owner of the private property upon which any graffiti is placed or made to
remove, eradicate or eliminate such inscription or representation within ten
days of the occurrence unless granted additional time by the village. In no
event shall the owner be granted more than 30 days to remove the graffiti.
The BOCA National Existing Structures Code, adopted and amended by the
village as provided in Ch. 6 of this code, shall also govern where
applicable, except that in the event of a conflict between the code and this
section, this section shall prevail.



      (2)   Notice to remove graffiti. The owner or his, her or
their representative shall be notified by certified mail or personal notice
that they have ten days, from the date of the delivery of the notice or
personal notification, in which to remove the graffiti. In no event shall the
owner of the property be granted more than 30 days to remove the graffiti,
weather conditions permitting as reasonably determined by the village. The
owner is responsible for removal within the time allowed in divisions (C)(1)
and (C)(2) of this section. In the event the owner has failed to eliminate
such graffiti, a village ordinance complaint will be issued to the owner of
the property according to the provisions in division (E)(1) of this section.
If criminal charges have been filed against the person believed responsible
for placement of the graffiti, the costs to remove the graffiti shall be
presented to the prosecutor for restitution to the owner of the property in
addition to the penalties as described in division (E)(1) of this section.



      (3)   List of contractors and cleaning materials. The village
may make available a list of contractors in the business of removing graffiti
and/or a list of cleaning materials generally recognized in the industry as
effective in the removal of graffiti. By providing such lists of contractors
and cleaning materials, the village does not guarantee the quality or
adequacy of work performed by anyone selected by owner or the effectiveness
or safety of the materials listed, and the village expressly disclaims
responsibility or liability for the quality or adequacy of such work or
materials or any claims for damage or injury arising therefrom.



   (D)   Removal by village.



      (1)   The village shall have the right, but not the duty, to
remove graffiti from the exterior of private property if the owner informs
the village of an inability to remove it. Prior to the village entering any
private property to remove graffiti, the owner must sign a statement
authorizing removal by the village and agreeing to pay the reasonable costs
of such removal and to allow the recording of a lien against the real estate
upon which the work was performed if the cost is not paid to the village
within 30 days of the date of the invoice sent to the owner. The owner must
also sign a release holding the village harmless from any claims or suits
brought for damages pursuant to any adverse or injurious effects of such
chemicals or from the actions taken by the village or its employees to remove
the graffiti prior to the village commencing work on the property. If the
village determines they cannot remove the graffiti, the responsibility of the
removal is reinstated to the owner for the owner. A certified letter will be
sent to the owner of the property so advising. If the property owner does not
remove the graffiti within the time specified or extended time requested and
granted by the village, the owner shall be subject to the penalties listed in
division (E) of this section.



      (2)   If the property owner is not located or they are
unavailable and normal attempts to notify the owner have been made, after 14
days after the time of the discovery of the graffiti the village shall have
the right, but not the duty to remove the graffiti from the exterior or
private property. A notice will be left at the property and a certified
letter sent to the property owner of record advising them of the graffiti
abatement.



      (3)   If the village performs the graffiti removal pursuant to
division (D)(1) or (D)(2) of this section and if an invoice was is not paid
within 30 days, the village shall be entitled to initiate collection actions
and file a notice of lien against the property upon which the work was
performed for the cost of the removal.



   (E)   Penalty.



      (1)   Upon a finding of guilty for violation of division (B)
of this section, there shall be imposed a fine of not less than $100, nor
more than $750. Additionally, the court may, as a condition of probation,
supervision or conditional discharge, require that the party guilty of
violating the provisions of division (B) of this section make full and
complete restitution to the owner of the property for expenses incurred in
the removal of the graffiti and/or, with the consent of the owner, restore
the structure, wall, building or surface to its previous condition. In
addition, the court may order as a further penalty community service in the
form of time to be spent in any location in the village.



      (2)   Upon a finding of guilty for violation of division
(C)(1) of this section, there shall be imposed a fine of not less than $25,
nor more than $750. The minimum fine for any subsequent violation of division
(C)(1) of this section shall be $50. Each and every day that such graffiti is
permitted to remain beyond the time specified in division (C)(2) of this
section shall constitute a separate violation. The village may also ask the
court to issue an order granting the village permission to enter the property
and to make an effort to remove the graffiti and to charge the cost of the
removal to the owner and to permit the village to secure its costs either
through an order directing the owner to pay the costs incurred by or on
behalf of the village in an attempt to remove the graffiti, or to file a lien
against the property.



   (F)   Compliance by village.



      (1)   It is the intention of the village that graffiti
discovered upon village property or public property under the jurisdiction
and control of the village will be removed within the time periods for
graffiti removal imposed upon other governmental bodies and owners of private
property under this article.



      (2)   The Village Manager or his or her designee shall
provide, no less than semi-annually, a written report to the Village Board of
graffiti incidents involving village property and removal efforts by the
village. Such report shall include at a minimum the location of the graffiti,
charges filed against or convictions of offenders where relevant, the date
and methods of graffiti removal undertaken by the village and the cost of
such removal.



(Ord. 93-10-91, passed 10-12-1993; Ord. 2009-03-09, passed 3-2-2009)



§ 14-1-4  DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to negligently or willfully injure,
damage, destroy or deface the property of another, including property of the
village.



(Ord. 93-10-91, passed 10-12-1993)



§ 14-1-5  DEFACING NOTICES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously tear
down, mutilate, place graffiti upon, or deface or render in part or in whole
illegible any poster, notice or handbill lawfully posted in the village.



§ 14-1-6  CRIMINAL TRESPASS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly enter or
remain unlawfully in or upon the premises of another. Any of the following
acts by any person, firm or corporation shall be deemed included among those
that constitute trespass, and appropriate action may be taken to prevent or
suppress any violation of this section, including the following acts:



      (1)   Entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of
another, including any public property in violation of a notice posted or
exhibited at such premises, or at any point of approach or entry or in
violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in writing, by
any owner or occupant thereof;



      (2)   The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental
to the making of an entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice
posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such premises or at any point of
approach or entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given
orally or in writing by any owner or occupant thereof;



      (3)   A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of
another in case of being requested, either orally or in writing, to leave by
any owner or occupant thereof; and



      (4)   An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or
watercraft made without the consent of the person having the right to the
possession or control thereof, or a failure or refusal to leave any such
vehicle, aircraft or watercraft after being requested to leave by the person
having such right.



   (B)   In any prosecution under this section, it is an affirmative
defense that the person reasonably believed that:



      (1)   The premises involved at the time were open to members
of the public and the person complied with all lawful conditions imposed on
access to or remaining on the premises; or



      (2)   The owner of the premises, or other person empowered to
license access thereto, would have licensed him or her to enter or remain.



§ 14-1-7  THEFT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to:



      (1)   Steal the property of another;



      (2)   By deception or by other means to avoid payment for
services or intentionally obtain services which the person knows to be
available only for compensation; and/or



      (3)   Have control over the disposition of services of others
to which the person is not entitled. Such person knowingly diverts those
services to his or her own benefit or to the benefit of another not entitled
thereto.



   (B)   In any prosecution under this section, it is an affirmative
defense that the property or services were openly obtained under a claim of
title made in good faith, even though the claim would not prevail in a court
of law.



Statutory reference:



   Prohibiting theft, see 720 ILCS 5/16-1 et seq.



§ 14-1-8  RETAIL THEFT PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Offense. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit retail
theft. A person commits the offense of retail when he or she knowingly:



      (1)   Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes
to be carried away or transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored or
offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment without paying the full
retail value of such merchandise;



      (2)   Alters, transfers or removes any labels, price tags,
markings, indicia of value or any other markings which aid in determining
value affixed to any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale,
in a retail mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such
merchandise personally or in consort with another at less than the full
retail value;



      (3)   Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or
offered for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in
or on which such merchandise is displayed to any other container;



      (4)   Under-rings the full retail value of merchandise;



      (5)   Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail
mercantile establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the
time of such removal; or



      (6)   Orders food, drink or other consumable items and once
having been presented with the finished item, consumes such item without
paying for such item with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full
retail value of such item.



   (B)   Presumption. If any person meets both of the following
criteria, such person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away or
transferred merchandise with the intention of retaining it or with the
intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or
benefit of such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such
merchandise:



      (1)   Conceals upon his or her person or among his or her
belongings unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for
sale in a retail mercantile establishment; and



      (2)   Removes that merchandise beyond the last known station
for receiving payments for that merchandise in that retail mercantile
establishment.



Statutory reference:



   Provisions concerning retail theft, see 720 ILCS 5/16-25 et seq.



§ 14-1-9  RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to receive stolen property
if a person knowingly receives, retains or disposes of property.



   (B)   The fact that the person who stole the property has not been
convicted, apprehended or identified is not a defense to a charge of
receiving stolen property.



§ 14-1-10  APPROPRIATION OF LOST OR MISDELIVERED PROPERTY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to appropriate lost or
misdelivered property if a person obtains or exerts control over the property
of another which the person knows to have been lost or mislaid, or to have
been delivered under a mistake as to the identity of the recipient or as to
the nature or amount of the property, and the person fails to take reasonable
measures to discover and notify the owner.



   (B)   As used in this section, REASONABLE MEASURE includes, but is
not necessarily limited to, notifying the identified owner or any peace
officer.



§ 14-1-11  EXTORTION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally obtain
property or services of another by threat.



   (B)   In any prosecution under this section based on a threat to
accuse any person of a crime or to cause criminal charges to be instituted
against any person, it is an affirmative defense that the person reasonably
believed the threatened criminal charge to be true and that his or her sole
purpose was to compel or induce the person threatened to take reasonable
action to make good the wrong which was the subject of such threatened
criminal charge.



§ 14-1-12  RECKLESS BURNING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to recklessly, by means of fire or
explosion, damage property of another or place the property of another in
danger of destruction or damage.



§ 14-1-13  VEHICLES; ABANDONMENT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any vehicle within the
village, and no person shall leave such vehicle at any place within the
village for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle
reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. A vehicle or any part thereof so
abandoned on private property, not belonging to the owner or tenant of such
property, may be authorized for removal by the Village Police Department
after a waiting period of seven days or more has expired.



§ 14-1-14  VEHICLES; INOPERABLE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any inoperable motor
vehicle on any street or highway in the village.



§ 14-1-15  VEHICLES; UNAUTHORIZED USE OF.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to:



   (A)   Take, operate or exercise control over a motor vehicle of
which the person does not have the consent of the owner to so act;



   (B)   Ride in a vehicle which the person knows has been unlawfully
obtained; and/or



   (C)   Have custody of a motor vehicle pursuant to an agreement
between himself, herself or another and the owner thereof whereby he, she or
another is to perform for compensation a specific service for the owner,
involving the maintenance, repair or use or storage of such vehicle, he or
she intentionally uses or operates the same, without the consent of the
owner, for his or her own purposes in a manner constituting a gross deviation
from the agreed purpose.



§ 14-1-16  PENALTY.



   Subject to the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1, every person found
guilty of violating §§ 14-1-4 or 14-1-6 of this article shall be subject to
either or both of the following penalties:



   (A)   A fine not in excess of $750; and/or



   (B)   A period of conditional discharge not to exceed six months.



      (1)   The conditions of a conditional discharge shall include
that the defendant:



         (a)   Not violate any criminal statute or quasi-criminal
ordinance of any jurisdiction; and



         (b)   Report to and appear in person before such person
or agency as directed by the court.



      (2)   The conditions of conditional discharge may, in
addition, require that the defendant:



         (a)   Work or pursue a course of study or vocational
training;



         (b)   Undergo medical or psychiatric treatment for drug
addiction or alcoholism;



         (c)   Make restitution or reparation in an amount not to
exceed actual loss or damage to property and pecuniary loss; and



         (d)   If a minor, to reside with his or her parent or in
a foster home, attend school, attend a non-residential program for youth, or
contribute to his or her own support at home or in a foster home.



      (3)   When a court orders restitution or reparation as a
condition of conditional discharge, the court shall determine the amount and
conditions of payment. When the conditions of payment have not been
satisfied, the court at any time prior to the expiration or termination of
the period of conditional discharge may impose an additional period of not
more than six months. Only the conditions of payment shall continue to apply
during such additional period. The court shall retain all of the incidents of
the original sentence, including the authority to modify or enlarge the
original conditions to revoke the penalty of the conditional discharge if the
conditions of payment are violated during such additional period.



      (4)   When a petition is filed charging a violation of a
condition imposed for conditional discharge, the court:



         (a)   May order a summons to the offender to appear, or
order a warrant for the offender’s arrest where there is danger of his or
her fleeing the jurisdiction or causing serious harm to others or when the
offender fails to answer a summons. The issuance of such warrant or summons
shall stay the sentence of conditional discharge until the final
determination of the charge, and the term of conditional discharge shall not
run so long as the offender has not answered the summons or warrant;



         (b)   Shall conduct a hearing of the alleged violation.
The court may admit the offender to bail pending the hearing;



         (c)   Shall receive evidence in open court with the
right of confrontation, cross-examination and representation by counsel. The
village has the burden of going forward with the evidence and proving the
violation by the preponderance of the evidence;



         (d)   Shall not revoke a conditional discharge for
failure to comply with conditions of a sentence which imposes financial
obligations upon the offender unless such failure is due to his or her
willful refusal to pay; and



         (e)   May modify the conditions of a conditional
discharge on motion of the village or on its own motion or at the request of
the offender after notice to all parties and a hearing.



      (5)   If the court finds that the offender has violated a
condition at any time prior to the expiration or termination of the period,
it may continue the offender on the existing period, with or without
modifying or enlarging the conditions, or may impose any other penalty that
was available at the time of the initial penalty.



      (6)   A judgement revoking conditional discharge is a final
appealable order.



§ 14-1-17  LIABILITY OF PARENT OR LEGAL GUARDIAN OF MINOR OFFENDER.



   The parent or legal guardian of a minor defendant who resides with such
parent or legal guardian shall be liable for any fine or condition of
restitution or reparation imposed by a court upon a minor for actual damages
for willful or malicious acts of such minor which cause injury to a person or
property, provided that such minor has not paid such fine or made restitution
or reparation within the time ordered by the court, and further provided that
such parent or legal guardian has been served with summons or notice to
appear in the original cause and all proceedings thereafter as provided by
law.



ARTICLE 2:  OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS



Section



   14-2-1   Definitions



   14-2-2   Assault



   14-2-3   Battery



   14-2-4   Cannabis; possession of



   14-2-5   Housing management; reckless



   14-2-6   Expectorating on sidewalk or in public place



   14-2-7   Gambling; definitions



   14-2-8   Gambling offenses



   14-2-9   Keeping a gambling place



   14-2-10   Seizure of gambling devices and gambling funds



   14-2-11   Impersonation



   14-2-12   Impersonation; impersonating and interfering with village
officers



   14-2-13   Pollution



   14-2-14   Pollution; creating odors



   14-2-15   Pollution; noises generally



   14-2-16   Pollution; noises defined, prohibited



   14-2-17   Adoption of the State of Illinois noise pollution control
regulations



   14-2-18   Prostitution



   14-2-19   Prostitution; soliciting for



   14-2-20   Prostitution; keeping a place of



   14-2-21   Prostitution; patronizing



   14-2-22   Indecency; public



   14-2-23   Indecency; nudity



   14-2-24   Indecency; indecent exhibition of animals



   14-2-25   Lewd conduct



   14-2-26   Obscenity; elements of the offense



   14-2-27   Obscenity; interpretation of evidence



   14-2-28   Obscenity; prima facie evidence



   14-2-29   Obscenity; affirmative defense



   14-2-30   Harmful material



   14-2-31   Purchase and possession of tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, electronic cigarettes and vapes by a minor prohibited



   14-2-32   Drug paraphernalia



   14-2-33   Synthetic alternative drugs



   14-2-34   Endangering the life or health of a child



   14-2-35   Powdered alcohol



   14-2-36   Alcohol vaporizers



§ 14-2-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CANNABIS. Includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are
identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa, whether
growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such
plant, and any compound manufacture, sale, derivative, mixture or preparation
of such plant, its seeds or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and
all other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or
synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly
by extraction, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a
combination of extraction and chemical synthesis, but shall not include the
mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake
made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalk (except the resin
extracted therefrom), fiber oil cake or the sterilized seed of such plant
which is incapable of germination. CANNABIS does not include industrial hemp
as defined and authorized under the Industrial Hemp Act. (720 ILCS 550/3).



   DISTRIBUTE. To transfer possession of, whether with or without
consideration.



   HARMFUL MATERIAL. The material is harmful if, to the average person,
applying contemporary standards, its predominant appeal, taken as a whole, is
to the prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity,
sex or excretion, which goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor
in description or representation of such matters, and is material the
redeeming social importance of which is substantially less than its prurient
appeal.



   INTENT TO DEFRAUD. The use of deception with the intention to injure
another’s interest which has economic value.



   KNOWINGLY. Having knowledge of the content of the subject matter, or
recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would have
disclosed the contents thereof.



   LEWD ACT.



      (1)   An exposure of one’s genitals or female breasts;



      (2)   The touching, caressing or fondling of the genitals or
female breasts;



      (3)   Sexual intercourse;



      (4)   Masturbation; and



      (5)   Urination or defecation in a place other than a toilet
or urinal.



   MATERIAL. Any writing, picture, record or other representation of
embodiment.



   OBSCENE. Any material or performance is OBSCENE if:



      (1)   The average person, applying contemporary adult
community standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the
prurient interest;



      (2)   The average person, applying contemporary adult
community standards, would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently
offensive way, ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether
normal or perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory
functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; and



      (3)   Taken as a whole it lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.



   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place where the conduct may reasonably be expected to
be viewed by others.



   TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but
not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or
dipping tobacco, and any nicotine delivery systems other than those
prescribed by a physician.



(Ord. 95-04-19, passed 4-4-1995)



§ 14-2-2  ASSAULT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault
within the village.



   (B)   A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he
or she engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of
receiving a battery.



§ 14-2-3  BATTERY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a battery within
the village.



   (B)   A person commits a battery if he or she intentionally or
knowingly without legal justification and by any means:



      (1)   Causes bodily harm to an individual; or



      (2)   Makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking
nature with an individual.



§ 14-2-4  CANNABIS; POSSESSION OF.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess any quantity
of any substance containing cannabis; except that, the effect of this section
shall be limited to persons knowingly possessing less than ten grams of any
substance containing cannabis, except as exempted by 720 ILCS 550/11.



§ 14-2-5  HOUSING MANAGEMENT; RECKLESS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the offense of
reckless housing management within the village.



   (B)   A person commits the offense of reckless housing management
when, having personal management or control of residential real estate,
whether as a legal or equitable owner of residential real estate or as a
managing agent or otherwise, he or she recklessly permits the physical
condition or facilities of the residential real estate to become or remain in
any condition which endangers the health or safety of any person.



§ 14-2-6  EXPECTORATING ON SIDEWALK OR IN PUBLIC PLACE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate or spit upon any
sidewalk or within any building or room to which the public is invited,
except for the wash basins and toilets therein.



§ 14-2-7  GAMBLING; DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   ACCESS. The same meaning as ascribed in 720 ILCS 5/17-55.



   COMPUTER. The same meaning as ascribed in 720 ILCS 5/52.5.



   GAMBLING DEVICE. Any clock, tape machine, slot machine or other
machines or device for the reception of money or other thing of value on
chance or skill, or upon the action of which money or other thing of value is
staked, hazarded, bet, won or lost; or any mechanism, furniture, fixture,
equipment or other device designed primarily for use in a gambling place. A
GAMBLING DEVICE does not include the following, as more specifically defined
in 720 ILCS 5/28-2(a)(1) through (a)(4):



      (1)   Coin-in-the-slot operated mechanical devices;



      (2)   Vending machines;



      (3)   Crane games; and



      (4)   Redemption machines.



   INTERNET. An interactive, computer service or system or an information
service, system or access software provider that provides or enables computer
access by multiple users to a computer server, and includes, but is not
limited to, an information service, system or access software provider that
provides access to a network system commonly known as the INTERNET, or any
comparable system or service and also includes, but is not limited to, a
World Wide Web page, newsgroup, message board, mailing list or chat area on
any interactive computer service or system or other online service.



   LOTTERY. Any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are
distributed by chance among persons who have paid or promised consideration
for a chance to win such prizes, whether such scheme or procedure is called a
lottery, raffle, gift, sale or some other name, excluding savings promotion
raffles authorized under Section 5g of the Illinois Banking Act, Section 7008
of the Savings Bank Act, Section 42.7 of the Illinois Credit Union Act,
Section 5136B of the National Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 25a), or Section 4 of the
Home Owners’ Loan Act (12 U.S.C. 1463).



   POLICY GAME. Any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or
guarantees by any instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token or other
device that any particular number, character, ticket or certificate shall in
the event of any contingency in the nature of a lottery entitle the purchaser
or holder to receive money, property or evidence of debt.



(720 ILCS 5/28-2)



§ 14-2-8  GAMBLING OFFENSES.



   (A)   Committing offense. A person commits gambling when, within the
corporate limits of the village, he or she:



      (1)   Plays a game of chance or skill for money or other thing
of value, unless excepted in division (B) below;



      (2)   Makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest or
any political nomination, appointment or election;



      (3)   Operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents,
sells, bargains for the sale or lease of, manufactures or distributes any
gambling device;



      (4)   Contracts to have or give himself or another the option
to buy or sell, or contracts to buy or sell, at a future time, any grain or
other commodity whatsoever, or any stock or security of any company, as
described in 720 ILCS 5/28-1(a)(4);



      (5)   Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument or
apparatus by means of which bets or wagers have been, or are, recorded or
registered, or knowingly possesses any money which he or she has received in
the courses of a bet or wager;



      (6)   Sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of
skill or chance, political nomination, appointment or election;



      (7)   Sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell
or transfers any ticket or share for any lottery;



      (8)   Sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to
sell or knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket, slip, record,
document or other similar device;



      (9)   Knowingly drafts, prints or publishes any lottery ticket
or share, or any policy ticket, slip, record, document or similar device,
except for such activity related to lotteries, bingo games and raffles
authorized by and conducted in accordance with the laws of Illinois or any
other state or foreign government;



      (10)   Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game, except
for such activity related to lotteries, bingo games and raffles authorized by
and conducted in accordance with the laws of Illinois or any other state;



      (11)   Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting
odds or changes in betting odds by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore or
similar means; or knowingly installs or maintains equipment for the
transmission or receipt of such information; except that, nothing in this
division (A)(11) prohibits transmission or receipt of such information for
use in news reporting of sporting events or contests; or



      (12)   Knowingly establishes, maintains or operates an
Internet site that permits a person to play a game of chance or skill for
money or other thing of value by means of the Internet or to make a wager
upon the result of any game, contest, political nomination, appointment or
election by means of the Internet. This division (A)(12) does not apply to
activities referenced in divisions (B)(6) and (B)(7) of this section.



   (B)   Conviction. Participants in any of the following activities
shall not be convicted of gambling:



      (1)   Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the
happening of chance including without limitation contracts of indemnity or
guaranty and life or health or accident insurance;



      (2)   Offers of prizes, awards or compensation to the actual
contestants in any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed,
strength or endurance or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered in such
contest;



      (3)   Pari-mutuel betting as authorized by the law of this
state;



      (4)   Manufacture of gambling devices, including the
acquisition of essential parts therefor and the assembly thereof, for
transportation in interstate or foreign commerce to any place outside this
state when such transportation is not prohibited by any applicable federal
law; or the manufacture, distribution or possession of video gaming
terminals, as defined in the Video Gaming Act, by manufacturers, distributors
and terminal operators licensed to do so under the Video Gaming Act;



      (5)   The game commonly known as “bingo”, when conducted
in accordance with 230 ILCS 25/1 et seq.;



      (6)   Lotteries when conducted by the state in accordance with
20 ILCS 1605/1 et seq. This exemption includes any activity conducted by the
Department of Revenue to sell lottery tickets pursuant to the provisions of
20 ILCS 1605/1 et seq. and its rules;



      (7)   The purchase of lottery tickets through the Internet for
a lottery conducted by the state under the program established in 230 ILCS
25/17.12;



      (8)   Possession of an antique slot machine that is neither
used nor intended to be used in the operation or promotion of any unlawful
gambling activity or enterprise. For the purpose of this division (B)(8), an
ANTIQUE SLOT MACHINE is one manufactured 25 years ago or earlier;



      (9)   Raffles when conducted in accordance with 230 ILCS 15/1
et seq.;



      (10)   Charitable games when conducted in accordance with 230
ILCS 30/1 et seq.;



      (11)   Pull tabs and jar games when conducted under 230 ILCS
20/1 et seq.;



      (12)   Gambling games conducted on riverboats when authorized
under 230 ILCS 10/1 et seq.; or



      (13)   Video gaming terminal games at a licensed
establishment, licensed truck stop establishment, licensed fraternal
establishment, or licensed veterans establishment when conducted in
accordance with the Video Gaming Act being 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.



      (14)   Savings promotion raffles authorized under Section 5g
of the Illinois Banking Act, Section 7008 of the Savings Bank Act, Section
42.7 of the Illinois Credit Union Act, Section 5136B of the National Bank Act
(12 U.S.C. 25a), or Section 4 of the Home Owners’ Loan Act (12 U.S.C. 1463).



   (C)   Sentence. Gambling under divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this
section is a class A misdemeanor. Gambling under divisions (A)(3) through
(A)(11) of this section is a class A misdemeanor. A second or subsequent
conviction under any of divisions (A)(3) through (A)(11) is a class 4 felony.
Gambling under division (A)(12) of this section is a class A misdemeanor. A
second or subsequent conviction under division (A)(12) is a class 4 felony.



   (D)   Circumstantial evidence. In prosecutions under division (A) of
this section, circumstantial evidence shall have the same validity and weight
as in any criminal prosecution.



(720 ILCS 5/28-1)



§ 14-2-9  KEEPING A GAMBLING PLACE.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, a GAMBLING PLACE  is any real
estate, vehicle, boat or any other property whatsoever used for the purposes
of gambling other than gambling conducted in the manner authorized by the
Riverboat Gambling Act, being 230 ILCS 10/1 et seq. or the Video Gaming Act,
being 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq. Any person who knowingly permits any premises or
property owned or occupied by him or her or under his or her control to be
used as a gambling place commits a class A misdemeanor. Each subsequent
offense is a class 4 felony.



   (B)   When any premises is determined by the Circuit Court to be a
gambling place:



      (1)   The premises is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
and may be proceeded against as such;



      (2)   All licenses, permits or certificates issued by the
state or any subdivision or public agency thereof authorizing the serving of
food or liquor on such premises shall be void; and no license, permit or
certificate so canceled shall be reissued for the premises for a period of 60
days thereafter; nor shall any person convicted of keeping a gambling place
be reissued such license for one year from his or her conviction and, after a
second conviction of keeping a gambling place, any such person shall not be
reissued such license; and



      (3)   The premises of any person who knowingly permits thereon
a violation of any section of this chapter shall be held liable for and may
be sold to pay any unsatisfied judgment that may be recovered and any
unsatisfied fine that may be levied under any section of this chapter.



(720 ILCS 5/28-3) 



§ 14-2-10  SEIZURE OF GAMBLING DEVICES AND GAMBLING FUNDS.



   (A)   Every device designed for gambling which is incapable of
lawful use or every device used unlawfully for gambling shall be considered a
gambling device  and shall be subject to seizure, confiscation and
destruction by village authorities. As used in this section, a GAMBLING
DEVICE includes any slot machine and includes any machine or device
constructed for the reception of money or other thing of value and so
constructed as to return or cause someone to return on chance to the player
thereof money, property or a right to receive money or property. With the
exception of any device designed for gambling which is incapable of lawful
use, no gambling device shall be forfeited or destroyed unless an individual
with a property interest in the device knows of the unlawful use thereof.



   (B)   Every gambling device shall be seized and forfeited as
contraband to the county wherein the seizure occurs. Any money or other thing
of value integrally related to acts of gambling shall be seized and forfeited
as contraband to the county wherein the seizure occurs.



(720 ILCS 5/28-5(a),(b))



§ 14-2-11  IMPERSONATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to assume a false identity and do
an act in his or her assumed character with the intent to defraud another, or
pretend to be a representative of some person or organization and do an act
in his or her pretended capacity with the intent to defraud another.



§ 14-2-12  IMPERSONATION; IMPERSONATING AND INTERFERING WITH VILLAGE
OFFICERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself or
herself to be an officer of the village or shall, without being duly
authorized, exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or
powers of a village officer or shall hinder, obstruct, resist or otherwise
interfere with any village officer in the discharge of his or her official
duties.



§ 14-2-13  POLLUTION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit the
discharge, emission, escape or release into the atmosphere from any source
such quantities of soot, fly ash, dust, cinders, dirt, oxides, gases, vapors,
odors, toxic or radioactive substances, waste or other solid, liquid or
gaseous matter in such quantities and in such place or manner as to endanger
the health, comfort or safety of any person or of the public, or in any such
manner as to cause or tend to cause injury or damage to property or business.



   (B)   Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any person
to cause or permit the emission of any smoke consisting of small airborne
particles other than water from any source whatever, or a density, shade or
opacity equal to or greater than described as No. 1 on the Ringelmann Chart
as published by the United States Bureau of Mines. A copy of the Ringelmann
Chart is on file with the village.



   (C)   During any eight-hour period, smoke having a density, shade or
opacity equal to but not greater than Ringelmann No. 3 shall be permitted for
a total time of no greater than two minutes.



§ 14-2-14  POLLUTION; CREATING ODORS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any business or use any
premises so as to create an offensive smell or an odor that may taint the air
and render it unwholesome or disagreeable to any reasonable person, or to the
public or to cause or tend to cause injury or damage to persons, property or
business.



§ 14-2-15  POLLUTION; NOISES GENERALLY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person within the village to make,
continue or cause to be made or continued any noise, of whatever type or
nature, which unreasonably disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary
sensitivity; or any noise so harsh or prolonged, unnatural or unusual in time
or place as to occasion unreasonable discomfort to any person of ordinary
sensitivity.



(Ord. 2013-05-17, passed 5-6-2013)



§ 14-2-16  POLLUTION; NOISES DEFINED, PROHIBITED.



   The following acts, among others, are declared to constitute a nuisance
and to be noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary
sensitivity:



   (A)   Musical instruments and audio media devices. The operation of
any musical instrument or any audio media device, including but not limited
to radio receiving set, stereo system, compact disk player, iPod, or
television, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. in such a manner as
to be plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet or more from where such audio
media device is located or at the lot line of the property upon which such
instrument, phonograph, machine or device is located, whichever is the
greater distance therefrom.



   (B)   Air conditioning units and the like.



      (1)   The use, operation, or permitting of use or operation of
any refrigerating equipment, fans, blowers humidifiers, dehumidifiers, or
other air circulating or air conditioning equipment, whether part of a
structure or a vehicle, in such manner as to be plainly audible upon
residential property at a distance of 30 feet from which such equipment is
located or at the lot line of the property upon which such equipment is
located, whichever is the greater distance therefrom.



      (2)   In any air cooled air conditioning installation, the
condensers must be located in such a manner that the discharged air is not
directed at the adjoining properties.



   (C)   Sound amplification.



      (1)   The operation of any sound amplification device between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. daily, which is plainly audible on any
residential property at a distance of 25 feet or more from where such sound
amplification device is located or at the lot line of the property upon which
such sound amplification device is located, whichever is the greater distance
therefrom.



      (2)   The operation of any sound amplification device between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. daily, which is plainly audible on any
residential property at a distance of 75 feet or more when measured from the
lot line of the property upon which the sound amplification device is located.



   (D)   Yelling, shouting and the like. Yelling, shouting, hooting,
whistling, or singing outdoors in such a manner as to be plainly audible
within 25 feet of any residential property between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 9:00 a.m.



   (E)   Animals, birds, and the like. The keeping of any animal or
bird which vocalizes (howls, yelps, barks, squawks or other similar
vocalization) and such vocalization is plainly audible upon residential
property beyond the property from which the vocalization is generated for
more than four minutes without interruption. The term without interruption
shall be defined as an average of four vocalizations per minute within a
four-minute period.



   (F)   Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of
any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, or motor
vehicle except through an operational muffler or other device properly
maintained to prevent excessive noise therefrom.



   (G)   Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection
(including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building
other than between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Monday through
Friday, and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Saturday, except
in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety,
and then only with a permit from the Building Official, which permit may be
granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency
continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of three days or less
while the emergency continues. If the Building Official should determine that
the public health and safety of other persons will not be impaired by the
erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation
of streets and highways within such hours, and he or she further determines
that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest seeking
permission, he or she may grant permission for such work to be done during
other hours, upon application made at the time the permit for work is awarded
or during the progress of the work.



   (H)   Exemptions. Sounds caused by the following are exempt from the
provision contained herein.



      (1)   Repairs of utility structures that pose a clear and
immediate danger to life or safety.



      (2)   Sirens, whistles or bells lawfully used by emergency
vehicles.



      (3)   The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting
persons to the existence of an emergency or emergency work.



      (4)   Repairs or excavations of bridges, streets or highways
by or on behalf of the village, Du Page County, the State of Illinois or the
United States government between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., when
the public welfare and convenience renders it impractical to perform the work
during hours otherwise allowed by ordinance.



      (5)   Outdoor gatherings and public events, provided that a
permit has been obtained from the appropriate permitting authority.



      (6)   Internal combustion engines when used to prevent
freezing or flooding during power outages.



   (I)   Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings as
set forth herein.



      (1)   AUDIO MEDIA DEVICE.  Any machine or device by which
music, rhythmic sounds or speech is produced or provided and shall include
but not be limited to radios, stereos, compact disk players, iPods,
televisions or other such machines or devices.



      (2)   EMERGENCY.  An occurrence of set of circumstances
involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage demanding
immediate attention.



      (3)   EMERGENCY WORK.  Any work performed for the purpose of
preventing or alleviating physical trauma or property damage, whether actual
or threatened by an emergency, or work by public or private utilities when
restoring utility service.



      (4)   PLAINLY AUDIBLE.  Any sound that can be detected by a
person using his or her hearing faculties, unaided by any mechanical device
such as a hearing aid. For a sound to be PLAINLY AUDIBLE, it is not required
that particular words or phrases are determinable or that the name, artist or
type of instrument producing the sound can be determined. The detection of
any rhythmic bass or reverberating type of sound is sufficient to constitute
a plainly audible sound.



      (5)   PROPERTY or LOT LINE.  Either:



         (a)   The boundary line of a parcel of real estate;



         (b)   The vertical and horizontal boundary of a dwelling
unit that is part of a multi-family dwelling unit; or



         (c)   On a mixed use property, the interface between the
two portions of the property on which different categories of activity are
being performed.



      (6)   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.  Any real property which contains
a building constructed for a residential purpose or in which one or more
persons reside, provided that the building is property zoned or is legally
nonconforming for residential use within the village.



      (7)   SOUND AMPLIFICATION DEVICE. Any speaker, loudspeaker,
amplifier or any other device or system by which sounds may be enhanced or
magnified.



(Ord. 2013-05-17, passed 5-6-2013)



§ 14-2-17 ADOPTION OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS NOISE POLLUTION CONTROL
REGULATIONS.



   There is hereby adopted by reference the State of Illinois Noise
Pollution Control Regulations, as set forth in Title 35 Environmental
Protection, Subtitle H, Noise, Chapter I, Pollution Control Board, dated May
1, 1984, as now or hereafter amended.



(Ord. 2013-05-17, passed 5-6-2013)



§ 14-2-18  PROSTITUTION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit prostitution
within the village.



   (B)   Any person who performs, offers or agrees to perform any act
of sexual penetration, as defined by 720 ILCS 5/11-0.1, for any money,
property, token, object or article or anything of value, or any touching or
fondling of the sex organs of one person by another person, for  any money,
property, token, object or article or anything of value, for the purpose of
sexual arousal or gratification commits an act of prostitution.



§ 14-2-19  PROSTITUTION; SOLICITING FOR.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit for a
prostitute within the village.



   (B)   Any person who performs any of the following acts commits
soliciting for a prostitute:



      (1)   Solicits another for the purpose of prostitution;



      (2)   Arranges or offers to arrange a meeting of persons for
the purpose of prostitution; or



      (3)   Directs another to a place knowing such direction is for
the purpose of prostitution.



§ 14-2-20  PROSTITUTION; KEEPING A PLACE OF.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a place of
prostitution within the village.



   (B)   Any person who has or exercises control over the use of any
place which could offer seclusion or shelter for the practice of prostitution
who performs any of the following acts keeps a place of prostitution:



      (1)   Knowingly grants or permits the use of such place for
the purpose of prostitution;



      (2)   Grants or permits the use of such place under
circumstances from which he or she could reasonably know that the place is
used or is to be used for purposes of prostitution; or



      (3)   Permits the continued use of a place after becoming
aware of facts or circumstances from which he or she should reasonably know
that the place is being used for purposes of prostitution.



§ 14-2-21  PROSTITUTION; PATRONIZING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to patronize a prostitute
within the village.



   (B)   Any person who performs any of the following acts with a
person not his or her spouse commits the offense of patronizing a prostitute:



      (1)   Engages in an act of sexual penetration, as defined in
720 ILCS 5/11-0.1, with a prostitute; or



      (2)   Enters or remains in a place of prostitution with intent
to engage in an act of sexual penetration, as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-0.1.



§ 14-2-22  INDECENCY; PUBLIC.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a public
indecency within the village.



   (B)   Any person of the age of 17 years and upwards who performs any
of the following acts in a public place commits a public indecency:



      (1)   An act of sexual penetration or sexual conduct, as
defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-0.1; or



      (2)   A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse
or to satisfy the sexual desire of the person.



   (C)   Breast-feeding of infants is not an act of public indecency.



   (D)   For purposes of this section, PUBLIC PLACE means any place
where the conduct may reasonable be expected to be viewed by others.



§ 14-2-23  INDECENCY; NUDITY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, for the purpose of bathing or
otherwise, to appear in any public place in a state of nudity.



§ 14-2-24  INDECENCY; INDECENT EXHIBITION OF ANIMALS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to instigate, cause or procure, or
in any manner assist in any indecent exhibition of any animal or exhibit or
perform an indecent, immoral or lewd play or show or representation of any
kind.



§ 14-2-25  LEWD CONDUCT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally perform any lewd
act in a public place or at a place and under circumstances where such act
could be reasonably viewed by any member of the public.



§ 14-2-26  OBSCENITY; ELEMENTS OF THE OFFENSE.



   (A)   A person commits obscenity when, with knowledge of the nature
or content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection
which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof, he or she:



      (1)   Sells, delivers, or provides, or offers or agrees to
sell, deliver or provide any obscene writing, picture, record or other
representation or embodiment of the obscene; 



      (2)   Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other
performance or participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it
obscene;



      (3)   Publishes, exhibits or otherwise makes available
anything obscene;



      (4)   Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene
exhibition of his or her body for gain;



      (5)   Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or
material with intent to disseminate it in violation of this section, or of
the penal laws or regulations of any other jurisdiction; or



      (6)   Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material
represented or held out by him or her to be obscene, whether or not it is
obscene.



   (B)   Any material or performance is OBSCENE if:



      (1)   The average person, applying contemporary adult
community standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the
prurient interest;



      (2)   The average person, applying contemporary adult
community standards, would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently
offensive way, ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether
normal or perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory
functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; and



      (3)   Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.



(720 ILCS 5/11-20)



§ 14-2-27  OBSCENITY; INTERPRETATION OF EVIDENCE.



   (A)   Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults;
except that, it shall be judged with reference to children or other specially
susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of the material or the
circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed for or directed
to such an audience.



   (B)   Where circumstances of production, presentation, sale,
dissemination, distribution or publicity indicate that material is being
commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is
probative with respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the
conclusion that the matter is lacking in serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.



   (C)   In any prosecution for an offense under this section, evidence
shall be admissible to show:



      (1)   The character of the audience for which the material was
designed or to which it was directed;



      (2)   What the predominant appeal of the material would be for
ordinary adults or a special audience, and what effect, if any, it would
probably have on the behavior of such people;



      (3)   The artistic, literary, scientific, educational or other
merits of the material, or absence thereof;



      (4)   The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material
in this state;



      (5)   Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in
advertising or other promotion of the material; and



      (6)   Purpose of the author, creator, publisher or
disseminator.



(720 ILCS Ch. 5/11-20) 



§ 14-2-28  OBSCENITY; PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE.



   The creation, purchase, procurement or possession of a mold, engraved
plate or other embodiment of obscenity specially adapted for reproducing
multiple copies, or the possession of more than three copies of obscene
material shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to disseminate.



(720 ILCS Ch. 5/11-20) 



§ 14-2-29  OBSCENITY; AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.



   It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity that the dissemination:



   (A)   Was not for gain and was made to personal associates other
than children under 18 years of age; and



   (B)   Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other
special justification for possession of such material.



(720 ILCS Ch. 5/11-20)



§ 14-2-30  HARMFUL MATERIAL.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      DISTRIBUTE. Transfer possession of, whether with or without
consideration.



      HARMFUL TO MINORS. The quality of any description or
representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual
excitement or sado-masochistic abuse, when, taken as a whole, it:



         (a)   Predominately appeals to the prurient interest in
sex of minors;



         (b)   Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in
the adult community in the state as a whole with respect to what is suitable
material for minors; and



         (c)   Lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value for minors.



      KNOWINGLY. Having knowledge of the contents of the subject
matter, or recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would
have disclosed the contents.



      MATERIAL.



         (a)   Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, film,
video game, computer game, video or similar visual depiction, including any
such representation or image which is stored electronically; or



         (b)   Any book, magazine, printed matter however
reproduced, or recorded audio of any sort.



      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18.



      NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic
area or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the
female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion below the
top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state.



      SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a
person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of
being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one
clothed for sexual gratification or stimulation.



      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse or
physical contact with a person’s clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area,
buttocks or, if such person be a female, breast.



      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.



   (B)   A person is guilty of distributing harmful material to a minor
when he or she:



      (1)   Knowingly sells, lends, distributes or gives away to a
minor, knowing that the minor is under the age of 18 or failing to exercise
reasonable care in ascertaining the person’s true age:



         (a)   Any material which depicts nudity, sexual conduct
or sado-masochistic abuse, or which contains explicit and detailed verbal
descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or
sado-masochistic abuse, and which taken as a whole is harmful to minors;



         (b)   A motion picture, show or other presentation which
depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sado-masochistic abuse and is harmful to
minors; or



         (c)   An admission ticket or pass to premises where
there is exhibited or to be exhibited such a motion picture, show or other
presentation.



      (2)   Admits a minor to premises where there is exhibited or
to be exhibited such a motion picture, show, or other presentation, knowing
that the minor is a person under the age of 18 or failing to exercise
reasonable care in ascertaining the person’s true age.



   (C)   In any prosecution arising under this section, it is an
affirmative defense:



      (1)   The minor as to whom the offense is alleged to have been
committed exhibited to the accused a draft card, driver’s license, birth
certificate or other official or apparently official document purporting to
establish that the minor was 18 years of age or older, which was relied upon
by the accused;



      (2)   The defendant was in a parental or guardianship
relationship with the minor or  that the minor was accompanied by a parent
or legal guardian;



      (3)   The defendant was a bona fide school, museum or public
library, or was a person acting in the course of his or her employment as an
employee or official of such organization or retail outlet affiliated with
and serving the educational purpose of such organization;



      (4)   The act charged was committed in aid of legitimate
scientific or educational purposes; or



      (5)   An advertisement of harmful material as defined in this
section culminated in the sale or distribution of such harmful material to a
child under circumstances where there was no personal confrontation of the
child by the defendant, his or her employees, or agents, as where the order
or request for such harmful material was transmitted by mail, telephone,
Internet or similar means of communication, and delivery of such harmful
material to the child was by mail, freight, Internet or similar means of
transport, which advertisement contained the following statement, or a
substantially similar statement, and that the defendant required the
purchaser to certify that he or she was not under the age of 18 and that the
purchaser falsely stated that he or she was not under the age of 18:



      NOTICE



      It  is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to purchase
the matter advertised. Any  person under the age of 18 that falsely states
that he or she is not under the age of 18 for  the purpose of obtaining the
material advertised is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor under the laws of the
State.



   (D)   The predominant appeal to prurient interest of the material
shall be judged with  reference to average children of the same general age
of the child to whom such material was  sold, lent, distributed or given,
unless it appears from the nature of the matter or the  circumstances of its
dissemination or distribution that it is designed for specially susceptible
groups, in which case the predominant appeal of the material shall be judged
with reference  to its intended or probable recipient group.



   (E)   Distribution of harmful material in violation of this section
is a class A misdemeanor. A second or subsequent offense is a class 4 felony.



   (F)   Any person under the age of 18 that falsely states, either
orally or in writing, that he or she is not under the age of 18, or that
presents or offers to any person any evidence of age  and identity that is
false or not actually his or her own for the purpose of ordering, obtaining,
viewing or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure or view any harmful
material is  guilty of a class B misdemeanor.



   (G)   A person over the age of 18 who fails to exercise reasonable
care in ascertaining the true age of a minor, knowingly distributes to, or
sends, or causes to be sent, or exhibits to, or offers to distribute, or
exhibits any harmful material to a person that he or she believes is a minor
is guilty of a class A misdemeanor. If that person utilized a computer web
camera, cellular telephone or any other type of device to manufacture the
harmful material, then each offense is a class 4 felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



   (H)   Telecommunications carriers, commercial mobile service
providers and providers of information services, including, but not limited
to, Internet service providers and hosting service providers, are not liable
under this section, except for willful and wanton misconduct, by virtue of
the transmission, storage or caching of electronic communications or messages
of others or by virtue of the provision of other related telecommunications,
commercial mobile services or information services used by others in
violation of this section.



(720 ILCS 5/11-21)



§ 14-2-31  PURCHASE AND POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ALTERNATIVE
NICOTINE PRODUCTS, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES AND VAPES BY A MINOR PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years
to possess, purchase or attempt to purchase or use any tobacco product,
alternative nicotine product, electronic cigarette or vape, or to
misrepresent his or her identity or age, or to use any false or altered
identification for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any
tobacco product, alternative nicotine product, electronic cigarette or vape.



   (B)   The terms TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS,
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES and VAPES shall have the same meanings as defined in
Chapter 10, Article 9, § 10-9-1 of the Carol Stream Code of Ordinances. 



   (C)   Any person who violates division (A) of this section shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $50, nor more than $750.



   (D)   Any police officer observing a violation of this section may,
as an alternative to arresting the offender, issue a “hang-on ticket” as
provided in Ch. 15, Art. 4, of this Code of Ordinances pursuant to which the
person cited may pay the sum of $50 within the time stated on the ticket as a
compromise or settlement to avoid the prosecution of an ordinance violation
in the Circuit Court.



(Ord. 95-04-19, passed 4-4-1995; Ord. 2017-05- 22, passed 5-1-2017)



§ 14-2-32  DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   (A)   As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires.



      CANNABIS. The meaning ascribed to it in § 3 of the Cannabis
Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/3, as if that definition were incorporated herein.



      CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. The meaning ascribed to it in § 102 of the
Illinois Controlled Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570/102, as if that definition
were incorporated herein.



      DELIVER or DELIVERY. The actual, constructive or attempted
transfer of possession, with or without consideration, whether or not there
is an agency relationship.



      DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. All equipment, products and materials of any
kind which are intended to be used unlawfully in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance in
violation of the Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq., the Illinois
Controlled Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570/100 et seq., or the Methamphetamine
Control and Community Protection Act, 720 ILCS 646/1 et seq. It includes, but
is not limited to:



         (a)   Kits intended to be used unlawfully in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
cannabis or a controlled substance;



         (b)   Isomerization devices intended to be used
unlawfully in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is
cannabis or a controlled substance;



         (c)   Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully
in a private home for identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness
or purity of cannabis or controlled substances;



         (d)   Diluents and adulterants intended to be used
unlawfully for cutting cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons;



         (e)   Objects intended to be used unlawfully in
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish,
hashish oil, methamphetamine or other controlled substances, as defined by
law, into the human body including, where applicable, the following items:



            1.   Water pipes;



            2.   Carburetion tubes and devices;



            3.   Smoking and carburetion masks;



            4.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;



            5.   Carburetor pipes;



            6.   Electric pipes;



            7.   Air-driven pipes;



            8.   Chillums;



            9.   Bongs;



            10.   Ice pipes or chillers;



            11.   Glass pipes; and



            12.   Any item whose purpose, as announced or
described by the seller, is for use in violation of this section.



   (B)   No person shall keep for sale, offer for sale, sell or deliver
for any commercial consideration any item of drug paraphernalia.



   (C)   Any store, place or premises from which or in which any item
of drug paraphernalia is kept for sale, offered for sale, sold or delivered
for any commercial consideration is declared to be a public nuisance.



   (D)   In addition to any other penalties already provided for by law
and this section, a person or store owner convicted of selling drug
paraphernalia shall be subject to having his or her license to sell tobacco
revoked, as provided by § 10-1-13 of the Village of Carol Stream Code of
Ordinances.



   (E)   No person shall knowingly possesses an item of drug
paraphernalia with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing cannabis or a controlled substance into the human body, or in
preparing cannabis or a controlled substance for that use. This division (E)
does not apply to a person who is legally authorized to possess hypodermic
syringes or needles under the Hypodermic Syringes and Needles Act, being 720
ILCS 635/0.01 et seq.



   (F)   In determining intent under division (E) above, the trier of
fact may take into consideration the proximity of the cannabis or controlled
substances to drug paraphernalia or the presence of cannabis or a controlled
substance on the drug paraphernalia.



   (G)   This section shall not apply to the following:



      (1)   Items used in the preparation, compounding, packaging,
labeling or other use of cannabis or a controlled substance as an incident to
lawful research, teaching, chemical analysis, use in law enforcement
activities and which is not offered for sale;



      (2)   Items historically and customarily used in connection
with, the planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance.
Items exempt under this division (G)(2) include, but are not limited to,
garden hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies, tobacco pipes and cigarette-rolling
papers;



      (3)   Items which are used for decorative purposes, when such
items have been rendered completely inoperable or incapable of being used for
any illicit purpose prohibited by this section; and



      (4)   A person who is legally authorized to possess hypodermic
syringes or needles under the Hypodermic Syringes and Needles Act. In
determining whether or not a particular item is exempt under this division
(G)(4), the trier of fact should consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:



         (a)   The general, usual, customary and historical use
to which the item involved has been put;



         (b)   Expert evidence concerning the ordinary or
customary use of the item and the effect of any peculiarity in the design or
engineering of the device upon its functioning;



         (c)   Any written instructions accompanying the delivery
of the item concerning the purposes or uses to which the item can or may be
put;



         (d)   Any oral instructions provided by the seller of
the item at the time and place of sale or commercial delivery;



         (e)   Any national or local advertising concerning the
design, purpose or use of the item involved, and the entire context in which
such advertising occurs;



         (f)   The manner, place and circumstances in which the
item was displayed for sale, as well as any item or items displayed for sale
or otherwise exhibited upon the premises where the sale was made;



         (g)   Whether the owner or anyone in control of the
object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community,
such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products; and



         (h)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community.



   (H)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
fined not less than $750.



(Ord. 2011-12-44, passed 12-19-2011)



§ 14-2-33  SYNTHETIC ALTERNATIVE DRUGS.



   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires
different meaning.



      DELIVER or DELIVERY. The actual, constructive or attempted
transfer of possession, with or without consideration, whether or not there
is an agency relationship.



      PRODUCT CONTAINING A SYNTHETIC ALTERNATIVE DRUG. Any product
containing a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/ hallucinogen,
as those terms are defined herein.



      SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID. Any laboratory-created compound that
functions similar to the active ingredient in marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC), including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic
material, compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their analog
(including isomers, esters, ethers, salts, and salts of isomers) containing a
cannabinoid receptor agonist, such as:



         (a)   JWH-007 (l-pentyl-2-methyl- 3-(l-naphthoyl)indole);



         (b)   JWH-015 ((2-Methyl-l-propyI-lH- indol-3 -yl)-l
-naphthalenylmethanone);



         (c)   JWH-018 (1-penty1-3-(1- naphthoyl)indole);



         (d)   JWH-019 (l-hexyl-3- (naphthalen-l-oyl)indole);



         (e)   JWH-073 (naphthalen-l-yl-(l-
butylindol-3-yl)methanone);



         (f)   J WH-081 (4-methoxynaphthalen-l-
y1-(1-pentylindo1-3-yl)methanone);



         (g)   JWH-098 (4-methoxynaphthalen-l- yl-(l-penty
1-2-methylindol-3- yl)methanone);



         (h)   JWH-I22 (1-Pentyl-3-(4-methy)- l-naphthoyl)indole);



         (i)   JWH-164 (7-methoxynaphthalen-
l-yl-(l-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone;



         (j)   JWH-200 (l-(2-morpholin-4-
ylethypindol-3-yl)-naphthalen-l-ylmethanone);



         (k)     JWH-203 (2-(2-chloropheny 1)-1- (1 -pentylindo
1 -3-y)thanone;



         (l)   JWH-210 (4-cthylnaphthalen-l-yl-
(l-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone;



         (m)   JWH-250 (1-penty1-3-(2- methoxyphenylacetypindole);



         (n)   JWH-251 (1-pentyl-3-(2- methylphenylacetypindole);



         (o)   JWH-398 (1-pentyl-3-(4-chloro-l- naphthoypindole);



         (p)   HU-210((6aR,10aR)-9-
(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyIoctan-2- yl)-6a,7,10,1
Oa-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-l-ol);



         (q)   HU-211 ((6aS,10aS)-9- (Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl
-3-(2-methyloctan-2-y 1)-6a,7,10,10a- tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-l-ol);



         (r)   HU-308 (f(lRJ2R,5R)-242,6-
dimethoxy-4-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenyl]-7,7-
dimethyl-4-bicyclo[3.1.l]hept-3-enyl] methanol);



         (s)   HU-331 ((3-hydroxy-2-[(lR,6R)-
3-methyl-6-(l-methylethenyl)-2-cyclohexen-l-y1]-5- pentyl-
2,5-cycIohexadiene-1,4-dione);



         (t)   CP 55,940 (2-[(lR,2R,5R)-5-
hydroxy-2-(34rydroxypropyl) cyclohexyl]-5-(2- methyloctan-2-yl)phenol);



         (u)   CP47,497 (2-[(lR,3S)-3-
hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2yl)phenol) and



its homologues;



         (v)   WIN 55,212-2((R)-(+)-[2,3-
Dihydro-5-methyI-3-(4-morpholinylmethyl)pyrrolo[l
,2,3-de)-l,4-benzoxazin-6-yl]-l- nepthalenylmethanone);



         (w)   RCS-4 ((4-methoxyphenyl)(l-
pentyl-lH-indol-3-yl)methanone); and



         (x)   RCS-8(l-(l-(2-cyclohexylethyI)-lH-
indol-3-yl)-2-(2-methoxyphenypethanone).



      SYNTHETIC PSYCHEDELIC/ HALLUCINOGEN. Any compound that mimics the
effects of any federally controlled Schedule I substance, including, but not
limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound,
mixture, preparation, substance and their analog (including salts, isomers,
esters, ethers and salts of isomers) containing substances which have a
psychedelic/hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system and/or brain,
such as:



         (a)   2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4- ethylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-E);



         (b)   2-(2,5-dimethoxy-4- methylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-D);



         (c)    2-(4-Chloro-2,5-dimethoxy-phenyl)ethanamine
(2C-C);



         (d)    2-(4-lodo-2,5-dimethoxy-phenyl)ethanamine (2C-I);



         (e)    2-(4-(Ethylthio)-2,5-dimethoxy-phenyl)ethanamine
(2C-T-2);



         (f)   2-(4-(Isopropylthio)-2,5-
dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-T-4);



         (g)   2-(2,5-Dimethoxyphenyl) ethanamine (2C-H);



         (h)   2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-nitro- phenyl)ethanamine
(2C-N); and



         (i)    2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-(n)-propylphenyl)ethanamine
(2C-P).



      SYNTHETIC STIMULANT. Any compound that mimics the effects of any
federally controlled Schedule I substance such as cathinone, methcathinone,
MDMA and MDEA, including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or
synthetic material, compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their
analog (including salts, isomers, and salts of isomers) containing substances
which have a stimulant effect on the central nervous system, such as:



         (a)   3-Fluoromethcathinone;



         (b)   4-Fluoromethcathinone (other name: flephedrone);



         (c)   3,4-Methylenedioxymethcathinone (other name:
methylone, MDMC);



         (d)   3,4-Methylenedioxypyrovalerone (other name: MDPV);



         (e)   4-Methylmethcathinon (other names: mephedrone,
4-MMC);



         (f)   4-Methoxymethcathinone (other names: methedrone,
bk-PMMA, PMMC);



         (g)   4-Ethylmethcathinone (other name: 4-EMC);



         (h)   Ethcathinone;



         (i)    Beta-keto-N-methylbenzo-dioxyolylpropylamine
(other names: butylone, bk-MBDB);



         (j)   Napthylpyrovalerone (other names: naphyrone,
NRG-1);



         (k)   N,N-dimethylcathinone (other name: metamfepramone);



         (l)   Alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name:
alpha-PPP);



         (m)   4-methoxy-alpha- pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other
name: MOPPP);



         (n)   3,4-methylenedioxy-alpha- pyrrolidinopropiophenone
(other name: MDPPP);



         (o)   Alpha-pyrrolidinovalerophenone (other name:
alpha-PVP);



         (p)   6,7-kihydro-5H-indeno(5,6-d)- l,3-dioxal-6-amine)
(other name: MDAI); and



         (q)   Any compound that is structurally derived from
2-amino-1-phenyl-l-propanone by modification or substitution in any of the
following ways:



            1.   In the phenyl ring to any extent with alkyl,
alkoxy, alkylenedioxy, haloalkyl or halide substituents, whether or not
further substituted in the phenyl ring by one or more other univalent
substituents;



            2.   At the 3-position with an alkyl substituent;



            3.   At the nitrogen atom with alkyl, dialkyl,
benzyl or methoxybenzyl groups; or



            4.   By inclusion of the nitrogen atom in a cyclic
structure.



   (B)   Sale or delivery unlawful. No person shall sell, offer for
sale or deliver any product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, a synthetic
stimulant or a synthetic psychedelic/hallucinogen including, but not limited
to, those products set forth in division (E) below.



   (C)   Possession unlawful. No person shall knowingly possess a
product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, a synthetic stimulant or a
synthetic psychedelic/hallucinogen, and including, but not limited to, those
products set forth in division (E) below.



   (D)   Use unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to be under
the influence of a synthetic cannabinoid, a synthetic stimulant or a
synthetic psychedelic/hallucinogen.



   (E)   List. The following products have been determined to contains
synthetic cannabinoid, synthetic stimulus or synthetic psychedelic/
hallucinogen:



 



POW
 
Wicked X
 
XTREME Spice


Spice Gold
 
K2 Summit
 
Stinger


Swagger Grape
 
Love Strawberry
 
Pulse


Spice Gold
 
Shanti Spice Blueberry
 
Mystery


Pulse
 
Aztec Midnight Wind
 
Bad 2 the Bone


Black Mamba
 
Tezcatlipoca
 
Dragon Spice


Naughty Nights
 
Sativah
 
Samurai Spirit


K2 Watermelon
 
Mid-Atlantic Exemplar
 
Buzz


Black Mamba
 
(K2 Summit)
 
Midnight Chill


Green Monkey Chronic Salvia
 
Aztec Gold
 
K Royal


Voodoo Remix
 
K2 Summit
 
Spicylicious


G Greenies Caramel Crunch
 
Ultra Cloud 10
 
Shanti Spice


Black Diamond
 
Colorado Chronic
 
K3 Grape


Blueberry Hayze
 
K3 Kryptonite
 
K3 Strawberry


Eruption Spice
 
Funky Monkey XXXX
 
K3 Blueberry


Love Strawberry
 
K2 Blue
 
Earthquake


Voodoo Child
 
K2 Blonde
 
Ocean Blue


Mid-Atlantic Exemplar
 
K2Pink
 
G Four


K2 Summit
 
K2 Citron K2
 
Wood Stock


Magic Dragon Platinum
 
Mellon K2
 
K3 Legal


Fire Bird Ultimate
 
Pineapple
 
Who Dat


Strength Cinnamon
 
K2 Standard
 
Dark Night II


Nitro
 
K2 Summit
 
Spike 99 Ultra


Black Magic Salvia
 
Si. S Werve
 
2010


Black Mamba
 
Chronic Spice
 
Zombie World


K2 Strawberry
 
K3 Mango
 
SYN Swagg


K2 Blueberry
 
K3 Original
 
SYN Smooth


SYN Spearmint
 
Magic Spice
 
SYN Incense Smooth


SYN Spearmint #2
 
Voodoo Magic
 
SYN Incense Spearmint


SYN Chill
 
Texas Gold
 
SYN Incense LemonLime


SYN Suave
 
Demon
 
Super Summit


Heavenscent Suave
 
K3
 
D-Rail


SYN Vanilla
 
K2 Pink Panties
 
K2 Peach


SYN Vanilla #2
 
Heaven Improved
 
Funky Monkey


SYN Lemon Lime
 
K3 Sun
 
K2 Summit Coffee Work


SYN Lemon Lime #2
 
K3 Dusk
 
K3 Legal - Original (Black)


New K3 Improved
 
K3 Original Improved
 
K3 Legal - Sun (Black)


C4 Herbal Incense
 
K2 Summit
 
K3 Legal - Sea (silver)


New Improved K3 Cosmic Blend
 
New K3 Heaven
 
K3 Legal - Earth (silver)


New Improved K3 Dynamite
 
New K3 Earth
 
K2 Cloud 9


New Improved K3 Kryptonite
 
New K3 Sea Improved
 
Greenies Strawberry


Utopia
 
New-Kron Bomb
 
K2 Blonde


Utopia-Blue Bern/
 
Cherry Bomb
 
K2 Standard


Euphoria
 
Rebel Spice
 
K2 Citron


Who Dat Herbal Incense
 
Mega Bomb
 
K2 (unknown variety)


Love Potion 69
 
Mr. Smiley’s
 
K2 Summit Space


Legal Eagle
 
Summer Skyy
 
K2 Blue


K2 Standard
 
Moe Joe Fire
 
K2 Pink


Super Kush
 
Fully Loaded
 
K2 Latte


Bayou Blaster
 
Da Block
 
K2 Mint


Paradise
 
Back Draft
 
K2 Silver


Red Bird
 
Kl Orbit
 
K2 Peach


Kl Gravity
 
C3
 
Spike Gold


Spike Maxx
 
Banana Cream Nuke
 
Humboldt Gold


Spike Diamond
 
K4 Silver
 
K2 Orisha Regular


Spike Silver
 
KA Gold
 
K2 Orisha Max


K2 Strawberry
 
K3 Heaven Improved
 
K2 Orisha Super


K2 Pineapple Express
 
K3 Heaven Legal
 
K2 Amazonian Shelter


K2 Blueberry
 
K3 Sun Legal
 
K2 Solid Sex on the Mountain


K2 Pink
 
K3 Sun Improved
 
Midnight Chill


K2 Blonde
 
K3 Kryptonite
 
Unknown cigarette


K2 Summit
 
K3 XXX
 
Freedom


K2 Citron
 
K3 Cosmic Blend
 
K2 Sex


K2 Ultra
 
K3 Original
 
K2 Orisha White Magic Super


K2 Blue
 
C4
 
K2 Orisha Black Magic Max


MNGB Tropical Thunder
 
Kl Gravity
 
K2 Thai Dream


MNGB Pinata Colada
 
KI Orbit
 
K4 Bubble Bubble


MNGB Almond/Vanilla
 
K2 Pina Colada
 
MTN-787


MNGB Peppermint
 
K3 Krypton ite
 
K2 Kryptonite


MNGB Spear Mint
 
K3 XXX
 
Legal Eagle Apple


p.e.p. pourri Twisted Vanilla
 
K3 Cosmic Blend
 
Pie K4 Purple Haze


p.e.p. pouiri Original Spearmint
 
K3 Original
 
K4 Summit Remix


p.e.p. pourri Love Strawberry
 
Rasta Citrus Spice
 
8-Ball


p.e.p. pourri X Blueberry
 
Kind Spice
 
C4


K2 Summit
 
Time Warp
 
K2


Voo Doo Remix (oranage package)
 
Rasta Citrus Spice
 
Tribal Warrior


Voo Doo Remix (black package)
 
Pink Tiger
 
Spike99


exSES
 
Spice Gold
 
Spice Gold


Yucatan Fire Smoke
 
Chill Out
 
Spice Diamond


Skunk
 
Smoke
 
Spice Silver


Sense
 
Forest Humus
 
Genie


EX-SES Platinum Blueberry
 
Scope Vanilla
 
Spike 99


EX-SES Platinum Cherry
 
Scope Wildberry
 
Jamaican Gold


EX-SES Platinum Strawberry
 
Chill X
 
Potpourri


EX-SES Platinum Vanilla
 
Space
 
Winter Boost


Magic Silver
 
Silent Black
 
Citrus


Spice Artie Synergy
 
Sence
 
Spice Gold


Spice Diamond
 
Smoke
 
Spicey XXX


Spice Gold
 
Caneff
 
Spike 99


Spice Tropical Synergy
 
Spice Gold
 
Ex-SES Platinum


Spicey Regular XXX Bluebeny
 
Gold Spirit Spice
 
Magic Gold


Spicey Regular XXX Strawberry
 
Yucatan Fire
 
Bombay Blue


Spicey Ultra Strong XXX Vanilla
 
Spice Diamond
 
Dream


Spicey Ultra Strong XXX
 
Smoke Plus
 
Spice Tropical Synergy


Spike 99 Ultra Blueberry
 
Magic Silver
 
Diamond Spirit


Spike 99 Ultra Cherry
 
Mojo
 
Platinum Strawberry


Spike 99 Ultra Strawberry
 
EX-SES
 
Spicey Ultra Strong XXX Vanilla


Spike 99 Ultra Strawberry
 
 
 
 




 



   (F)   Penalty. Violation of any provision of this section shall
result in a fine of not less than $750 for each such offense. Each violation
of this section, or every day a violation continues to exist, shall
constitute a new and separate violation.



   (G)   License suspension. In addition to any other penalties
provided by law and this code, any person or store owner convicted of selling
any product containing synthetic cannaboid, synthetic stimulant or synthetic
psychedelic/hallucinogen shall be subject to having their business license
suspended or revoked as provided in § 10-1-13 of the Village of Carol Stream
Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. 2011-12-46, passed 12-19-2011)



§ 14-2-34  ENDANGERING THE LIFE OR HEALTH OF A CHILD.



   (A)   A person commits the offense of endangering the life or health
of a child when he or she knowingly (1) causes or permits the life or health
of a child under the age of 18 to be endangered; or (2) causes or permits a
child under the age of 18 to be placed in circumstances that endanger the
child's life or health.  It is not a violation of this section for a person
to relinquish a child in accordance with the Abandoned Newborn Infant
Protection Act, 325 ILCS 2/1 et seq., as amended.



   (B)   A trier of fact may infer that a child six years of age or
younger is unattended if that child is left in a motor vehicle for more than
ten minutes.



   (C)   UNATTENDED means either (1) not accompanied by a person 14
years of age or older; or (2) if accompanied by a person 14 years of age or
older, out of the sight of that person.



   (D)   A violation of this section shall be a Class A misdemeanor.



(Ord. 2016-04-20, passed 4-18-2016)



§ 14-2-35  POWDERED ALCOHOL.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, POWDERED ALCOHOL means any
powder or crystalline substance containing alcohol, as defined in Section
1-3.01 of the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934 (235 ILCS 5/1-3.01).



   (B)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, or deliver, receive or
purchase, or possess in the village any product consisting of or containing
powdered alcohol.



(Ord. 2017-05-17, passed 5-1-2017)



§ 14-2-36  ALCOHOL VAPORIZERS.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, ALCOHOL VAPORIZER means any
device designed, manufactured, marketed or used for the purpose of mixing
alcoholic liquor with oxygen, air or another gas to produce a mist or vapor
for inhalation or snorting for non-medicinal purposes.  ALCOHOL VAPORIZER
shall not include medical devices as inhalers, nebulizers, atomizers or other
devices properly prescribed by a physician and being used to dispense a
prescribed medication to the holder of such prescription.



   (B)   No person shall possess, sell, offer for sale, deliver,
receive, or purchase any alcohol vaporizer within the village.



   (C)   No person shall use a medical device such as an inhaler,
nebulizer, atomizer or other device for the purpose of mixing alcoholic
liquor with oxygen, air or another gas to produce a mist or vapor for
inhalation or snorting for non-medicinal purposes within the village.



(Ord. 2017-05-17, passed 5-1-2017)



ARTICLE 3:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER



Section



   14-3-1   Breach of the peace



   14-3-2   Disorderly conduct



   14-3-3   Disturbing the peace



   14-3-4   Disturbing schools, assemblies



   14-3-5   Fighting



   14-3-6   Loitering; definitions



   14-3-7   Loitering



   14-3-8   Nuisances; definition; prohibition



   14-3-9   Nuisances; non-summary abatement; notice



   14-3-10   Nuisances; non-summary abatement



   14-3-11   Nuisances; summary abatement



   14-3-12   False alarms and calls



   14-3-13   Passing fire or police lines



   14-3-14   Prisoners



   14-3-15   Weapons; unlawful possession of; definition



   14-3-16   Weapons; unlawful use of; offense exemptions



   14-3-17   Weapons; discharge and possession of air rifles, air guns,
spring guns and similar objects



   14-3-18   Weapons; possession in motor vehicles



   14-3-19   Weapons; discharge of firearms



   14-3-20   Reserved



   14-3-21   Weapons; confiscation and disposition of



   14-3-22   Smoking prohibited



§ 14-3-1  BREACH OF THE PEACE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in any public place to provoke a
breach of the peace or use any violent, threatening, profane, indecent or
abusive language toward or about any other person in his or her presence or
hearing, which language in its common acceptance is calculated to arouse, to
anger the person addressed or cause a breach of the peace or an assault.



§ 14-3-2  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly:



   (A)   Do any act in such unreasonable manner as to provoke, make or
aid in making a breach of peace or an assault;



   (B)   Refuse or fail to cease and desist any peaceful conduct or
activity likely to produce a breach of peace where there is an imminent
threat of violence, and where the police have made all reasonable efforts to
protect the otherwise peaceful conduct and activity, and have requested that
such conduct and activity be stopped, and explained the request if there be
time;



   (C)   Fail to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person known by
him or her to be a peace officer under circumstances where three or more
persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity,
and where the public health and safety is imminently threatened;



   (D)   Interfere with or hinder an officer or employee of the village
while such officer or employee is engaged in the duties of his or her office
or employment;



   (E)   Assemble with three or more persons for the purpose of using
force or violence to disturb the public peace;



   (F)   Appear in any public place manifestly under the influence of
narcotics or other drug, not therapeutically administered, to the degree that
he or she may endanger himself, herself or other persons or property, or
annoy persons in his or her vicinity;



   (G)   Carry in a threatening or menacing manner, without authority
of law, any pistol, revolver, dagger, razor, dangerous knife, stiletto,
knuckles, slingshot, an object containing noxious or deleterious liquid, gas
or substance or other dangerous weapon, or conceals such weapon on or about
the person or vehicle;



   (H)   While on public or private ground adjacent to any building in
which a school or any class thereof is in session, to willfully make or
assist in the making of any noise or diversion which disturbs or tends to
disturb the peace or good order of such school session or class thereof;



   (I)   Be drunk or be in a state of intoxication in any street,
avenue or public place or in any private house or place to the disturbance of
any person;



   (J)   To drink any alcoholic liquor as defined by law on any public
way or in or about any motor vehicle upon a public way or in or about any
motor vehicle upon a public way in the village; or



   (K)   To transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor
within the passenger area of any motor vehicle, except in the original
package and with the seal unbroken.



§ 14-3-3  DISTURBING THE PEACE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously or
intentionally disturb the peace and quiet of another, of any neighborhood,
family, religious congregation or other private or public assembly by being
unreasonably loud, unusual noises or indecent behavior or by threatening,
swearing or uttering any obscene, profane, vulgar or indecent language or by
any disorderly or unusual conduct.



§ 14-3-4  DISTURBING SCHOOLS, ASSEMBLIES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully interrupt or
disturb any school by menace, profane swearing, vulgar language or any
disorderly or unusual conduct, which causes substantial disruption of the
activity of the school.



   (B)   A person is guilty of disruption of school activities if he or
she comes into or remains in any school building, classroom or upon any
school ground, or street, sidewalk or public way adjacent thereto, without
lawful reason, and intentionally causes substantial disruption of the
activities of the school.



§ 14-3-5  FIGHTING.



   It shall be unlawful for any persons angered with each other to fight,
box or wrestle in public view. It shall also be unlawful for any person to
instigate, cause or procure any dog fight, prize fight, cock fight or any
public or private fighting.



§ 14-3-6  LOITERING; DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LOITERING. Remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include
the concept of spending time idly, to be dilatory, to linger, to stay, to
saunter, to delay, to stand around and shall also include the colloquial
expression “hanging around”.



   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the general public has access and a
right to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose, but does
not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It
shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop,
restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, areas
or parks.



§ 14-3-7  LOITERING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or
remain idle either alone or in consort with others in a public place in such
manner and for such an unreasonable length of time so as to:



   (A)   Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk,
public parking lot or any other public place or building by hindering or
impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of
vehicles, traffic or pedestrians; or



   (B)   Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk, public parking lot or any other public place or building any act or
thing which is an obstruction of interference to the free and uninterrupted
use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon
or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public
sidewalk, public parking lot or any other public place or building, all of
which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress,
therein, thereon and thereto.



§ 14-3-8  NUISANCES; DEFINITION; PROHIBITION.



   The following acts, conduct and conditions are hereby declared and
defined to be nuisances, and when committed, performed or permitted to exist
by any individual, firm, association or corporation within the territorial
limits of the village, are hereby declared to be unlawful and prohibited:



   (A)   Any act or offense which is a nuisance according to the common
law of the state, or declared or defined to be a nuisance by the ordinances
of the village. In addition, the village officials shall be authorized to
abate any nuisance which, while not specifically defined within this article,
shall constitute the unreasonable, unwarrantable or unlawful use by persons
of property real or personal, or from his or her own improper, indecent or
unlawful personal conduct which works an obstruction or injury to a right of
another, or of the public, and produces such material annoyance,
inconvenience, discomfort or hurt that the law will presume an actionable
nuisance. Nuisances may be abated which are public or which are both public
and private in nature;



   (B)   To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or any offal,
filth or noisome substance to be collected, deposited or to remain in any
place under his or her ownership or control to the prejudice of others;



   (C)   To throw or deposit any offal or other offensive matter, or
the carcass of any dead animal in any watercourse, lake, pond, spring, well
or common sewer, street or public highway;



   (D)   To corrupt or render unwholesome or impure the water of any
spring, river, stream, pond or lake, to the injury or prejudice of others;



   (E)   To obstruct or encroach upon public highways, private ways,
streets, alleys, commons, landing places and ways to burying places;



   (F)   To erect, continue or use any building or other place for the
exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by occasioning
noxious exhalations, offensive smells or otherwise, is offensive or dangerous
to the health of individuals, or of the public;



   (G)   To advertise wares or occupation by painting notices of the
same on, or affixing them to fences, walls, windows, building exteriors,
utility poles or on hydrants, other public or private property, or on rocks
or other natural objects, without the consent of the owner, or if in the
highway or other public place, without permission of the proper authorities;



   (H)   To harass, intimidate or threaten any person who is about to
sell or lease or has sold or leased a residence or other real property or is
about to buy or lease or has bought or leased a residence or other real
property, when the harassment, intimidation or threat relates to a person’s
attempt to sell, buy or lease a residence, or other real property, or refers
to a person’s sale, purchase or lease of a residence or other real property;



   (I)   To dump, abandon, deposit, dismantle or burn upon any public
property or right-of-way, highway, park, street or parkway anywhere in the
village any trash, garbage, ashes, junk, junked or wrecked motor vehicles or
parts thereof, or miscellaneous waste;



   (J)   To own, maintain or keep a dwelling unit unfit for human
habitation, or dangerous or detrimental to life, safety or health because of
lack of repair, defects in the plumbing system, lighting or ventilation, the
existence of contagious diseases or unsanitary conditions likely to cause
sickness or discomfort among persons residing in such premises or residing in
proximity thereof; and/or



   (K)   To store or place any materials in a manner which is likely to
harbor rats.



§ 14-3-9  NUISANCES; NON-SUMMARY ABATEMENT; NOTICE.



   Any officer of the village possessing police powers may serve or cause
to be served a notice, in writing, upon the owner, agent, occupant or person
in possession, charge or control of any land, building or premises or item of
personalty in or upon which any nuisance may be found, or who may be the
owner or cause of any nuisance, requiring them, or either or both of them, to
abate the same within a specified reasonable time, in such manner as the
notice shall direct.



§ 14-3-10  NUISANCES; NON-SUMMARY ABATEMENT.



   If the person so served and notified does not abate the nuisance within
the specified reasonable time, the corporate authorities may proceed to abate
the nuisance in any or all manner allowable by law, including, without
limiting the generality thereof, the following:



   (A)   Seeking to impose a monetary penalty as defined by § 1-1-9 of
this code by instituting an ordinance enforcement action; and/or



   (B)   Seeking to enjoin the continuation of the nuisance by the
filing of a lawsuit in a court of competent jurisdiction.



§ 14-3-11  NUISANCES; SUMMARY ABATEMENT.



   Whenever, in the opinion of an officer of the village possessing police
powers, the maintenance or continuation of a nuisance creates an imminent
threat of serious injury to persons or serious damage to persons or real
property, or if the nuisance can be abated summarily without or with only
minor damage to the items or premises which are creating the nuisance, and
the continuation of the nuisance poses a substantial threat of injury to
persons or property or a substantial interference with the quiet enjoyment of
life normally present in the community, such officer shall proceed and shall
subsequently inform the owner of the property, if known, of the action taken;
provided, further, that, whenever the owner, occupant, agent or person in
possession, charge or control of the real or personal property which has
become a nuisance is unknown or cannot readily be found, the village officer
shall reasonably attempt to learn the identity of the owner and provide
notice of the action taken. Where the abatement of nuisance requires
continuing acts by the corporate authorities beyond the initial summary
abatement and any other additional emergency abatements, it shall seek
abatement of such nuisance on a permanent basis through judicial process as
soon as reasonably possible.



§ 14-3-12  FALSE ALARMS AND CALLS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or send in any
alarm or call for emergency fire, police or ambulance service unless there is
sufficient cause therefor.



§ 14-3-13  PASSING FIRE OR POLICE LINES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to pass fire or police lines
without specific permission to do so from a firefighter, police officer or
other officer of the village who can be later identified by the person.
Officials of the village and members of the press may pass such lines unless
specifically directed by a firefighter or police officer to remain outside of
the cordoned area.



§ 14-3-14  PRISONERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to rescue or attempt to rescue any
person from the custody of any village officer. No person shall aid, abet or
encourage the rescue or escape from prison of any person legally committed
thereto or shall supply, or attempt to supply, any such person with any
weapon or intoxicating liquors or with any implement or means of escape while
in prison or in the legal custody of any village officer.



§ 14-3-15  WEAPONS; UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF; DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AIR GUN. Any air rifle, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, B-B gun,
pellet gun or any similar implement that is not a firearm which impels a
pellet constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead or other hard material with a
force that reasonably is expected to cause bodily harm or property damage.



   FIREARM. Any item as defined by 430 ILCS 65/1.1.



   PROJECTILE-TYPE WEAPON. Includes, but is not limited to, “wrist
rockets”, slingshots or any other similar implement capable of propelling
any type projectile.



   PUBLIC PLACE. Shall include any of the following places within the
village:



      (1)   Any publicly owned land, roadway, sidewalk or building;



      (2)   Any public place of accommodation or amusement;



      (3)   The common area of any apartment or condominium complex;
or



      (4)   Any businesses open to the public.



   WEAPON. Shall have the following meaning:



      (1)   Any instrument which, by reason of its design, is
primarily intended for use as a weapon, such as, but not limited to, firearm,
dagger, stiletto, stun gun or taser, noxious liquid gas or substance,
nunchucks, bill, police baton, cross-bow or bow and arrow. A STUN GUN or
TASER, as used in this definition, means any device which is powered by
electrical charging units, such as batteries, and which fires one or several
barbs attached to a length of wire and which, upon hitting a human can send
out current capable of disrupting the person’s nervous system in such a
manner as to render him or her incapable of normal functioning;



      (2)   Any knife having a fixed or locking blade which is three
or more inches in length; or



      (3)   Any instrument which could be used as a weapon and is
carried or possessed in such a manner as to indicate intent on the part of
the possessor to use it as a weapon.



(Ord. 2002-06-33, passed 6-17-2002)



§ 14-3-16  WEAPONS; UNLAWFUL USE OF; OFFENSE EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Offense. No person shall possess a weapon on or about his or
her person while in a public place or in any vehicle while in a public place
with the intent to use the same unlawfully against another.



   (B)   Exemption. This section shall not apply to the following:



      (1)   Any person who is in possession of a weapon pursuant to
his or her employment; provided that, such person is either:



         (a)   The proprietor or manager of a licensed business;
or



         (b)   An employee of a licensed business who has been
authorized by the proprietor or manager to possess such weapon.



      (2)   Any person who is in possession of a weapon and who is a
proprietor, employee, instructor or patron of any licensed business engaged
in the manufacture, sale, use or demonstration of such weapon, when and to
the extent that possession of such weapon is necessary to the conduct of such
business, such as but not limited to possession of a firearm at a firearm
dealership, possession of a firearm at a shooting range or possession of
nunchucks at a martial arts school;



      (3)   Any person who is in possession of a weapon and who is a
supervisor, instructor or participant in a recreational program offered by a
political subdivision, such as, but not limited to, a park district or a
school district, or offered by a civil organization, such as, but not limited
to, the Boy Scouts, when and to the extent that possession of such weapon is
a part of such recreational program;



      (4)   Any person who is authorized to possess a weapon by
divisions (B)(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section while such person is
transporting such weapon from his or her residence to such business or
recreational program, and from such business or recreational program to his
or her residence; provided that, during such transport such weapon is not
concealed and is, to the extent possible, either in a non-functional
condition or not readily accessible to such person;



      (5)   Any person defined by 720 ILCS 5/24-2, subject to the
provisions and limitations of that section; or



      (6)   Any person 18 years of age or older who possesses an
object containing a non-lethal liquid gas or substance designed solely for
personal defense.



(Ord. 2002-06-33, passed 6-17-2002)



§ 14-3-17  WEAPONS; DISCHARGE AND POSSESSION OF AIR RIFLES, AIR GUNS,
SPRING GUNS AND SIMILAR OBJECTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge on
any street, public parkway, public alley or other public place or way within
the village or out of doors of any place within the village within 1,000 feet
of any such public way any air gun, air rifle  or air pistol, spring gun or
spring pistol or other projectile-type weapon device, which is calculated or
intended to propel or project a bullet, pellet, arrow or similar projectile.



   (B)   Weapons used in violation of this section shall be forfeited
to and confiscated by the village.



§ 14-3-18  WEAPONS; POSSESSION IN MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, carry or
transport any firearms, air guns or other projectile-type weapons in the
passenger compartment area of a motor vehicle within the village limits.



   (B)   Exceptions include:



      (1)   A peace officer or any officer of any court whose duty
it may be to serve warrants or make arrests;



      (2)   Firearms that are broken down in a non-functioning state;



      (3)   Firearms that are not immediately accessible; and



      (4)   Firearms that are unloaded and enclosed in a case,
firearm carrying box, shipping box or other container by a person who has
been issued a currently valid firearm owner’s identification card.



   (C)   Persons found in violation of this section shall be fined not
less than $50 for each offense and have the firearm air gun or other
projectile-type weapon confiscated by the village.



(Ord. 2009-09-41, passed 9-21-2009)



§ 14-3-19  WEAPONS; DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person except a peace officer or any
officer of any court whose duty it may be to serve warrants or make arrests,
to fire or discharge any gun, pistol, fowling piece or other firearm, within
the corporate limits of the village, except within a totally enclosed
building licensed by the village to permit the discharge of firearms therein.



§ 14-3-20  RESERVED.



§ 14-3-21  WEAPONS; CONFISCATION AND DISPOSITION OF.



   (A)   Upon conviction of an offense under this article, any weapon
seized shall be confiscated by the trial court. When the weapon is no longer
needed for evidentiary purposes, the court may transfer the weapon to the
village’s Police Department, which shall destroy such weapon,
notwithstanding any interest in such weapon by any other person unless such
weapon is exempted under division (B) of this section.



   (B)   Any stolen weapon so confiscated, when no longer needed for
evidentiary purposes, shall be returned to the person entitled to possession
if known under the following circumstances:



      (1)   The owner provides satisfactory proof of ownership;



      (2)   The owner is not the offender;



      (3)   The owner did not consent to the possession of such
weapon for any purpose by the offender;



      (4)   The ownership of the property predates the offense; and



      (5)   The owner possesses a valid firearms owner’s
identification card.



§ 14-3-22  SMOKING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section, the below terms shall
have the following ascribed meanings.



      BAR. An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic
beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more
than 10% of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises.
BAR includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges,
adult entertainment facilities and cabarets.



      EMPLOYEE. A person who is employed by an employer in
consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person
who volunteers his or her services for a non-profit entity.



      EMPLOYER. A person, business, partnership, association or
corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust or non-profit entity
that employs the services of one or more individual persons.



      ENCLOSED AREA. All space between a floor and a ceiling that is
enclosed or partially enclosed with solid walls or windows, exclusive of
doorways or solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of
doorways, that extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without
limitation, lobbies and corridors.



      ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA. Any sports pavilion,
stadium, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice
rink, bowling alley or other similar place where members of the general
public assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic
competitions or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural,
recreational or other events.



      GAMING EQUIPMENT OR SUPPLIES. Gaming equipment/supplies as
defined in the Illinois Gaming Board Rules of the Illinois Administrative
Code.



      GAMING FACILITY. An establishment utilized primarily for the
purposes of gaming and where gaming equipment or supplies are operated for
the purposes of accruing business revenue.



      HEALTHCARE FACILITY. An office or institution providing care or
treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental or emotional, or other
medical, physiological or psychological conditions, including, but not
limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics,
nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories and
offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists
and all specialists within these professions. HEALTHCARE FACILITY includes
all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semi-private rooms and wards
within healthcare facilities.



      PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any area under the control of a public or
private employer that employees are required to enter, leave or pass through
during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, entrances and
exits to places of employment, including a minimum distance of 15 feet from
entrances, exits, windows that open and ventilation intakes that serve an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms;
conference and classrooms; break rooms and cafeterias; and other common
areas. A private residence or home-based business, unless used to provide
licensed child care, foster care, adult care or other similar social service
care on the premises, is not a PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT.



      PRIVATE CLUB. A not-for-profit association that has been in
active and continuous existence for at least three years prior to the
effective date of this amendatory Act of the 95th General Assembly, whether
incorporated or not, is the owner, lessee or occupant of a building or
portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times, is operated
solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political,
benevolent or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and only sells
alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. For purposes of this
definition, PRIVATE CLUB means an organization that is managed by a board of
directors, executive committee or similar body chosen by the members at an
annual meeting, has established bylaws, a constitution, or both to govern its
activities, and has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal
income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. § 501.



      PRIVATE RESIDENCE. The part of a structure used as a dwelling,
including, without limitation: a private home, townhouse, condominium,
apartment, mobile home, vacation home, cabin or cottage. For the purposes of
this definition, a hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or
other similar public accommodation, hospital, nursing home or assisted living
facility shall not be considered a PRIVATE RESIDENCE.



      PUBLIC PLACE. The portion of any building or vehicle used by and
open to the public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in
whole or in part by private persons or entities, the state, the village, or
any other public entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged for
admission, including a minimum distance of 15 feet from entrances, exits,
windows that open and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where
smoking is prohibited. A PUBLIC PLACE does not include a private residence
unless the private residence is used to provide licensed child care, foster
care or other similar social service care on the premises. A PUBLIC PLACE
includes, but is not limited to, hospitals, restaurants, retail stores,
offices, commercial establishments, elevators, indoor theaters, libraries,
museums, concert halls, public conveyances, educational facilities, nursing
homes, auditoriums, enclosed or partially enclosed sports arenas, meeting
rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention facilities, polling places,
private clubs, gaming facilities, all government-owned vehicles and
facilities, healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping centers,
retail service establishments, financial institutions, educational
facilities, ticket areas, public hearing facilities, public restrooms,
waiting areas, lobbies, bars, taverns, bowling alleys, skating rinks,
reception areas and no less than 75% of the sleeping quarters within a hotel,
motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast, or other similar public
accommodation that are rented to guests, but excludes private residences.



      RESTAURANT. An eating establishment, including, but not limited
to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands and private and public school
cafeterias, that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests or
employees, and a kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on
the premises for serving elsewhere. RESTAURANT includes a bar area within the
RESTAURANT.



      RETAIL TOBACCO STORE. A retail establishment that derives more
than 80% of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants or herbs
and cigars, cigarettes, pipes and other smoking devices for burning tobacco
and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products is
merely incidental. RETAIL TOBACCO STORE does not include a tobacco department
or section of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment with any
type of liquor, food or restaurant license.



      SMOKE or SMOKING. The carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling or
exhaling of any kind of lighted or burning pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah
pipe, pipe weed, herbs or any other lighted tobacco product in any manner or
in any form.



   (B)   Smoking prohibited in public places and places of employment.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any
public place or place of employment within the village.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any
place designated as a “No Smoking Area”, as provided in division (D) of
this section.



      (3)   It shall be unlawful for an employer to knowingly permit
smoking in any enclosed area in any place of employment.



      (4)   It shall be unlawful for an employer, owner, occupant or
lessee in control of a public place to knowingly permit smoking in any
enclosed area in said public place.



      (5)   It shall be unlawful for an employer, owner, occupant or
lessee in control of a public place to fail to post signage or remove
ashtrays, as provided in division (E) of this section.



   (C)   Exemptions. The prohibitions on smoking set forth in this
section shall not apply to:



      (1)   Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests
and are designated as smoking rooms; provided that all smoking rooms on the
same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate
into non-smoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited under the
provisions of this section. Not more than 25% of the rooms rented to guests
in a hotel or motel may be designated as rooms where smoking is permitted.
The status of rooms as smoking or non-smoking may not be changed, except to
add additional non-smoking rooms;



      (2)   Private vehicles, not including public transportation
facilities or government vehicles;



      (3)   Private residences or dwelling places except when used
as a child care, adult day care, health care facility or any other home-based
business open to the public;



      (4)   Private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes and
long-term care facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of
whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where
smoking is permitted; and



      (5)   Any public place or place of employment that is a
tobacco dealer, whose principal business is the sale of retail of tobacco and
tobacco-related products; provided that, smoke generated by smoking on the
premises of the tobacco dealer does not infiltrate into enclosed areas where
smoking is otherwise prohibited; and no food or liquor license has been
granted.



   (D)   Designation of other no-smoking areas. Notwithstanding any
other provision of this section, any employer, owner, occupant, lessee,
operator, manager or other person in control of any public place or place of
employment may designate a non-enclosed area of said public place or place of
employment, including outdoor areas, as an area where smoking is also
prohibited; provided that, such employer, owner, lessee or occupant shall
conspicuously post signs prohibiting smoking in the manner described in
division (E) of this section.



   (E)   Responsibilities of proprietors. Each owner, lessee, occupant,
employer or other person in control of a public place or a place of
employment shall be responsible for all the following:



      (1)   Post conspicuous signs no smaller than five inches by
seven inches in enclosed areas and the entrance or vestibule to the public
place, place of employment or the building wherein they are located, as the
case may be, bearing the text “No Smoking” or the international “No
Smoking” symbol, which consists of a pictorial representation of a
cigarette enclosed in a circle with a bar across it. Such signs shall also be
posted outside of the main entrance to the public place or place of
employment, shall reference the 15-foot buffer zone in which smoking is
prohibited, and contain the telephone numbers of the designated enforcement
authorities noted in this section, in addition to the telephone number and
website designated by the Illinois Department of Public Health for
registering complaints;



      (2)   Remove ash trays or other similar containers intended
for the deposit of tobacco ash, cigarettes, cigars or other tobacco products
from public places;



      (3)   Request any person who smokes in an area where smoking
is prohibited to refrain from smoking, and if the person continues to smoke,
request the person to leave; and



      (4)   Notify employees regarding the requirements of this
section.



   (F)   Enforcement.



      (1)   This section shall be enforced by the Police Department.



      (2)   Notice of the provisions of this section shall be given
to all applicants for a business license in the village.



      (3)   Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under
this section may initiate enforcement by contacting the Police Department.



      (4)   An employer, owner, lessee, manager, operator or
employee of an establishment regulated by this section shall inform persons
violating this section of the appropriate provisions thereof and request that
the violator cease smoking in a prohibited area and, if the person continues
to smoke, request the person to leave.



   (G)   Penalties.



      (1)   Any person who shall violate divisions (B)(1) or (B)(2)
of this section shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of $100
for a first violation and $250 for any subsequent violations within one year.
Each day in which a violation of divisions (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section
occurs constitutes a separate and distinct violation.



      (2)   Any person who shall violate divisions (B)(3) or (B)(4)
of this section shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of $500
upon conviction for the first violation and $750 for each subsequent
conviction stemming from a violation within one year of the initial violation
of divisions (B)(3) or (B)(4) of this section. Each day in which a violation
of divisions (B)(3) or (B)(4) of this section occurs constitutes a separate
and distinct violation.



      (3)   Any person who shall violate division (B)(5) of this
section shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of $250 for each
violation. Each day during which a violation of division (B)(5) of this
section continues beyond the specified time for correction shall constitute a
separate punishable offense, although owners, operators, managers or other
controllers of public places and places of employment shall be given a
reasonable time to come into compliance with division (B)(5) of this section
following issuance of a notice of violation, but such period shall not, in
any event, exceed one week.



      (4)   In addition to the fines established by this division
(G), violation of this section by a person who owns, manages, operates or
otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the
suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for
the premises on which the violation occurred.



      (5)   Violation of this section is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance, which may be abated by an action in the Circuit Court for
injunctive relief, or other means provided for by law, and the village may
take action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement.



      (6)   Any person granted law enforcement authority in the
village, who observes a violation of any provision of this section may, as an
alternative to initially instituting a charge in the Circuit Court of DuPage
County, issue a “hang-on ticket” as provided in Ch. 15, Art. 4, of this
code, pursuant to which the person cited may pay the sum of $25 within the
time stated on the ticket as a compromise or settlement to avoid the
prosecution of an ordinance violation in the Circuit Court.



(Ord. 2007-12-50, passed 12-17-2007)



ARTICLE 4:  MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES



Section



   14-4-1   Litter



   14-4-2   Abandoned refrigerators and freezers



   14-4-3   Admission fees, fraudulently avoiding payment of



   14-4-4   Curfew



   14-4-5   Activities on public rights-of-way



   14-4-6   Parental responsibility for certain acts pertaining to
minors



   14-4-7   Remedies for violations of parental responsibility
provisions



   14-4-8   Fireworks



§ 14-4-1  LITTER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to:



   (A)   Throw, drop or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk,
alley, public park or any public park facilities therein, or other public
place within the village, except in public receptacles or in authorized
private receptacles for collection;



   (B)   Sweep or deposit in any gutter, street or alley, or other
public place within the village the accumulation of litter from any building
or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of
litter; and/or



   (C)   Drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the village
unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck
within the village, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any
street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or
foreign matter of any kind.



§ 14-4-2  ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS AND FREEZERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow a discarded
refrigerator or freezer or one not in use to remain in any place accessible
to children unless the latching or locking mechanism on the door of the same
has been removed, or unless the doors of the same are bolted and locked in
such manner that it is impossible to open the same by the use of hands.



§ 14-4-3  ADMISSION FEES, FRAUDULENTLY  AVOIDING PAYMENT OF.



   It shall be unlawful for any person fraudulently to enter, without
payment of the proper admission fee, any theater, ballroom, lecture, concert
or other place where admission fees are charged; provided, however, that,
nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit or restrict the free
admission of police officers engaged in the performance of police duties to
any place of public entertainment or amusement.



§ 14-4-4  CURFEW.



   (A)   It is unlawful for a person less than 17 years of age to be
present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway at
the following times unless one of those exceptions listed in division (B)
below applies:



      (1)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday and Sunday; and



      (2)   Between 11:01 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and
6:00 a.m. on the following day.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to any person less than 17 years
of age who is involved in the following activities:



      (1)   Accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal guardian
or other responsible companion of at least 17 years of age who is approved by
the parent or legal guardian;



      (2)   Engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of
this state authorize a person less than 17 years of age to perform;



      (3)   Attending or traveling to or from an official school,
religious or civic activity;



      (4)   Attending or traveling to or from any assembly activity
for which a permit has been lawfully issued;



      (5)   Involved in an emergency involving the protection of a
person or property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or
substantial damage; or



      (6)   Any activity which involves the exercise of the
minor’s First Amendment rights.



   (C)   Before issuing any citation pursuant to this section, the
citing officer shall make a reasonable effort to determine whether the person
is involved in any activity specified in division (B) of this section. If the
officer determines that the person is involved in such an activity, then no
citation shall be issued. If the officer reasonably believes that the person
is not involved in such activity, then the officer may issue a citation for
violation of this section.



   (D)   It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to
knowingly permit a minor in his or her custody or control to violate division
(A) of this section.



   (E)   A person violating this section shall be issued a citation and
fined no more than $500.



(Ord. 90-10-92, passed 10-23-1990; Ord. 2004-04-21, passed 4-19-2004)



§ 14-4-5  ACTIVITIES ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   It shall be unlawful to throw, kick or knock any ball, stones or other
hard substances, or play ball or engage in any sport, exercise or other
recreational activity upon any public street or place so as to endanger
persons or property, or obstruct or impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic.



(Ord. 95-08-44, passed 8-21-1995)



§ 14-4-6  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR CERTAIN ACTS PERTAINING TO MINORS.



   It shall be unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other adult having
custody or control of a minor or in whose home a minor resides to:



   (A)   Deliver to or otherwise furnish cannabis or any controlled
substances as defined by state law to that minor or use, engage or employ
such minor to deliver such prohibited materials; and/or



   (B)   Knowingly permit a minor child to use, sell, deliver or obtain
possession of cannabis or of any controlled substance. A parent or legal
guardian or the adult having custody or control of a minor or in whose home a
minor resides shall be presumed to have committed a violation of this section
if that minor has been convicted of violating any of the provisions of local
ordinance or state law pertaining to the use, delivery, possession or sale of
the identified prohibited materials, or has incurred non-judicial sanctions
from any law enforcement officer resulting from an admission of guilt to any
such offense.



(Ord. 94-03-25, passed 3-8-1994)



§ 14-4-7  REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY PROVISIONS.



   In addition to fines or penalties available to the court pursuant to
the general penalty provisions of this code, including § 14-1-16, or any
other applicable ordinance or statute, the court may impose upon the minor
and the responsible adult found guilty of a violation of § 14-4-6, a term of
court supervision, community service or counseling for the minor or the
adult, or may order the responsible adult to pay restitution to the victim as
provided in § 14-1-17.



(Ord. 94-03-25, passed 3-8-1994)



§ 14-4-8  FIREWORKS.



   (A)   Definition. The term FIREWORKS shall mean and include any
explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances, or
article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect of
a temporary exhibitional nature by explosion, combustion, deflagration or
detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy cannons in which
explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath to
propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, sky rockets, Roman candles, bombs
or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any
explosive compound; or any tablets or other device containing any explosive
substance, or containing combustible substances producing visual effects. The
term FIREWORKS shall not include snake or glow worm pellets, smoke devices;
sparklers; trick noisemakers known as “party poppers”, “bobby traps”,
“snappers”, “trick matches”, “cigarette loads” and “auto
burglar alarms”, toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which
paper or plastic caps containing twenty-five hundredths grains or less of
explosive compound are used; provided, they are so constructed that the hand
cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy
pistol paper or plastic caps which contain less than twenty-five hundredths
grains of explosive mixture; the sale and use of which shall be permitted at
all times.



   (B)   Possession, sale and use of fireworks.



      (1)   Except as hereinafter provided it shall he unlawful for
any person, firm, co-partnership or corporation to knowingly possess, offer
for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail or use or explode any fireworks.
The village may grant permits for pyrotechnic and consumer displays to
persons with proven experience in the commercial use of fireworks.



      (2)   Any person who violates division (A) of this section
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500, nor more than $1,000.



      (3)   Any police officer observing a violation of this section
may, as an alternative to arresting the offender, issue a “hang-on
ticket” as provided in Ch. 15, Art. 4, of this code pursuant to which the
person cited may pay the sum of $250 within ten days of the violation as a
compromise or settlement to avoid the prosecution of an ordinance violation
in the Circuit Court.



(Ord. 2008-06-28, passed 6-2-2008)



CHAPTER 15: MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS



      Article



         1.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES



         2.   HANDBILLS AND POSTING NOTICES



         3.   PARADES AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES



         4.   PROCEDURE FOR SETTLING AND COMPROMISING ORDINANCE
VIOLATIONS AND INDEX OF MINIMUM FINES



         5.   SOUND AMPLIFIERS



         6.   FAIR HOUSING



         7.   ANNEXATIONS



         8.   TOWN CENTER RULES AND REGULATIONS



         9.   POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES



ARTICLE 1:  CIVIL EMERGENCIES



Section



   15-1-1   Definitions



   15-1-2   Declaration of civil emergency



   15-1-3   General curfew order



   15-1-4   Other orders



   15-1-5   Notice



   15-1-6   Length of effectiveness



   15-1-7   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Emergency Management Agency, see Ch. 3, Art. 5



§ 15-1-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CIVIL EMERGENCY.



      (1)   A riot, or any unlawful assembly or gathering of three
or more persons, characterized by the use of force or violence upon persons
or property, or threatened or obvious intended use of force or violence upon
persons or property accompanied by immediate power to execute, acting
together or in conjunction with each other, without authority of law, which
has or could result in injury to persons or property, or jeopardize the
public peace, safety and welfare.



      (2)   Any natural disaster, or human-made calamity, including
flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake, explosion or bombing,
within the corporate limits of the village or within the area adjacent to the
village, resulting in the death or injury of persons or in the damage or
destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be
taken for the protection and preservation of the public peace, safety and
welfare within the village.



   CURFEW. A prohibition against any person or persons, standing, sitting,
lying, loitering, walking, running or being within or upon any vehicle, in or
upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises in any
geographical area within the corporate limits of the village, except persons
officially designated to duty with reference to such civil emergency.



§ 15-1-2  DECLARATION OF CIVIL EMERGENCY.



   Whenever a civil emergency, as defined in § 15-1-1, exists, the
Village President shall declare the existence by means of a written
declaration, signed under oath, setting forth the facts which constitute the
civil emergency.



§ 15-1-3  GENERAL CURFEW ORDER.



   After proclamation of a civil emergency by the Village President, the
Village President may order a general or limited curfew applicable to such
geographical areas of the village or to the village as a whole, as the
Village President deems advisable, and applicable during such hours of the
day or night as the Village President deems necessary for the protection and
preservation of the public peace, safety and welfare.



§ 15-1-4  OTHER ORDERS.



   After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the Village President may
also, in the interest of public peace, safety and welfare, make any or all of
the following orders:



   (A)   Order the closing of all liquor stores and establishments,
including restaurants and private clubs or portions thereof, wherein the
consumption of alcoholic liquor is permitted;



   (B)   Prohibit the sale, serving or giving away of any intoxicating
liquor in or by any store, restaurant, private club or other establishment
having an alcoholic liquor license issued by the village;



   (C)   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by
any wholesaler or retailer;



   (D)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving
away of gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any
container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;



   (E)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing
or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever; and



   (F)   Such other orders as are imminently necessary for the
protection of life and property.



§ 15-1-5  NOTICE.



   Upon issuance of the proclamation authorized, it shall be filed with
the Village Clerk as soon as practicable, and the Chief of Police shall
notify the news media of the village and shall cause three copies of the
proclamation declaring the existence of the civil emergency to be posted in
three prominent places within the village.



§ 15-1-6  LENGTH OF EFFECTIVENESS.



   A state of civil emergency, declared as provided in this article, shall
expire not later than the adjournment of the first regular meeting of the
corporate authorities after the state of civil emergency is declared.



§ 15-1-7  PENALTY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions
of any curfew or any other order issued by the Village President under the
provisions of this article, or to fail or refuse to obey promptly any
reasonable order, direction or command issued by any police officer acting in
the performance of his or her duty or power in the enforcement of the
provisions of this article for the preservation of the public peace, health
and safety.



   (B)   Any person guilty of such violation shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $100, nor more than $750, for
each offense.



ARTICLE 2:  HANDBILLS AND POSTING NOTICES



Section



   15-2-1   Placing handbills on vehicles prohibited



   15-2-2   Depositing handbills on vacant premises prohibited



   15-2-3   Placing newspapers and handbills on private property



   15-2-4   Persons liable



   15-2-5   Posting notices prohibited



§ 15-2-1  PLACING HANDBILLS ON VEHICLES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any commercial
or non-commercial handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that,
it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or
distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, a commercial or
non-commercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept
it.



§ 15-2-2  DEPOSITING HANDBILLS ON VACANT PREMISES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any commercial
or non-commercial handbill in or upon any private premises which, because of
its appearance or the presence of unremoved handbills, newspapers or
magazines, appears to be unoccupied.



§ 15-2-3  PLACING NEWSPAPERS AND HANDBILLS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place newspapers or commercial
or non-commercial hand-bills on private property in a manner resulting in
their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place or upon private property.



§ 15-2-4  PERSONS LIABLE.



   It shall be a violation of this article for any person to instruct
agents or employees to distribute commercial or non-commercial handbills and
news-papers in a manner inconsistent with the prohibitions of this article or
to fail to supervise agents or employees so that a violation of this article
occurs.



§ 15-2-5  POSTING NOTICES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to post or affix any notice,
advertisement, poster or other paper or device calculated to attract the
attention of the public to any lamp post, public utility pole, tree or upon
any public structure, building or public property, except as may be
authorized by the Sign Code, being Ch. 6, Art. 11, of this code.



(Ord. 92-06-64, passed 6-9-1992)



ARTICLE 3:  PARADES AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES



Section



   15-3-1   Definitions



   15-3-2   Permit required



   15-3-3   Application



   15-3-4   Time



   15-3-5   Not to obstruct traffic



   15-3-6   Grant or denial of permit



   15-3-7   Procedure when permit denied



   15-3-8   Simultaneous applications



   15-3-9   Issuance of multiple permits



§ 15-3-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARADE. Any march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of
any kind, or similar display, in or upon any public way or other public
property.



   PUBLIC ASSEMBLY. Any outdoor meeting, congregation or gathering of
persons held on public property for the purpose of expressive activity.



(Ord. 92-05-60, passed 5-26-1992)



§ 15-3-2  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall participate in or hold a parade or any public assembly
unless a written permit therefor shall first be obtained.



(Ord. 92-05-60, passed 5-26-1992)



§ 15-3-3  APPLICATION.



   (A)   An application to conduct a parade or public assembly shall be
made in writing to the Village Manager at least 72 hours prior to the event
by a representative of the group seeking the permit.



   (B)   The application to conduct a parade or public assembly shall
set forth the following information:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the person
seeking to conduct such parade or public assembly;



      (2)   If the parade or public assembly is proposed to be
conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and
telephone number of the headquarters of the organization;



      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who
will be the parade Chairperson or person in charge of the public assembly;



      (4)   The date when the parade or public assembly is to be
conducted;



      (5)   The route to be traveled, the starting point, the
termination point and the location of speakers’ platforms;



      (6)   The approximate number of persons who, and animals and
vehicles which, will constitute such parade or public assembly; the type of
animals and description of the vehicles;



      (7)   The hours when such parade or public assembly will start
and terminate;



      (8)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or
only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;



      (9)   The location by streets of any assembly areas for such
parade or public assemblies;



      (10)   The time at which units of the parade will begin to
assemble at any such assembly area or areas;



      (11)   The interval of space to be maintained between units of
such parade; and



      (12)   If the parade is designed to be held by and on behalf
of or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit
shall file with the Village Manager a communication in writing from the
person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for
the permit on his or her behalf.



(Ord. 92-05-60, passed 5-26-1992)



§ 15-3-4  TIME.



   All parades on public ways and all public assemblies shall be held at
times other than peak traffic periods (7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.
to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday) and not before noon on Sundays. All
public assemblies shall conclude by midnight.



(Ord. 92-05-60, passed 5-26-1992)



§ 15-3-5  NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC.



   Parades and public assemblies shall be limited to such numbers as will
not obstruct traffic, either vehicular or pedestrian, in an unreasonable
manner.



(Ord. 92-05-60, passed 5-26-1992)



§ 15-3-6  GRANT OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   Following receipt of an application or reapplication for a parade or
public assembly meeting, and its approval, the Village Manager shall either
issue a permit within 24 hours, or reject the application for a permit for
the holding of a parade or public assembly.



(Ord. 92-05-60, passed 5-26-1992)



§ 15-3-7  PROCEDURE WHEN PERMIT DENIED.



   Permits may be rejected on the basis of improper or incomplete
application. The reasons for rejection shall be made known to the applicant,
in writing, at the time of rejection. The applicant shall be allowed to
correct or complete any improper application and resubmit it to the Village
Manager within 24 hours prior to the time of the event.



(Ord. 92-05-60, passed 5-26-1992)



§ 15-3-8  SIMULTANEOUS APPLICATIONS.



   If the Village Manager shall receive more than one application for a
parade or public assembly at the same time and the same place, or on the same
day, the application filed first in time shall take precedence. An
application shall be considered to be “at the same time” if the event is
scheduled to commence within two hours before or after the holding of another
event. An application shall be considered to be “at the same place” if
the requested parade route comes at any point within six blocks or any
equivalent distance from the route of another parade, or if the public
assembly is to be conducted within one-half mile of another public assembly.
If the Village Manager receives an application for more than one parade or
public assembly in a single day, he or she may set a time for the duration of
each parade or public assembly, which time shall not, without the consent of
the group seeking the permit, be less than three hours.



(Ord. 92-05-60, passed 5-26-1992)



§ 15-3-9  ISSUANCE OF MULTIPLE PERMITS.



   The Village Manager shall issue permits for more than a single parade
during one day in accordance with the requirements of this article. However,
he or she may not issue multiple permits beyond the point at which the
issuance of an additional permit would require the continuing diversion of so
great a number of police officers or other village personnel so as to prevent
normal police protection or other services to the village.



(Ord. 92-05-60, passed 5-26-1992)



ARTICLE 4:  PROCEDURE FOR SETTLING AND COMPROMISING ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS AND
INDEX OF MINIMUM FINES



Section



   15-4-1   Notice of violation



   15-4-2   Hang-on tickets



   15-4-3   Payment of settlement



   15-4-4   Prosecutions



   15-4-5   Index of minimum fines



§ 15-4-1  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   All persons accused of violating or failing to comply with any
provisions of the code of ordinances of the village or any other ordinances
of the village not reprinted within the loose-leaf volume entitled “Code of
Ordinances of the Village of Carol Stream”, including, but not limited to,
ordinances relating to traffic control, shall be notified of such violation
or failure to comply in one of the following two ways:



   (A)   By arrest, or by the issuance of a formal complaint in the
Circuit Court of DuPage County, which complaint shall require the appearance
of the defendant at the Circuit Court upon a noted day. A violation or a
failure to comply commenced in this manner shall not be settled or
compromised, but shall proceed to a hearing at which the defendant may plead
“guilty” or “not guilty”; or



   (B)   By the issuance to the defendant of a “hang-on ticket”. A
violation or failure to comply commenced in this manner may be settled or
compromised as provided in this article.



§ 15-4-2  HANG-ON TICKETS.



   (A)   A person receiving a “hang-on ticket” may settle or
compromise such ticket by payment of the amount shown on the ticket or, if no
amount is shown on the ticket, then the amount of the minimum fine provided
in this article for the offense, at the village building of the village
within ten days after the issuance of such ticket or within 30 days if such
ticket is for a violation of §§ 8-2-7, 8-2-8, 8-2-9, 8-2-10, 8-2-11,
8-2-12, 8-2-13, 8-2-14, 8-2-15, and 8-2-16,  §§ 8-7-1, 8-7-2 and 8-7-3,
and §§ 7, 8, 9, 10 and 16 of Village Ord. 90-07-55. If such ticket is not
settled or compromised within the initial ten- or 30-day period, it may be
settled or compromised by the payment of twice the amount of such ticket, or
if no amount is shown on the ticket, then twice the amount of the minimum
fine provided in this article for the offense, for a period of 20 days after
the lapse of the initial ten- or 30-day period.



   (B)   In the case of failure to make payment as herein provided, the
officer issuing the ticket shall issue a written notice to appear and
complaint which shall state the name and address of the person, if known; the
offense committed; be signed by the officer; and request the person to appear
at the Circuit Court of DuPage County at a specific time and date. The notice
to appear and complaint shall be served in the manner provided by the rules
of the Circuit Court of DuPage County.



   (C)   In the event that the person fails to appear in court on the
date set forth in the notice to appear and complaint, the matter shall be
referred to the Circuit Court of DuPage County for issuance of summons or an
arrest warrant and the setting of a date for a hearing.



(Ord. 93-08-77, passed 8-24-1993; Ord. 2003-12-85, passed 12-1-2003)



§ 15-4-3  PAYMENT OF SETTLEMENT.



   Payment of a settlement and compromise amount shall be made to the
village in person or by mail, and a receipt shall be issued for all money so
received.



§ 15-4-4  PROSECUTIONS.



   Officers of the Village Police Department are hereby authorized to
refrain from initiating a prosecution for the alleged offense for which
“hang-on tickets” are issued until the expiration of 11 days from the
date of issuance of the ticket, as provided in this article.



§ 15-4-5  INDEX OF MINIMUM FINES.



   (A)   This index is no way limits the right of the village to assess
or to seek a higher fine than is listed herein, or to impose or seek any
other remedy which is provided by ordinance or other law. The maximum penalty
which may be assessed in the event of any violation of the code of ordinances
of the village is $750 per offense.



   (B)   This index is provided for reference purposes only. Failure to
include an existing or future minimum fine within this index in no way
invalidates such fine.



 

Violation
 
Minimum Fine for Violation




Administration
 
$10


Animals and fowl
 
$10


Buildings and building regulations


   Anti-Monotony Code
 
$75


   Building Code
 
$75


   Electrical Code
 
$75


   Energy Code
 
$75


   Fence Code
 
$75


   Fire Code
 
$75


   Fuel Gas Code
 
$75


   Mechanical Code
 
$75


   Permit and inspection fees
 
$75


   Plumbing Code
 
$75


   Private swimming pools
 
$75


   Property Maintenance Code
 
$75


   Residential Code
 
$75


   Sign Code
 
$75


   Stop work orders
 
$75


Business and licensing regulations
 
$50


General provisions
 
$10


Health regulations
 
$200


Intoxicating liquors
 
$50


Miscellaneous provisions and offenses


   Cannabis possession
 
$75


   Firearms
 
$75


   Litter
 
$75


   Miscellaneous
 
$10


   Parades and open air meetings
 
$10


   Retail theft
 
$75


   Weeds and plants
 
$75


Police alarm systems
 
$25


Regulations of dogs and animals


   Control of defecation
 
$100


   Dangerous animal
 
$100


   Dog license
 
$10


   Vicious animal
 
$400


Streets, sidewalks and driveways
 
$10


Subdivisions


   All other violations
 
$10


   Construction of public improvements, sale, offer for sale, lease or
offer for lease prior to approval of final plat
 
$25


   Flood prone areas
 
$100


   Land movement
 
$10


   Stop work orders
 
$100


Taxation and finance
 
$10


Traffic


   All other parking
 
$30


   Operation of motor vehicle on sidewalk
 
$30


   Operation of motorized skateboards
 
$30


   Parking for disabled persons
 
$250


Water generally and storm water drainage


   Turning on water without permission
 
$50


   Unauthorized sprinkling
 
$50


   Use of water from fire hydrants
 
$50


Zoning
 
$75




 



(Ord. 93-08-77, passed 8-24-1993; Ord. 95-06-26, passed 6-5-1995; Ord.
2003-12-85, passed 12-1-2003; Ord. 2006-02-05, passed 2-6-2006; Ord.
2008-04-15, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 2017-11-62, passed 11-6-2017)



ARTICLE 5:  SOUND AMPLIFIERS



Section



   15-5-1   Permit required



   15-5-2   Permit fee



   15-5-3   Application



   15-5-4   Issuance of permits



   15-5-5   Restrictions



§ 15-5-1  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any sound
amplification device by which sounds are magnified and made heard over any
public street or public place without having first obtained a permit therefor.



   (B)   No permit shall be required for amplification devices used on
private property in residential districts only. However, all restrictions
contained in § 14-2-17(C) and § 15-5-5 shall also apply to amplification
devices on private property in residential districts, including during block
parties.



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to audio media
devices in homes or in private pleasure vehicles, when the same are operated
in such a manner as not to be audible at a distance of 50 feet from such
vehicle; to noise devices, bands, or other musical devices used in any public
parade, procession or event which is operated under a permit in accordance
with this code; or to church bells, chimes or carillons.



(Ord. 92-07-79, passed 7-14-1992; Ord. 92-08-98, passed 8-25-1992; Ord.
2013-05-17, passed 5-6-2013)



§ 15-5-2  PERMIT FEE.



   The fee for the use or operation of any radio receiving set, talking
machine, amplifier or other similar device to be operated from a fixed
location or in a moving vehicle on any public place shall be $25 for any day
or part of a day for which the permittee desires to have a permit.



(Ord. 92-07-79, passed 7-14-1992)



§ 15-5-3  APPLICATION.



   Any person, firm or corporation desiring a permit for the use or
operation of such a device shall file an application with the Village Manager
upon a form provided therefor, setting forth the name and address of the
applicant, the name and address of the owner of such device, the date upon
which it is intended to be used, the purpose for its use and such other
information as may be prescribed.



§ 15-5-4  ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.



   Such permit shall be issued upon the payment of the fee to the Village
Manager, as provided above, and shall permit the use of such device subject
to the terms and conditions of this article, only upon the date specified on
such permit and no other.



§ 15-5-5  RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any sound
amplification device by which sounds are magnified and made heard over any
public street or public place within the village limits between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on any day.



   (B)   No person shall use, operate or employ any sound amplification
device within a radius of two blocks from any hospital or within the radius
of two blocks from any church or other place of worship while services are
being held. This section shall not apply to church bells, chimes or carillons.



   (C)   No person shall cause or permit to be emitted from any such
device any lewd, obscene, profane or indecent language or sounds, or allow
any false representation of any matter, product or product advertised whereby
the sale of which is prohibited by law, ordinance or statute.



   (D)   This section shall not apply to audio media devices in homes
or in private pleasure vehicles, when the same are operated in such a manner
as not to be audible at a distance of 50 feet from such vehicle.



(Ord. 92-07-79, passed 7-14-1992; Ord. 2013-05-17, passed 5-6-2013)



ARTICLE 6:  FAIR HOUSING



Section



   15-6-1   Declaration of policy



   15-6-2   Definitions



   15-6-3   Committee created, membership



   15-6-4   Qualifications of members



   15-6-5   Appointment; term



   15-6-6   Chairperson



   15-6-7   Quorum; majority



   15-6-8   Powers; duties



   15-6-9   Unlawful real estate practices



   15-6-10   Advertisements, signs, notices



   15-6-11   Withholding housing



   15-6-12   Refusal of offers



   15-6-13   Refusal to negotiate



   15-6-14   Discriminatory terms



   15-6-15   Discrimination in lending



   15-6-16   Representation



   15-6-17   Miscellaneous violations



   15-6-18   Complaints of violation



   15-6-19   Service of complaint; investigation



   15-6-20   Procedure upon determination of probable cause



   15-6-21   Hearing without further mediation



   15-6-22   Hearings by Committee



   15-6-23   Enforcement



   15-6-24   Time limitations



   15-6-25   Remedies



§ 15-6-1  DECLARATION OF POLICY.



   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the village and the purpose
of this article, in the exercise by the village of its police and regulatory
powers for the protection of the public safety, for the health, morals,
safety and welfare of the persons in and residing in the village, and for the
maintenance and promotion of commerce, industry and good government in the
village, to secure to all persons living or working or desiring to live or
work in the village a fair opportunity to purchase, lease, rent or occupy
real estate without discrimination based on race, color, religion or national
origin.



§ 15-6-2  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMITTEE. The Ad Hoc Carol Stream Fair Housing Committee.



   LEASE. Includes sublease, assignment or rental and includes any
contract to do any of the foregoing.



   NATIONAL ORIGIN. Includes the national origin of an ancestor.



   OWNER. Any person who holds legal or equitable title to, or owns any
beneficial interest in, any real property or who holds legal or equitable
title to shares of, or holds any beneficial interest in, any real estate
cooperative which owns any real property.



   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, legal representatives, mutual companies, unincorporated
organizations, trusts, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and
fiduciaries.



   PURCHASE. Includes any contract to purchase.



   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION. The purchase, sale, exchange, rental or lease
of any real property, or an option to do any of the foregoing.



   REAL PROPERTY. Any real estate, vacant land, building or structure
within the village limits.



   SALE. Includes any contract to sell, exchange or to convey, transfer or
assign legal or equitable title to or a beneficial interest in real property.



§ 15-6-3  COMMITTEE CREATED, MEMBERSHIP.



   Pursuant to the village policy established in this article, the Village
President is hereby authorized to establish, at his or her discretion, an ad
hoc Fair Housing Committee, which shall consist of five members appointed by
the Village President with the consent and approval of the Board of Trustees.



§ 15-6-4  QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.



   All five members of the ad hoc Fair Housing Committee shall be
appointed from the community at large and shall be citizens who have
previously exhibited commitment and interest in various activities concerned
with improving community human relations.



§ 15-6-5  APPOINTMENT; TERM.



   Members of the ad hoc Fair Housing Committee shall be appointed by the
Village President with the consent and approval of the Board of Trustees. The
ad hoc Fair Housing Committee shall cease to exist at the expiration of 30
days from the date of appointment or upon the submission of the report
required under this article, whichever occurs sooner, unless the existence of
the Committee is extended by the Village President with the consent and
approval of the Board of Trustees.



§ 15-6-6  CHAIRPERSON.



   The Village President shall designate one of the members of the ad hoc
Fair Housing Committee to be its Chairperson.



§ 15-6-7  QUORUM; MAJORITY.



   Three members of the ad hoc Fair Housing Committee shall constitute a
quorum and the concurrence of a majority shall be sufficient for any
Committee action.



§ 15-6-8  POWERS; DUTIES.



   The ad hoc Fair Housing Committee shall have and exercise the following
duties and powers:



   (A)   Investigate allegations and complaints of discrimination in
housing as a result of the race, color or religion or national origin of any
person seeking housing within the village. Any complaint or allegation of
discrimination shall be made in writing to the corporate authorities of the
village and shall fully set forth circumstances of the alleged violation and
the source of all information upon which the complaint is based, including
the names and addresses of all complainants. A copy of such written complaint
shall be mailed to the party alleged to be engaging in housing discrimination;



   (B)   Report to the corporate authorities no later than 30 days from
the date the Committee was appointed, the Committee’s results of its
investigation regarding housing discrimination and any recommendations which
the Committee wishes to make therefor; and



   (C)   Any other duties and powers which are granted by the Village
President with the consent and approval of the Board of Trustees when the ad
hoc Fair Housing Committee is created or at any time during its existence.



§ 15-6-9  UNLAWFUL REAL ESTATE PRACTICES.



   The following acts, as set forth in §§ 15-6-10 through 15-6-17, are
hereby prohibited acts by an owner, real estate broker, real estate
salesperson or any other person acting as agent for the owner of any real
estate and are hereby declared to constitute unlawful real estate practices,
and the commission or omission of any of these acts shall be deemed a
violation of this article.



§ 15-6-10  ADVERTISEMENTS, SIGNS, NOTICES.



   It shall be unlawful and an unlawful real estate practice for any
person to publish or circulate a statement, advertisement or notice, or to
post or erect or cause any person to post or erect, any sign or notice upon
any real property, indicating any intent to sell or lease any real property
in a manner that is unlawful under this article.



§ 15-6-11  WITHHOLDING HOUSING.



   It shall be unlawful and an unlawful real estate practice for any
person to represent to any person that any real property is not available for
inspection, purchase, sale, lease or occupancy when in fact it is so
available, or otherwise to withhold real property from any person because of
race, color, religion or national origin.



§ 15-6-12  REFUSAL OF OFFERS.



   It shall be unlawful and an unlawful real estate practice for any real
estate agent or other person to refuse to receive or to fail to transmit a
bona fide offer for the purchase, sale, exchange or lease of any real
property because of the race, color, religion or national origin of the
person making such offer.



§ 15-6-13  REFUSAL TO NEGOTIATE.



   It shall be unlawful and an unlawful real estate practice for any
person to refuse to negotiate for, enter into or perform any sale or rental
of any real property, because of the race, color, religion or national origin
of any party to such sale or rental, or of any member of the family of any
such party, or of any person using or occupying or intending to use or occupy
such real property, or of any person using or occupying any real property in
the area in which such real property is located.



§ 15-6-14  DISCRIMINATORY TERMS.



   It shall be unlawful and an unlawful housing practice for any person to
sell or rent or offer to sell or rent real property on terms, conditions or
privileges that discriminate between persons because of race, color, religion
or national origin.



§ 15-6-15  DISCRIMINATION IN LENDING.



   It shall be unlawful and an unlawful real estate practice for any
lending institution to refuse to negotiate for, enter into or perform any
agreement to lend or guarantee the loan of funds, or in making, agreeing to
make, arranging or negotiating any loan or guarantee of funds, for the
purpose of financing the purchase or sale, construction, lease,
rehabilitation, improvement, renovation or repair of any real property, or to
offer or agree to terms, conditions or privileges that discriminate between
persons because of race, color, religion or national origin of any party to
such agreement, or of any member of the family of any such party, or of the
residents of the area in which such real property is located.



§ 15-6-16  REPRESENTATION.



   It shall be unlawful and an unlawful real estate practice for any
person, for the purpose of inducing any other person to enter into a real
estate transaction with such person, his or her principal or his or her agent:



   (A)   To represent that a change has occurred, will occur or may
occur with respect to race, color, religion or national origin in the
composition of the owners or occupants in any block, neighborhood or area in
which the real property (which is the subject of the real estate transaction)
is located; or



   (B)   To represent that a change, with respect to the race, color,
religion or national origin in the composition of the owners or occupants in
any block, neighborhood, or area will result in the lowering of property
values, or in an increase in criminal or antisocial behavior, or in a decline
in the quality of schools, in such blocks, neighborhood or area.



§ 15-6-17  MISCELLANEOUS VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful and an unlawful real estate practice for any
person:



   (A)   To aid, abet, incite or coerce a person to commit an unlawful
real estate practice;



   (B)   To deliberately and knowingly refuse examination of copies of
any listing of real property in the village to any person because of race,
color, religion or national origin;



   (C)   To enter into a listing agreement which prohibits the
inspection, sale, lease or occupancy of real property to any person because
of race, color, religion or national origin; and/or



   (D)   To knowingly and willfully interfere with the performance of a
duty or the exercise of a power by the Fair Housing Committee or one of its
members or representatives.



§ 15-6-18  COMPLAINTS OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved in any manner of any violation of any
provision of this article may file with the Committee a written verified
complaint setting forth his or her grievance.



   (B)   The complaint shall state:



      (1)   The name and address of the complainant;



      (2)   The name and address of the person against whom the
complaint is brought, if known to the complainant;



      (3)   The alleged facts surrounding the alleged violation of
this article; and



      (4)   The name and address of all persons believed to have
knowledge concerning the alleged facts.



   (C)   The Committee shall provide a printed form of complaint for
the use of aggrieved persons and such complaint shall be accompanied by a
filing fee of $25 to be deposited with the village.



§ 15-6-19  SERVICE OF COMPLAINT; INVESTIGATION.



   After the filing of any complaint, the Fair Housing Committee shall
serve a copy of the complaint on the party or parties charged and the
Chairperson of the Committee shall designate a panel to make a prompt
investigation in connection therewith.



§ 15-6-20  PROCEDURE UPON DETERMINATION OF PROBABLE CAUSE.



   If the panel shall determine after such investigation that probable
cause exists for the allegations of the complaint filed under this article,
the panel shall set a time and date for a conference, and at such meeting,
the panel or any member thereof shall interview the complainant and the
person or persons against whom the complaint has been directed and shall
attempt to resolve the complaint by all proper methods of conciliation and
persuasion.



§ 15-6-21  HEARING WITHOUT FURTHER MEDIATION.



   If at any time within 60 days after the date of filing of a complaint
pursuant to this article such panel shall determine that such attempts at
conciliation would not be in furtherance of the objectives of this article,
the Committee shall thereupon proceed promptly to a full hearing on the
complaint.



§ 15-6-22  HEARINGS BY COMMITTEE.



   (A)   Committee hearings shall be conducted by the entire Fair
Housing Committee, or a quorum thereof, upon due and reasonable notice to all
parties. The Committee shall have power to administer oaths and to take sworn
testimony. Any party alleged to have violated this article shall be entitled
to be represented by counsel and shall have the right to call witnesses on
his or her own behalf and to cross-examine witnesses.



   (B)   At the conclusion of any hearing, the Committee shall render
to the Village President and Board of Trustees a written report with
recommendations, which shall also be served by mail upon the complainant and
the party or parties charged. No report shall be delayed more than 60 days
after the first issuance of notice for commencement of a hearing.



   (C)   If the Fair Housing Committee determines that a grievance
exists, or if the complaint is settled by conciliation, then, upon
recommendation of the committee, the filing fee of $25 shall be refunded.
However, if no grievance exists, or the charges of such complaint are not
sustained, the filing fee shall not be refunded.



§ 15-6-23  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The Fair Housing Committee shall be empowered, at the
conclusion of the proceedings, to recommend to the Village President and
Board of Trustees that the Village President and Board of Trustees order any
person found to be engaging in any unfair real estate practice to cease and
desist from such practice, upon such terms as necessary and proper for the
enforcement of this article.



   (B)   The Fair Housing Committee shall be empowered, at the
conclusion of its proceedings, as part of its report, to recommend to the
Village President and Board of Trustees that it direct the Village Attorney
to do any one or more of the following:



      (1)   To institute and prosecute proceedings to enforce,
against any person found in violation of this article, the fine provided for
in this code;



      (2)   To apply to any court of competent jurisdiction:



         (a)   For an order restraining any person from violating
any provision of this article; and/or



         (b)   For such other or future relief as may seem to the
court appropriate for the enforcement of this article and for the elimination
of violations hereof.



      (3)   To petition or institute proceedings with the State
Department of Registration and Education for the purpose of causing the
Department to revoke, suspend or refuse to renew the license granted by such
Department to any real estate broker or real estate salesperson found to have
violated any provision of this article.



   (C)   After receipt of the recommendation of the Fair Housing
Committee, the Village President and Board of Trustees may issue such cease
and desist orders and may direct such action by the Village Attorney,
including the procedures in division (B) above, as shall be necessary for the
enforcement of this article.



§ 15-6-24  TIME LIMITATIONS.



   Any complaint filed with the Fair Housing Committee must be filed
within 60 days after the alleged discriminatory practice occurred or it shall
be barred.



§ 15-6-25  REMEDIES.



   Any person aggrieved in any manner by the violation of any provision of
this article who has exhausted the remedies provided in this article may
apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for appropriate relief from such
violation, including:



   (A)   An order compelling compliance with this article;



   (B)   An order to prohibit any person found by the court to have
violated any provision of this article from the sale, lease, exchange,
transfer, conveyance or assignment of any real property, by any person who in
violation of this article refuses or fails to perform such contract;



   (C)   Compensatory damages; and



   (D)   Such other and further relief as may seem appropriate to the
court for the enforcement of this article and the elimination of violations
hereof.



ARTICLE 7:  ANNEXATIONS



Section



   15-7-1   Extension of annexation agreements



Cross-reference:



   Annexations, public ways and properties, see Ch. 12



§ 15-7-1  EXTENSION OF ANNEXATION AGREEMENTS.



   Where land has been annexed to the village pursuant to an annexation
agreement, and at least five years of that agreement have expired, and the
village and the owner have concluded that it is desirable to extend the terms
of that agreement beyond the period established by statute, the village and
the owner may, utilizing the procedures established by state law for the
extension of an annexation agreement, extend the terms of the agreement for
up to an additional period of 20 years. The village intends to fully exercise
its home rule powers through the passage of this section and finds that it
will be benefit the citizens of the community and will assist in the
appropriate planning and development of the village to provide an option for
property owners and the corporate authorities of the village to mutually
benefit from the terms of an extended annexation agreement.



(Ord. 97-09-57, passed 9-2-1997)



ARTICLE 8:  TOWN CENTER RULES AND REGULATIONS



Section



   15-8-1   Hours of use



   15-8-2   Conduct or activities restricted or prohibited on premises



   15-8-3   Penalties



§ 15-8-1  HOURS OF USE.



   (A)   Generally. No person shall be or remain in the Town Center
between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. each day or during any other
times as may be specified by posted notice.



   (B)   Exceptions to closing hours. The provisions of division (A)
shall not be applicable in cases where a scheduled village program, activity
or event extends beyond or ends shortly before the closing hours, in which
case a person attending such program, activity or event may remain for its
duration and for such reasonable time period thereafter as is necessary to
vacate the premises following the conclusion of the program, activity or
event.



(Ord. 98-06-48, passed 6-15-1998)



§ 15-8-2  CONDUCT OR ACTIVITIES RESTRICTED OR PROHIBITED ON PREMISES.



   (A)   Alcoholic beverages/drugs. No person shall bring illegal drugs
to the Town Center. No person shall be on the Town Center premises while
intoxicated or under the influence of illegal drugs. The term “drugs”, as
set forth in this provision, refers to any “controlled substance”, as
defined in an Act to Establish a Uniform System for the Control Of the
Manufacture, Distribution and Possession Of Controlled Substances, known as
the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570/100 et seq. Only persons
who have applied for and been approved a Town Center use permit are allowed
to contract with a licensed caterer to provide beer and/or wine service as
part of a permitted event.



   (B)   Skateboards and skates. No person shall ride upon or otherwise
use any skateboard, roller skates, in-line skates, coaster or other similar
self-propelled wheeled device, except wheelchairs and other wheeled devices
for use by disabled persons, on the Town Center premises.



   (C)   Improper use of and damage to property. No person shall stand,
climb on or cut, break or in any way injure, deface, disfigure or remove any
tree, shrub, bush, plant, turf or any of the buildings, fences, bridges,
lamps or posts, equipment or other structure or property located within the
Town Center, including the stones in and around the Town Center Fountain, or
sit upon any structures not designed or intended for such purpose.



   (D)   Swimming. No person shall swim, bathe or wade in, or place
objects into the Town Center Fountain, or the ponds, or other waters located
on the premises.



   (E)   Games and sorts. No person shall take part in or abet the
playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as
balls, stones, arrows, javelins or model airplanes, except in areas that may
be set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or
comparatively dangerous games such as football, baseball and soccer and the
participation in hazardous recreational activities which create a substantial
risk of injury to a participant or spectator are prohibited.



   (F)   Firearms and fireworks. No person shall carry or discharge
firearms or discharge or set off any rocket, cracker, torpedo, squib or other
fireworks or things containing any substance of an explosive nature; except
that, this prohibition shall not apply to any village sponsored or authorized
fireworks display.



   (G)   Offering articles for sale. No person shall offer for sale any
article, thing or service, or do any hawking, peddling or soliciting, or take
any collection or solicit or receive contributions of money or anything of
value, except when authorized to do so by permit from or scheduling by the
corporate authorities.



   (H)   Public meeting. No person shall call or hold any public
meeting or give any concert or public entertainment of any kind in the Town
Center without the express consent of the corporate authorities.



   (I)   Obstructing travel. No person shall set or place or cause to
be set or placed any goods, wares or merchandise or property of any kind so
as to obstruct or interfere with pedestrian travel within the Town Center
without the express consent of the corporate authorities.



   (J)   Camping. No person shall camp or use any structures or
vehicles for camping purposes.



   (K)   Erection of structures. No person shall erect any structure,
tent or shelter of any kind.



   (L)   Advertisement. No person shall place any hand bill, pamphlet,
circular, advertisement or notice of any kind, nor post, stencil or otherwise
affix any notice, or bills, advertisement or other papers, upon any structure
or thing in or about the Town Center premises, except as authorized by the
corporate authorities.



(Ord. 98-06-48, passed 6-15-1998; Ord. 2006-03-09, passed 3-6-2006)



§ 15-8-3  PENALTIES.



   (A)   Every person who violates any provisions of § 15-8-2 of this
article shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $750 and shall be
further subject to the general penalties set forth in § 1-1-9 of the village
code.



   (B)   Any police officer observing a violation of any provisions of
§ 15-1-2 of this article may, as an alternative to arresting the offender,
issue a “hang-on ticket” as provided in Ch. 15, Art. 4, of this code
pursuant to which the person cited may pay the sum of $25 within the time
stated on the ticket as a compromise or settlement to avoid the prosecution
of an ordinance violation in the Circuit Court.



(Ord. 98-06-48, passed 6-15-1998)



ARTICLE 9:  POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES



Section



   15-9-00   Applicability



   15-9-01   Definitions



   15-9-02   Petitions



   15-9-03   Payment and administration of costs



   15-9-04   Participants



   15-9-05   Public hearing



   15-9-06   Public comment; written and oral



   15-9-07   The public record



   15-9-08   Decision by the Village Board



Cross-reference:



   Sewage, sewage disposal, discharge standards, pretreatment, wastewater
use charges and collections, see Ch. 13, Art. 4



§ 15-9-00  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   This article is applicable to a request for site location
approval of a new pollution control facility that does not handle hazardous
waste as defined by the Illinois Environmental Protection Act, being 415 ILCS
5/3.220.



   (B)   To the extent a facility, described in a petition, proposes to
handle or manage material that is not a waste, or proposes to conduct an
activity which is excluded from the Illinois Environmental Protection Act’s
definition of a pollution control facility, or proposes to conduct an
activity which does not require a permit from the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, this article does not govern the petition, and
authorization to locate such a facility shall be determined by other
provisions in the village code, including, but not limited to, those related
to zoning, special use, building or environmental requirements, as applicable.



   (C)   The terms of this article do not constitute or imply a policy
decision by the village concerning siting pollution control facilities of any
kind within the village, but exist to guide the village in the fulfillment of
its statutory duties with respect to requests for site location approval.



(Ord. 2003-07-43, passed 7-21-2003)



§ 15-9-01  DEFINITIONS.



   All words used in this article shall have the same meaning and
definition as set forth in the Environmental Protection Act, 415 ILCS 5/1 et
seq. (hereinafter the “Act”), unless otherwise set forth herein below.
Defined terms in this article need not be capitalized to have the meaning
proscribed to them in this section or the Act.



   ACT. The Environmental Protection Act, 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.



   APPLICANT. Any person, group of persons, partnership, firm,
association, corporation, company or organization of any kind that files an
application for site approval pursuant to this article.



   FACILITY. A new pollution control facility as defined in the Act.



   HAZARDOUS WASTE SITE. A site where hazardous waste is received, stored,
treated, dumped or disposed. HAZARDOUS WASTE is defined by the Act.



   HEARING OFFICER. An attorney, licensed to practice in the State of
Illinois, appointed by the Mayor to conduct the public hearing(s) associated
with a siting petition.



   IEPA. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.



   MAYOR. The Mayor of the Village of Carol Stream, Illinois.



   PETITION. The application filed by the applicant requesting site
approval for a facility.



   VILLAGE. The Village of Carol Stream, Illinois.



   VILLAGE BOARD. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Carol Stream.



   VILLAGE CLERK. The Village Clerk for the Village of Carol Stream,
Illinois, or the Clerk’s designee. Most references to the VILLAGE CLERK
refer to the administrative office of the VILLAGE CLERK.



(Ord. 2003-07-43, passed 7-21-2003)



§ 15-9-02  PETITIONS.



   (A)   Filing.



      (1)   The applicant shall file one original and 20 copies of
the petition with the Village Clerk, in the form described in divisions (C)
and (D) of this section.



      (2)   The applicant shall include, with the filing of the
petition, the application fee, as described in § 15-9-03 of this article.



   (B)   Processing. Upon receiving the petition, the Village Clerk
shall do the following.



      (1)   Accept for filing and date stamp as filed any petition
that is filed with the correct number of copies, as required by division (A)
above, in the form as required by division (C) below; and with the
application deposit as provided in § 15-9-03.



         (a)   The date on the stamp of the Village Clerk shall
be considered the official filing date for all purposes relating to the time
of filing.



         (b)   Receipt and acceptance of a petition by the
Village Clerk is pro forma, and does



not constitute an acknowledgment that the applicant has complied with the Act
or this article.



         (c)   Should the petition be presented to the Village
Clerk without the correct number of copies, in the incorrect form, or without
the sections and fee described in this division (B)(1), the petition shall be
rejected by the Village Clerk.



      (2)   Upon the filing of a petition, the Village Clerk shall
promptly distribute the copies of the petition to the following parties in
the following numbers: one copy to the Mayor; one copy to each Trustee; five
copies to the Village Manager’s office; two copies to the Village Attorney;
one copy to the Fire Protection District; two copies to the Hearing Officer;
and two copies to the village public library.



         (a)   The original petition and two copies shall be
maintained by the Village Clerk.



         (b)   The Village Clerk has the option of sending one of
the copies to a copy service within the village.



      (3)   The Village Clerk shall make available a copy of the
petition and public record concerning the petition for public inspection
during the normal business hours of the Village Clerk’s office.
Additionally, the Village Clerk shall provide to any person so requesting,
copies of the petition or the public record, upon such person’s payment of
the actual cost of reproduction.



   (C)   Form of petitions.



      (1)   All petitions shall be in writing on eight and
one-half-inch by 11-inch, eight and one-half-inch by 14-inch or 11-inch by
17-inch paper, and in an electronic P.D.F. format; except that, this format
is optional for exhibits or drawings.



      (2)   The pages of the petition and all exhibits, including
pages intentionally left blank, shall be consecutively numbered.



   (D)   Content of petitions. The determination of the quality and
quantity of information to be included in a petition is, ultimately, the
applicant’s to make, as it is the applicant’s burden to demonstrate that
the siting criteria set forth in § 39.2 of the Act are met. However, for
purposes of this article, a petition shall contain, at a minimum, the
following documents and information, in addition to what the applicant
submits in support of the § 39.2 criteria, together with — to the extent
that such documents and information are based on other information or data
—  citations to the primary sources of data:



      (1)   The identification as well as current address of the
applicant, all landowners and the operator for the proposed facility:



         (a)   If the proposed site is owned by a land trust,
each beneficiary of the land trust must be identified and their name and
address listed, and the extent of their interest must be defined;



         (b)   Indicate whether or not the applicant, if not the
property owner, is to purchase or lease the site;



         (c)   Also indicate whether the applicant, the landowner
and the operator is a corporation, partnership, individual or unit of
government;



         (d)   In the case of a partnership, submit the names of
all partners;



         (e)   In the case of a corporation, submit the names and
addresses of all officers and directors, and the names and addresses of all
shareholders owning 5% or more of the capital stock of the corporation; and



         (f)   In the case of a corporation, attach as exhibits
articles of incorporation and a certified copy from the Secretary of State
of, the entity’s incorporation in the state or, if not incorporated in the
State of Illinois, its license to do business in the State of Illinois.



      (2)   The proposed operator of the proposed facility shall
submit audited financial statements for the preceding three years or the
total number of years the entity has been in existence, whichever is less.



         (a)   If an entity has no audited financial statements,
then it shall include pro forma statements for the same time period as
required for audited statements.



         (b)   Also, the proposed operator shall present a
certificate of good standing issued by the Illinois Secretary of State and a
certificate of authority to do business in DuPage County issued by the
appropriate authority.



      (3)   The legal description of the proposed site and a street
address as well as other reasonable description of where the proposed site is
located. A plat of survey of the proposed facility boundary must be attached
to the petition;



      (4)   A brief description of the proposed facility, its
operation, the expected longevity thereof and copies of any proposed or
actual agreements for host fees or incentives offered or agreed to by the
applicant with the village;



      (5)   Identification of the area to be served by the proposed
facility, a map showing the extent of the service area the facility is
intended to serve, and a statement of the need for the identified area for
such a facility;



      (6)   The expected types, amounts and methods of treatment,
disposal, consolidation, transfer or storage of all wastes proposed for the
site;



      (7)   Reasons supporting approval of the application;



      (8)   A request for site approval;



      (9)   Proof of notice, pursuant § 39.2 of the Act;



      (10)   A site plan showing details of the proposed facility,
including:



         (a)   Engineering cross sections;



         (b)   All known and proposed wells (identified as such),
whether potable, monitoring or other, within the proposed site and within
1,500 feet of the property line of the proposed site;



         (c)   Fences, buildings other structures and berms and
landscaping;



         (d)   Roads, entrances and driveways;



         (e)   Existing and proposed underground or aboveground
storage tanks (identified as such), identifying, if applicable, which are
known to be out of operation or abandoned;



         (f)   Location of property lines of neighboring
properties and properties whose owners were provided notice pursuant to §
39.2(b) of the Act;



         (g)   Existing and proposed utility lines (identified as
such and identified as to type of utility), indicating which are above and
which are below the ground;



         (h)   Surface water drainage systems and ways shown on
village public records within 1,500 feet of the property line of the proposed
site, including, but not limited to, drain tiles, creeks and the like;



         (i)   Any information to demonstrate that the proposed
facility is so designed, located and proposed to be operated in such a manner
that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected, in addition to
that which has been provided already pursuant to this article; and



         (j)   Whether any existing uses will be continued.



      (11)   A description of the general characteristics of the
site (industrial park, open field, gravel pit, quarry, strip mine, swamp,
floodplain and the like);



      (12)   A statement of the plan of operation for the proposed
facility, including, but not limited to, the following (where applicable):



         (a)   Type of facility, including method of transfer or,
if applicable, landfilling, incineration, resource recovery or other proposed
storage, process, treatment or management, and the proposed layout of the
site, including identification of the location of proposed buildings or other
above or below ground structures, and identification of the location of any
proposed process flows, storage, treatment, disposal, consolidation or other
waste management activity;



         (b)   Description of the design criteria and design
features of the facility, where applicable, including:



            1.   Leachate collection system:



               a.   Type, location and construction of the
subsurface collection system;



               b.   Written narrative describing methods
and processes of the collection, management and treatment of the leachate;



               c.   Program for monitoring effectiveness of
the collection, management and treatment of the leachate; and



               d.   Discharge points of effluent.



            2.   Drainage and erosion control, including a
description of the type, location and design of drainage and erosion control
devices;



            3.   All monitoring systems, including, but not
limited to, ground water, surface water and air:



               a.   Techniques, location and construction;



               b.   Frequency of sampling and analysis; and



               c.   Future corrective action program.



            4.   Surface water control;



            5.   Air emissions control;



            6.   Final cover system, including proposed soil
and/or geomembrane specifications if applicable;



            7.   Facility construction quality assurance and
quality control program:



               a.   Hours of operation;



               b.   Personnel;



               c.   Both on-site and off-site litter,
vector, dust, odor and noise control;



               d.   Fire control;



               e.   Corrective actions for spills and other
operational accidents;



               f.   If applicable, the stages of
development or use;



               g.   If applicable, an end use plan; and



               h.   Operating procedures including:



                  i.   Personnel require-ments,
including number of full- and part-time employees, which personnel positions
and in what numbers are considered minimally necessary for facility
operation, and the training and supervision of employees. In addition,
identify whether the proposed facility intends on utilizing any contract or
temporary employees and, if so, the positions those employees would fill, the
training requirements and supervision of such employees, and whether they
would be considered minimally necessary for the facility operation;



                  ii.   Plans for chemical analysis of
waste;



                  iii.   Plans for identifica-tion and
verification of waste;



                  iv.   Plans for identifica-tion of
unacceptable waste, soils or other material and removal of same;



                  v.   Leachate collection, management
and treatment system or plan;



                  vi.   Noise control;



                  vii.   Operation of air emission
monitoring system;



                  viii.   Facility cleaning and
maintenance, including, but not limited to, the interior floor; and



                  ix.   For each type of waste proposed
to be received for storage, treatment, management, consolidation or disposal,
provide: the maximum daily and annual receipt and throughput, and the
expected types of sources for such waste within the proposed area to be
served.



      (13)   A map showing on-site roadways, vehicle and direction
flow signage and road markings, vehicle staging and parking areas, and a
description of the plan of operation with respect to moving vehicular traffic
on-site, including, but not limited to, on-site traffic flow direction and
control;



      (14)   A closure plan, including satisfactory proof of
financial responsibility therefor;



      (15)   Provide a traffic study in accordance with guidelines
recommended by the institute of transportation engineers regarding the
proposed site, including the anticipated number of vehicles, their size,
weight and direction of movement, and a copy of any driveway permit:



         (a)   Included in this study, state the number of each
type of vehicle expected or intended to enter or exit the facility, broken
down by each hour of the day; and



         (b)   If the number of vehicles is expected or intended
to be greater or less on particular days of the week, identify those days,
the numbers of vehicles, and where it includes vehicles other than passenger
automobiles, include the hourly analysis for each day of the week.



      (16)   Provide all physical evidence, including, but not
limited to, studies, maps, reports, permits or exhibits that the applicant
desires the village to consider at the public hearing. It is intended that
the applicant provide a full and complete disclosure of his or her case to
facilitate early review and analysis by all participants;



      (17)   Supply certificates of insurance verifying the
insurance policies carried by the applicant to cover single accidents, such
as fires, explosions, non-sudden accidental occurrences, whether such
accidents occur at the proposed site or while waste is being transported to
or from the proposed site;



      (18)   Include a statement describing the past operating
experience of the applicant (and any subsidiary, parent corporation, or
subsidiary of the parent corporation), in the field of solid waste management
and identify all experience in the State of Illinois;



      (19)   Furnish a statement identifying the past record of
convictions of the applicant, including, but not limited to, any individual
conviction of its current officers and directors, concerning a violation of
the Act or any federal environmental law, a description of enforcement
actions or lawsuits brought, if any, by government entity or any person, and
remedial action taken, if any, as a result of, in conjunction with, or as
part of a settlement of any conviction or admission of violation;



      (20)   Furnish a statement regarding adjacent and nearby land
uses, including, but not limited to, as to whether the facility is located so
as to minimize incompatibility with the character of the surrounding area and
to minimize the effect on the value of the surrounding property, providing
documentation detailing:



         (a)   Property values of surrounding property, and a
property value impact analysis conducted by a certified real estate appraiser;



         (b)   Topographic survey of existing site;



         (c)   Final design grades;



         (d)   Surrounding zoning and land uses within one mile
of the property line of the site, including identification of any surface or
subsurface mining activities in the area, residential (single-family or
multiple-family) housing areas, schools, hospitals, nursing or extended care
facilities, daycare or other childcare facilities, historic, architectural or
archaeological landmarks;



         (e)   Proposed use after operation (i.e., end-use),
including changes in topography and all new surface features;



         (f)   A description of how the applicant will minimize
the effect of traffic flow to and from the proposed facility on the character
and property values of the area through which the traffic is proposed to pass;



         (g)   A description of the external materials to be used
in construction of the proposed facility; and



         (h)   A description of any proposed landscaping or
facility screening.



      (21)   A statement as to whether the facility is located
outside the boundary of the 100-year flood- plain or whether the site is
floodproofed, and documentation supporting such statement;



      (22)   Documentation detailing compliance of the proposed
facility with all applicable storm water ordinances;



      (23)   As to whether the plan of operation for the facility is
so designed to minimize the danger to the surrounding area from fire, spills
or other operational accidents, at a minimum, provide documentation detailing:



         (a)   Accident prevention plan, including plans for
spill control and containment;



         (b)   Fire prevention plan; and



         (c)   Proposed responses to spills and other operational
accidents.



      (24)   An emergency response plan for the proposed site,
including, but not limited to, documentation detailing procedures to be used
in case of a release or spill, as to:



         (a)   Notification of appropriate agencies and personnel;



         (b)   Containment procedures; and



         (c)   Evacuation procedures for the facility and the
surrounding area.



      (25)   The petition shall be signed by the applicant,
landowner(s), operator, engineer registered in the State of Illinois under
the Illinois Professional Engineering Practice Act, land surveyor and any
other technical consultant responsible for drafting all or portions of the
petition. The application shall state a contact address, a phone number and
an email address for each person named.



(Ord. 2003-07-43, passed 7-21-2003)



§ 15-9-03  PAYMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF COSTS.



   (A)   Costs and fees deposit.



      (1)   At the time of filing a petition, the applicant shall
submit to the Village Clerk a costs deposit in the form of a certified or
cashier’s check made payable to “Village of Carol Stream”, to pay the
reasonable and necessary fees and costs of the village in processing and
responding to the petition, including, but not limited to: village employee
or staff review time, legal fees, expert witness fees, scientific testing,
records or other investigations, data searches, notices, court reporters,
transcription costs, consultants, as well as the cost of any agreement for an
appropriate forum for the hearing, the Hearing Officer’s expenses and fees,
and any other expenses incurred by the village in conducting their review of
the petition, the public hearing, the village’s site location decision, and
any appeal to the Illinois Pollution Control Board (“IPCB”), the
Appellate or Supreme Courts of the State of Illinois, any federal court
located within the State of Illinois, or any legal action concerning the
siting process or the interpretation of this article relating to the siting
application or process.



      (2)   The amount of the costs and fees deposited is $100,000.



   (B)   Additional initial costs and fees deposit. In the event the
applicant files an amendment in accordance with 415 ILCS 5/39.2(e), an
additional initial costs and fees deposit of $25,000 shall be delivered to
the Village Clerk at the same time as the filing of the amendment, and such
deposit shall be in the same form as described in division (A) above.



   (C)   Payment of fees and expenses. All fees and expenses incurred
by the village as described in division (A) above, shall be paid from the
fees and costs deposits as provided herein.



      (1)   Records of village-incurred fees and costs, including,
but not limited to, relevant time records of village employees and staff, and
village consultants, to the extent the village is seeking reimbursement of
their time, are to be submitted by the persons creating such records to the
Finance Director on a monthly basis.



      (2)   The Finance Director, or his or her designee, shall
organize the records and prepare and submit periodic reports to the Village
Board, Village Clerk and the applicant, of invoices to or expenditures by the
village.



         (a)   The actual invoices and bills submitted to the
Finance Director and included in the report submitted to the Village Board,
Village Clerk and applicant, with all privileged and confidential
information, if any, redacted.



         (b)   Inadvertent disclosure of confidential or
privileged information by the village is not a waiver of confidentiality or
privilege.



      (3)   Upon approval of each report, described in division
(C)(2) above, by the Village Board, the Finance Director may draw upon the
applicant’s cost and fees deposits in the amount of the reported incurred
costs and fees, or as otherwise provided by the Village Board.



      (4)   In determining the fees to be paid to the village to
reimburse the village for its employees’ or staff’s time involved in
matters concerning the petition, the Finance Director shall determine a rate
for each employee who submits a record of his or her time to the Finance
Director, including in such rate, all costs of the village in compensating
such employee or staff member, such as salary, wages or benefits. The Finance
Director shall include the rate calculated per employee in the report
described in division (C)(2) above.



      (5)   At any time the amount on deposit with the village falls
below $5,000, then, upon written demand from the Director of Finance, the
applicant shall deposit, within five business days of receipt of the demand,
an additional $15,000, or the amount reasonably estimated to finish the
process, whichever is greater. Any unpaid amount shall constitute a debt and
the village shall recover its costs and attorneys’ fees, if it is required
to make a claim or commence a suit against the applicant to recover the
unpaid fees.



      (6)   Any portion of the fees and costs deposit that remains
unexpended at the conclusion of the local site location review process
(including all appeals and resolution of any applicant challenge to fees or
costs), shall be returned to the applicant.



      (7)   Nothing herein limits an applicant’s ability to
contest or object to the reasonableness of costs and expenses described
herein.



(Ord. 2003-07-43, passed 7-21-2003)



§ 15-9-04  PARTICIPANTS.



   (A)   The applicant. The applicant is a participant.



   (B)   The village.



      (1)   The village, its employees and staff, and any experts,
consultants, investigators or attorneys hired by the village to review,
investigate, present at hearing, or otherwise work for the village concerning
the petition, are participants.



      (2)   To the extent the village employees and staff wish to
participate in the public hearings outside their roles or employment with the
village, they must submit a notice of participation, as do other members of
the public.



   (C)   Notice of participation.



      (1)   Any person, other than those described in divisions (A)
and (B) above, must file a written notification of intent to participate
(notice of participation), with the Village Clerk before the start of the
first day of public hearing or, after the start and before the adjournment of
the first day of public hearing, with the Hearing Officer.



      (2)   Such notification shall state, at a minimum, the name,
address, daytime phone number and, if available, facsimile number of the
person filing the notice of participation, whether the person will be
participating on his or her own behalf or as a representative/spokesperson of
another person or entity (and if on behalf of another person or entity,
identify the name of that person or entity), whether the person (or the
entity or association he or she represents) will be represented by an
attorney during the public hearing, and whether the person intends on
providing oral testimony or comment during the public hearing.



      (3)   A person may not become a participant after the first
day of the hearing, except for good cause shown.



      (4)   The village shall liberally interpret this limitation,
if the additional participation will not delay the process or unfairly
prejudice a prior participant.



      (5)   No late participant shall be entitled to cross-examine a
witness who has previously testified.



   (D)   Participant rights. Participants have the right to:



      (1)   Present sworn testimony and witnesses;



      (2)   Provide unsworn, oral comment during the public hearing
(subject to the Hearing Officer’s judgment and consistent with fundamental
fairness); and



      (3)   Cross-examine or question witnesses who provide sworn
testimony or, alternatively, submit to the Hearing Officer written questions
to be asked of the witnesses by the Hearing Officer, at the Hearing
Officer’s discretion as to whether and how such questions are to be posed.



   (E)   Attorneys. Any attorneys representing a participant must be
licensed and in good standing to practice law in the State of Illinois, or if
licensed and in good standing to practice law in another state that is part
of the United States, shall be allowed to serve as an attorney for a
participant upon motion made to and granted by the Hearing Officer.



(Ord. 2003-07-43, passed 7-21-2003)



§ 15-9-05  PUBLIC HEARING.



   (A)   No sooner than 90 days, but no longer than 120 days, from the
date the petition was filed with the Village Clerk, a public hearing shall be
held by the Village Board.



      (1)   Any two members of the Village Board shall constitute a
quorum for the purpose of holding such a public hearing.



      (2)   They will participate in the proceedings.



   (B)   Within 50 days of the filing date of the petition, the Mayor
shall determine the date, time and location upon which such public hearing
shall be held, but in any event the initial public hearing must be scheduled
no sooner than 90 days, but no later than 120 days, from the date the
petition was filed with the Village Clerk.



   (C)   Upon such determination of the hearing date, time and
location, as described in division (B) above, the Mayor or, if he or she
designates, the Hearing Officer, shall notify the Village Clerk of the date
upon which such hearing shall be held and shall request the Village Clerk to
cause notice of such hearing to be made as follows. Upon receipt of such
request, the Village Clerk, and at the Village Clerk’s discretion with the
help of the attorney representing the village (its staff and employees),
shall cause the publication of notice pursuant to the following requirements:



      (1)   By publication of two legal notices in a newspaper of
general circulation published in the village.



         (a)   One such notice shall be published no later than
60 days from the date the petition was filed.



         (b)   Another such notice shall be published no later
than 75 days from the date the petition was filed.



      (2)   Such notices shall consist of the following information,
which, except for divisions (C)(2)(h) through (C)(2)(k) below, must be
disclosed by the applicant in the petition:



         (a)   The name and address of the person, partnership or
corporation requesting site location approval;



         (b)   The name and address of the owner of the site, and
in case ownership is in a land trust, the names of its beneficiaries;



         (c)   The legal description of the site;



         (d)   The street address of the property, and if there
is no street address applicable to the property, a description of the site
with reference to location, ownership, occupancy or in some other manner that
will reasonably identify the property to residents of the neighborhood;



         (e)   The nature and size of the proposed facility;



         (f)   The nature of the activity proposed;



         (g)   The probable life of the proposed activity and
facility;



         (h)   The time and date of the public hearing(s);



         (i)   The location(s) of the public hearing(s);



         (j)   A statement that all copies of evidence other than
testimony to be submitted at the public hearing(s) must be filed with the
Village Clerk at least seven days before the date of the first public
hearing. The Hearing Officer may permit late filing for good cause shown and
without prejudice to the participants; and



         (k)   A statement that any person wanting to present
sworn testimony or cross-examine witnesses must sign up as a participant with
the Village Clerk no later than the first day of the public hearing, or sign
up with the Hearing Officer no later than the adjournment of the first day of
the public hearing. The Hearing Officer may permit late filing for good cause
shown and without prejudice to the participants.



      (3)   A copy of the notice shall also be sent, no later than
55 days after the date the petition was filed, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the following.



         (a)   Pursuant to § 39.2(d) of the Act, the notice must
be delivered to the following persons/entities no later than 14 days prior to
the first day of public hearing.



         (b)   If a return receipt is not received by the Village
Clerk confirming delivery of the notice on the following persons/entities, by
the sixty-fifth day following the filing of the petition, the Village Clerk
shall arrange for personal service on the following persons/entities:



            1.   All members of the General Assembly from the
district in which the proposed facility is located;



            2.   The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency;



            3.   The governing authority of every municipality
whose corporate limits are within one mile of the boundary of the proposed
facility; and



            4.   The county board of the county where the
proposed site is to be located.



      (4)   Additional notice of the public hearing may, at the
discretion of the Mayor, be given, by publishing a notice in a newspaper of
general circulation published as a display ad at least once during the week
preceding the public hearing. Such notice shall consist of all items
described in divisions (C)(2)(a) through (C)(2)(k) above, except for division
(C)(2)(c) above.



   (D)   Prior to the date of the first public hearing, the Mayor shall
appoint the Hearing Officer for the public hearing on the petition.



      (1)   The Hearing Officer shall preside over the public
hearing and shall make any decisions concerning the admission of evidence and
the manner in which the hearing is conducted, subject to this section and the
law concerning such applications.



      (2)   Accordingly, all decisions and rulings shall be in
accordance with the concept of fundamental fairness (unless a different
standard is adopted as a matter of Illinois law).



      (3)   The Hearing Officer may exclude irrelevant, immaterial
or unduly repetitious testimony.



      (4)   Rulings of the Hearing Officer may be promptly appealed
to those Village Trustees then present.



      (5)   A simple majority of those Trustees present shall be
sufficient to overrule the decision of the Hearing Officer.



      (6)   All testimony and all public meetings concerning the
petition shall be in the presence of a certified court reporter who shall
report all proceedings regarding consideration of the petition.



      (7)   The Hearing Officer shall have the following powers or
duties:



         (a)   Administer oaths and affirmations;



         (b)   Prior to the start of the public hearing, conduct
a public meeting to explain the public hearing procedure and site location
review process.



            1.   If the Hearing Officer decides to hold such a
meeting, it shall be held no sooner than the ninetieth day from the date the
petition was filed.



            2.   Notice shall be given in a newspaper of
general circulation one week prior to the meeting (or alternatively, as part
of the first published notice of the hearing).



            3.   Such notice shall expressly state that it is
a informational meeting concerning the procedure to be used at the public
hearing and the site location review process, and that it is not a public
hearing at which evidence will be taken for purposes of making a
determination in accordance with the Act.



         (c)   Arrange for the presence of a certified court
reporter to attend and transcribe the conduct of all public hearings for the
public record;



         (d)   Regulate the course of the hearing, including, but
not limited to, controlling the order of proceedings, consistent with this
article;



         (e)   Require a witness or person presenting unsworn
public comment to state his or her position either for, against or undecided
with respect to the proposed facility;



         (f)   Examine a witness and direct a witness to testify;



         (g)   Establish reasonable limits on the duration of
public hearing consistent with the Act and this article, including, but not
limited to, the reasonable limitation of sworn testimony, unsworn oral
comment, direct and cross-examination of any witnesses, and the limitation of
repetitive or cumulative testimony and questioning;



         (h)   Rule upon objections and evidentiary questions,
with the understanding that such rulings must be consistent with fundamental
fairness, but need not be in strict compliance with the Illinois 



Supreme Court, Illinois Code of Civil Procedure or any local rules of
evidence governing a civil judicial trial in the State of Illinois, County of
DuPage;



         (i)   Allow the introduction of late-filed evidence, be
it written or testimonial, on behalf of any participant; provided, good cause
is shown for the late-filing, and the evidence is relevant and not unduly
prejudicial to another participant so that fundamental fairness to all
parties is preserved;



         (j)   The Hearing Officer shall be an attorney, licensed
to practice in Illinois.



            1.   The Hearing Officer shall confer with the
Village Board concerning the petition, between the time of the filing of the
petition and the Village Board’s decision on the petition.



            2.   Given the Hearing Officer’s role of
communicating with the Village Board, the Hearing Officer may not confer with
the participants (members of the public, the applicant and the village
included) concerning the petition, unless such conference takes place during
the public hearing, is through correspondence filed with the Village Clerk
(and, thus, available for everyone to view), or concerns location, time or
other similar scheduling aspects of the public meeting or public hearing, or
the notices for same.



            3.   The only additional exception from this
restriction is that the Hearing Officer may:



               a.   Confer with the Village Clerk about the
upkeep or status of the public record;



               b.   Make a request to review or copy the
public record; or



               c.   Confer with the Village Clerk regarding
the scheduling or location of, or arrangements for, the public meeting or
hearing.



         (k)   The Mayor may remove and/or replace the Hearing
Officer at will.



            1.   If the Hearing Officer is replaced, a new
Hearing Officer shall be appointed.



            2.   In the interim, the hearing may be adjourned
or continued, with the Mayor or a Trustee as presiding officer.



         (l)   At the conclusion of the public hearing and after
consideration of all timely-filed written comments or late-filed written
comments, the Hearing Officer shall submit written findings of fact and
conclusions of law to the Village Board, and file a copy of such findings
with the Village Clerk; and



         (m)   The Hearing Officer does not have the right or the
power to vote on the application. That power resides with the Village Board.



   (E)   All reports, studies, exhibits or other evidence or copies
thereof, other than testimony, which any participant desires to submit for
the record at the public hearing must be filed with the Village Clerk, in the
quantity provided for in § 15-9-02, at least seven calendar days before the
public hearing, and shall be available for public inspection in the office of
the Village Clerk.



      (1)   In the event that the seventh day prior to the date set
for public hearing falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, the next working
day shall be considered the day that reports, studies and exhibits must be
filed.



      (2)   The Hearing Officer may permit the late filing of
evidence for good cause shown and without prejudice to any participant.



   (F)   Conduct of the public hearing shall be substantially as
follows:



      (1)   Call to order with determination of a quorum;



      (2)   Introduction of the Village Board members who are
present;



      (3)   Introduction of the Hearing Officer;



      (4)   Recognition of the applicant and identification of the
petition;



      (5)   Recognition of fees, notices and date of filing of the
petition;



      (6)   Recognition of the village staff and attorney present;



      (7)   Recognition of all other participants who have filed the
notice of participation, pursuant to § 15-9-04(C);



      (8)   Recognition of all reports, exhibits, maps or documents
of record as filed pursuant to division (E) above;



      (9)   The applicant, the village and the participants each may
then make an opening statement;



      (10)   The Village Board shall then hear testimony from the
applicant and/or any witnesses the applicant may wish to call. Upon the close
of the applicant’s testimony, participants, other than the applicant or the
village, may present sworn testimony, including any witnesses and evidence
they wish to present;



      (11)   After the close of the applicant’s and the
participants’ cases, the village may present any witnesses and evidence it
wishes to present;



      (12)   Rebuttal testimony and evidence will be allowed at the
discretion of the Hearing Officer; but, if it is allowed, it will be
presented in the same order as described in division (F)(9) above;



      (13)   Following rebuttal testimony, if any, any participant
who wishes to present oral, unsworn comment may then present such comment to
the Village Board;



      (14)   Closing statements, if any, will be presented in the
same order as described in division (F)(9) above;



      (15)   Rebuttal statement, if any, by the applicant, subject
to limitations as imposed by the Hearing Officer; and



      (16)   Hearing closed.



   (G)   All witnesses who testify under oath shall be subject to
reasonable questioning as follows: direct, cross-examination, redirect,
re-cross and the like.



   (H)   At any time during the public hearings, any Village Board
member and the Hearing Officer may question participants or cross-examine
witnesses.



   (I)   Should any issues, facts, data or other evidence arise during
the course of the public hearing, which were not apparent or reasonably
foreseeable by a party from the petition as filed with the Village Clerk,
such situation may constitute grounds for a recess in the public hearing for
a period not to exceed five working days. Any decision in this regard shall
be made by the Hearing Officer.



(Ord. 2003-07-43, passed 7-21-2003)



§ 15-9-06  PUBLIC COMMENT; WRITTEN AND ORAL.



   (A)   Any person has the right to file a written comment concerning
the appropriateness of the proposed facility, or its compliance with the
requirements of § 39.2 of the Act, with the Village Clerk, at any time after
the filing of a petition and within the time limitation provided in division
(D) below.



   (B)   (1)   On behalf of the Village Board, the Village Clerk
shall receive written comment from any person concerning the appropriateness
of the proposed site.



      (2)   Upon receipt of any such written comment, the Village
Clerk shall date stamp same, and shall file it with the postmarked envelope
in which it was received.



   (C)   Copies of such written comments shall be made available for
public inspection in the offices of the Village Clerk, and members of the
public shall be allowed to obtain a copy of any written comment upon payment
of its actual cost of reproduction.



   (D)   (1)   Any written comment received by the Village Clerk or
postmarked not later than 30 days after the date of the last public hearing
shall be made part of the record at the public hearing, as hereinafter
described, and the Village Board shall consider any such timely written
comments in making its final determination concerning the petition.



      (2)   In the event that the thirtieth day falls on a Sunday or
a federal holiday, the next day on which mail is delivered shall be
considered the thirtieth day for purposes of this division (D).



   (E)   (1)   Any person has the right to provide oral, unsworn
comment during the course of the public hearing, upon reasonable notice to
the Hearing Officer that the person desires to provide such comment.



      (2)   This type of comment, since it is not provided under
oath, is not subject to cross-examination.



(Ord. 2003-07-43, passed 7-21-2003)



§ 15-9-07  THE PUBLIC RECORD.



   (A)   The Village Clerk, or his or her designee, shall prepare and
maintain the public record concerning the petition. Such record shall include
the following documents:



      (1)   The original petition and any amendments filed with the
Village Clerk;



      (2)   All written comment filed with the Village Clerk within
the time frame specified by § 15-9-06(A) and (D);



      (3)   Notices of participation filed with the Village Clerk
pursuant § 15-9-04(C);



      (4)   All exhibits entered into evidence at the time of the
public hearing;



      (5)   All transcripts of testimony during the public hearing;



      (6)   Any motions filed during the course of the public
hearing;



      (7)   Any evidence filed pursuant to § 15-9-05(F);



      (8)   Copies of all published or displayed notices, and
certified or personally served notices of the public hearings that were
prepared by the Village Clerk or prepared by others and filed with the
Village Clerk;



      (9)   All reports submitted to the Village Clerk pursuant to
§ 15-9-03(C)(2), redacted as necessary to prevent disclosure of confidential
or privileged information;



      (10)   All transcripts, when available, of meetings, other
than the public hearings held pursuant to this article, at which a Village
Board member was in attendance.



         (a)   Although Village Board members are not encouraged
to attend meetings at which the member knows the petition may be discussed,
due to the member’s continuing, regular legislative duties during the
course of the Village Board’s consideration of a petition, attendance at
such meetings is sometimes unavoidable (e.g., attendance at a
municipality’s council meeting, attendance at a local chamber of commerce
meeting).



         (b)   As such, the member is required to obtain and file
a transcript of any meeting, where such meeting has been transcribed or
recorded, or otherwise disclose such meeting in the public records (such as
disclosing it on the record during the transcribed public hearings or during
the written comment period provided for in this article).



         (c)   The transcript shall not, however, be utilized by
the village in reaching its decision.



      (11)   The Hearing Officer’s written findings to the Village
Board;



      (12)   The resolution containing the final decision of the
Village Board on the petition; and



      (13)   A log, which the Village Clerk shall require each
person seeking to view, copy or file documents with or in the public record
to sign, stating the date of the request, the nature of the request (i.e.,
view, copy, file or other, and identifying the “other”), and the
requesting person’s name and address.



   (B)   The Village Clerk, or his or her designee, shall, during the
regular business hours of the Village Clerk’s office, make the public
record available to any person requesting to review it.



   (C)   (1)   The Village Clerk, or his or her designee, shall,
during the regular business hours of the Village Clerk’s office, accept
requests from persons for copies of the public record, in whole or in part,
and arrange for copying so requested upon the requesting person’s payment
of the actual cost of copying.



      (2)   The Village Clerk shall respond to copying requests
within a reasonable time.



   (D)   The Village Clerk shall be responsible for certifying all
copies of the public record.



   (E)   Although late-filed public comments are not part of the public
record pursuant to this Article, they shall be retained by the Village Clerk
with any evidence of its date of filing, such as the Village Clerk’s date
stamp copy or the postmark, if the written comment was mailed.



   (F)   The Village Clerk, or his or her designee, shall make and
deliver a copy of all transcripts to the Mayor and each Trustee for their
review.



(Ord. 2003-07-43, passed 7-21-2003)



§ 15-9-08  DECISION BY THE VILLAGE BOARD.



   (A)   On or before the one hundred eightieth day following the date
the petition was filed, or on or before the two hundred seventieth day
following the date the petition was filed if the applicant filed an amendment
to the petition in compliance with the timing requirements of the Act, the
Village Board shall, by written resolution, upon the vote of a majority of
its members, decide whether to:



      (1)   Grant the petition, without any conditions;



      (2)   Grant the petition, but with conditions on such
approval; provided, such conditions are reasonable and necessary to
accomplish the purposes of § 39.2 of the Act and are not inconsistent with
the regulations promulgated by the Illinois Pollution Control Board; or



      (3)   Deny the petition.



   (B)   In its decision, the Village Board shall state whether it
finds that the applicant has established, and whether the public record
supports the establishment of each of the following criteria:



      (1)   The facility is necessary to accommodate the waste needs
of the area it is intended to serve;



      (2)   The facility is so designed, located and proposed to be
operated that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected;



      (3)   The facility is located so as to minimize the
incompatibility with the character of the surrounding area and to minimize
the effect on the value of the surrounding property;



      (4)   For a transfer facility or facility other than a
sanitary landfill or waste disposal site, the facility is located outside the
boundary of the 100-year floodplain or the site is floodproofed; and for a
facility that is a sanitary landfill or waste disposal site, the facility is
located outside the boundary of the 100-year floodplain; or if the facility
is a facility described in subsection (b)(3) of § 22.19a of the Act, the
site is floodproofed;



      (5)   The plan of operations for the facility is designed to
minimize the danger to the surrounding area from fire, spills or other
operational accidents;



      (6)   The traffic patterns to or from the facility are so
designed as to minimize the impact on existing traffic flows;



      (7)   If the facility will be treating, storing or disposing
of hazardous waste, an emergency response plan exists for the facility, which
includes notification, containment and evacuation procedures to be used in
case of an accidental release;



      (8)   The consistency of the facility with the county’s
Solid Waste Management Plan, including any updates of that plan; and



      (9)   If the facility is located in a regulated recharge area,
any applicable requirements specified by the Illinois Pollution Control Board
for such areas have been met.



   (C)   The Village Board shall consider as evidence the previous
operating experience and past record of convictions or admissions of
violations of the applicant (and any subsidiary, parent corporation, or
subsidiary of the parent corporation) in the field of solid waste management,
when considering the second and fifth criteria of the Act, and divisions
(B)(2) and (B)(5) above.



   (D)   (1)   In making its decision, the Village Board shall
consider the public record of the hearing proceedings.



      (2)   The Village Board shall give greater evidentiary weight
to sworn testimony and evidence presented during the public hearings than to
unsworn, oral or written comment.



   (E)   No determination by the Village Board of a petition may be
reconsidered, except to the extent it is reversed and remanded on appeal and
the Village Board is directed by the Illinois Pollution Control Board or
Illinois Appellate Court to conduct all or part of the review process again.



   (F)   Any Village Board member may be excused from participation in
the hearing and decision, upon demonstration of any disqualifying direct and
personal interest in the property or the affairs of the applicant or any
objector to the proceedings.



CHAPTER 16: ZONING CODE



      Article



         1.   TITLE



         2.   PURPOSE



         3.   INTENT



         4.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



         5.   GENERAL REGULATIONS



         6.   ZONING DISTRICTS



         7.   FLOODWAYS AND FLOOD FRINGE AREAS



         8.   RESIDENCE DISTRICT



         9.   BUSINESS DISTRICT



         10.   INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT



         11.   AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT



         12.   SUPPLEMENTAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS



         13.   OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING



         14.   NONCONFORMING LOTS, BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES



         15.   ADMINISTRATION



         16.   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT



         17.   MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS



         18.   DEFINITIONS



         19.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS ZONING REGULATIONS



ARTICLE 1:  TITLE



Section



   16-1-1   Title



§ 16-1-1  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the
“Carol Stream Zoning Ordinance”, the “Carol Stream Zoning Code” or
the “Zoning Code”.



ARTICLE 2:  PURPOSE



Section



   16-2-1   Purpose



§ 16-2-1  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:



   (A)   Promoting and protecting the public health, safety, comfort,
morals, convenience and general welfare;



   (B)   Securing adequate natural light, pure air and safety from fire
and other dangers;



   (C)   Limiting and controlling the pollution of the environment;



   (D)   Conserving the taxable value of land and buildings;



   (E)   Enhancing aesthetic values throughout the village;



   (F)   Implementing the Comprehensive Plan of the village; and



   (G)   Detailing the developmental policy of the village with respect
to the use of land, intensity of use of land and location of land uses
throughout the village.



ARTICLE 3:  INTENT



Section



   16-3-1   Intent



§ 16-3-1  INTENT.



   To these ends, this chapter is intended to meet certain standards and
objectives by:



   (A)   Dividing the entire village into districts and restricting and
regulating therein the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration and
use of buildings, structures and land, whether for residential, business,
manufacturing or other specified uses;



   (B)   Avoiding or lessening congestion in the public streets;



   (C)   Preventing the overcrowding of land through regulating and
limiting the height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected as related to
land area;



   (D)   Establishing, regulating and limiting the building or setback
lines on or along streets, easements or property lines;



   (E)   Regulating and limiting the intensity of the use of lot areas,
and regulating the area of open spaces within and surrounding such buildings;



   (F)   Establishing standards to which buildings or structures
therein shall conform;



   (G)   Prohibiting uses, buildings or structures incompatible with
the character of the residence, business or manufacturing districts;



   (H)   Preventing additions to or remodeling of existing buildings or
structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations herein
imposed;



   (I)   Limiting the deterioration of the environment by establishing
standards whereby emissions, noise and other potential nuisances or hazards
are regulated;



   (J)   Providing for the gradual elimination of those uses, buildings
and structures which are incompatible with the character of the districts in
which they are located, including, but not necessarily limited to:



      (1)   Elimination of such uses of unimproved lands or lots
when the existing rights of the persons in possession thereof are terminated,
the uses to which they are devoted are discontinued or a reasonable time of
use after the passage of this chapter shall have elapsed;



      (2)   Elimination of uses to which such buildings and
structures are devoted, if they are adaptable for permitted uses; and



      (3)   Elimination of such buildings and structures when they
are destroyed or damaged in a major part as hereinafter provided, or when
they have reached the age fixed as a normal useful life of such buildings or
structures.



   (K)   Defining and limiting the powers and duties of the
administrative officers and official bodies as hereinafter provided; and



   (L)   Prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of
this chapter, or of any amendment thereto.



ARTICLE 4:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   16-4-1   Interpretation



   16-4-2   Private agreements



   16-4-3   Non-conforming uses



   16-4-4   Present non-conforming uses



   16-4-5   Rules and construction of language



   16-4-6   Incorporation by reference



   16-4-7   Disclosure by trustee of land trust



   16-4-8   Successor to rule or standard making agencies



   16-4-9   Conversion to special use



Cross-reference:



   Definitions, see Ch. 16, Art. 18



   Non-conforming lots, structures and uses, see Ch. 16, Art. 14



§ 16-4-1  INTERPRETATION.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted and applied so as
to best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience and general
welfare. Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions
than those of any statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of
this chapter shall be controlling. Where the provisions of any statute, other
ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than this chapter, the
provisions of such statute, other ordinance or regulation shall be
controlling.



§ 16-4-2  PRIVATE AGREEMENTS.



   This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or
other private agreement; provided that, where the regulations of this chapter
are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than
easements, covenants or other private agreements, the requirements of this
chapter shall be controlling.



§ 16-4-3  NON-CONFORMING USES.



   From and after the effective date of this chapter, the use of all land
and every building erected, altered with respect to height or area, added to
or relocated, and every use within a building or use accessory thereto, in
the village shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. Any
existing building or structure and any use of properties not in conformity
with the regulations herein prescribed shall be regarded as non-conforming
properties or uses.



§ 16-4-4  PRESENT NON-CONFORMING USES.



   No building, structure or use not lawfully existing at the time of the
adoption of this chapter shall become or be made lawful unless such building,
structure or use shall be allowable under the terms of this chapter; and to
the extent that, and in any manner that such unlawful building, structure or
use is in conflict with the requirements of this chapter, such building,
structure or use remains unlawful.



§ 16-4-5  RULES AND CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE.



   In the construction of this chapter, the rules of language contained
herein shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise.



   (A)   The particular shall control the general.



   (B)   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between
the text of this chapter and any caption or illustration, the text shall
control.



   (C)   The word “shall” is always mandatory and not
discretionary. The word “may” is permissive.



   (D)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and
words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural
the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.



   (E)   The phrase “used for” includes “arranged for”,
“designed for”, “intended for”, “maintained for” and “occupied
for”.



   (F)   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events
connected by the conjunction “and”, “or” or “either - or”, the
conjunction shall be interpreted as follows.



      (1)   “And” indicates that all the connected items,
conditions, provisions or events do or shall apply.



      (2)   “Or” indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply either singly or in combination.



      (3)   “Either - or” indicates that the connected items,
conditions, provisions or events shall apply either singly or in combination.



   (G)   All measured distances or standards shall be to the nearest
integer; if a fraction is one-half or less, the integer next below shall be
taken.



   (H)   All words and terms as set forth in Ch. 16, Art. 18,
“Definitions”. wherever they occur in this chapter shall be interpreted
as therein defined. Any word or terms not listed shall be construed in their
general accepted meanings as defined in the most recent publication of
Webster’s Dictionary.



§ 16-4-6  INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.



   Any and all standards and other codes, regulations and public records
incorporated by reference into this Zoning Code have been adopted in
accordance with the requirement established in 65 ILCS 5/1-3-1 et seq., and
50 ILCS 220/1 et seq.



§ 16-4-7  DISCLOSURE BY TRUSTEE OF LAND TRUST.



   Whenever any trustee of a land trust or any beneficiary or
beneficiaries of a land trust make application to the village or any of its
agencies pursuant to the provisions of this chapter relating to the land
which is the subject of such trust, any interest therein, improvements
thereto, or use thereof, such application shall identify each beneficiary of
such land trust by name and address and define his or her interest therein.
All such applications shall be verified by the applicant in his or her
capacity as trustee, or by the beneficiary as the beneficial owner of an
interest in such land trust.



§ 16-4-8  SUCCESSOR TO RULE OR STANDARD MAKING AGENCIES.



   Whenever in this chapter a governmental or private agency is referred
to as the promulgator of a rule or standard which is incorporated by
reference herein, the rule or standard shall continue to be incorporated by
reference within this chapter in the event that the same rule or standard is
adopted by a successor agency in name or substance.



§ 16-4-9  CONVERSION TO SPECIAL USE.



   Any non-conforming use may be converted into a conforming use by the
granting of a special use permit, as authorized in the administrative section
(Ch. 16, Art. 15), if such use is permitted as a special use in the district
in which it is located.



ARTICLE 5:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



Section



   16-5-1   Allowable use of land, buildings or structures



   16-5-2   Control over use



   16-5-3   Control over bulk



   16-5-4   Fire lanes



   16-5-5   Temporary buildings, structures and uses of land



   16-5-6   Gary and North Avenue Corridor regulations



   16-5-7   Above-ground service facilities



Cross-reference:



   Definitions, see Ch. 16, Art. 18



§ 16-5-1  ALLOWABLE USE OF LAND, BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.



   The following uses of land, buildings or structures are allowed in the
districts indicated hereinafter under the conditions specified in this
chapter:



   (A)   Uses lawfully established and existing on the effective date
of this chapter, which conform to the provisions herein;



   (B)   Uses lawfully established and existing on the effective date
of this chapter, rendered non-conforming by the provisions herein shall be
subject to the regulations of Ch. 16, Art. 14, “Non-conforming Lots,
Buildings, Structures and Uses”;



   (C)   Permitted uses as designated in this chapter and established
after the effective date of this chapter;



   (D)   Special uses as designated in this chapter and established
after the effective date of this chapter:



      (1)   A classification of special uses is hereby established
to provide for the location of certain uses hereinafter which are deemed
desirable for the public welfare within a given district or districts, but
which might have a significant effect upon nearby properties or upon the
character and future development of the district in which they are located;
and



      (2)   Where a use exists on the effective date of this chapter
and is classified as a special use, it shall be considered to be a lawful
special use. Property granted such lawful special uses prior to the effective
date of this chapter shall continue to have such uses and the use of the
property shall be restricted to such special use and to such conditions under
which the special use was granted. Additions or alterations to existing
buildings or land improvements for expansion of lawful special uses or
modifications in site plans or other documents submitted with special uses or
incorporated into and made a condition of the development of the special use
shall be permitted only in accordance with the procedures set forth in §
16-15-8, and where applicable.



   (E)   Only one principal structure, along with permitted accessory
uses, shall be constructed upon a single subdivided lot or an unsubdivided
parcel of land.



§ 16-5-2  CONTROL OVER USE.



   (A)   General. No building or premise shall hereafter be used or
occupied, and no building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be
erected, raised, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered, except
in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which
it is located.



   (B)   Unlisted uses similar to listed uses. When a use is not
specifically listed in the sections devoted to permitted uses or special
uses, it shall be assumed that such use is hereby expressly prohibited.
Whenever a proposed use is synonymous or nearly synonymous with a permitted
or special use allowed within the zoning district, the Community Development
Director may allow the proposed use without a requirement that the specific
terms of this chapter be amended, subject to the following.



      (1)   A permanent use not listed as a permitted or special use
in the zoning district shall be allowed therein if the use is not listed as a
permitted or special use in any less restrictive district.



      (2)   The use is determined by the Community Development
Director to be similar to any listed use in the subject zoning district with
respect to:



         (a)   Types of goods or services produced or sold;



         (b)   Generation of automobile, truck or pedestrian
traffic;



         (c)   Hours of operation; and



         (d)   General effect upon its environs.



      (3)   Uses determined to be similar to listed special uses
shall be subject to the approval of a special use permit.



      (4)   All regulations herein applicable to the listed use
shall also apply to the unlisted use to which it is judged similar.



      (5)   An applicant for a use disapproved under this section
may appeal the decision of the Community Development Director under §
16-15-5 of this chapter or apply for a text amendment to the title under §
16-15-7 of this chapter.



   (C)   Applicability. Performance standards apply to all districts.



(Ord. 2008-10-57, passed 10-20-2008)



§ 16-5-3  CONTROL OVER BULK.



   (A)   Generally. Unless variations are granted pursuant to the
simple variation provisions of this chapter, or pursuant to variations
granted by special use as provided in § 16-15-8, all new buildings shall
conform to the bulk regulations established herein for the district in which
each building is located, and no existing building shall be enlarged,
reconstructed, structurally altered, converted or relocated in such a manner
as to conflict with the bulk regulations in this chapter for the district in
which such buildings shall be located.



   (B)   Revised yards for future buildings. All new buildings shall
conform to the yard regulations established herein for the district in which
each building shall be located, and no existing building shall be enlarged,
reconstructed, structurally altered, converted or relocated in such a manner
as to conflict with the yard regulations in this chapter for the district in
which such building shall be located.



   (C)   Maintenance of yards, courts, and other open spaces. The
maintenance of yards, courts and other open spaces and minimum lot area
legally required for a building shall be a continuing obligation of the owner
of such building or of the property on which it is located, as long as the
building is in existence. Furthermore, no legally required yards, courts or
other open space or minimum lot area allocated to any building shall, by
virtue of change of ownership or for any other reason, be used to satisfy
yard, court, other open space or minimum lot area requirements for any other
building.



   (D)   Division of zoning lots. No improved zoning lot shall
hereafter be divided into two or more zoning lots unless all improved zoning
lots resulting from each such division shall conform with the provisions of
all village ordinances.



   (E)   Location of required open spaces. All yards, courts and other
open spaces allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be located on the
same zoning lot as such building or dwelling group.



   (F)   Required yard for existing buildings. No yards on or hereafter
provided for a building existing on the effective date of this chapter shall
subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced below if already less than
the minimum yard requirements of this chapter for equivalent new construction.



   (G)   Public and private streets. Each lot must be on a public
street; except that, with the approval of the Village Board, a lot may be
allowed on a private street within a planned unit development.



   (H)   Calculation of lot area. The area of all lots shall be
determined after first excluding all public and private rights-of-way.



   (I)   Minimum lot widths for interior lots. Lot widths shall be
measured at the building line and shall conform to the district requirements
as found else-where in this chapter. The minimum length of a front lot line,
however, for interior lots measured along the public right-of-way shall be 40
feet; provided, however, that, an interior lot shall comply with the
provisions of this chapter if it is served by a permanent easement at least
40 feet in width, which easement may not be extinguished or modified without
the passage of a resolution approving such extinguishment or modification by
the corporate authorities of the village. In addition, the location of the
40-foot public right-of-way or easement both in relationship to its entry on
the interior lot and with regard to its exit upon a public right-of-way shall
be placed in conformity with good planning standards. In addition, all lot
lines not considered a rear or side lot line as herein defined, and
approximately parallel to the front lot line shall be considered a front lot
line and building setbacks and yards shall be in accordance with the
provisions set forth within the respective zoning district.



§ 16-5-4  FIRE LANES.



   In all zoning districts, there shall be provided such fire lanes as are
herein required.



   (A)   A fire lane shall be so established as to provide access to
all portions of a building within 150 feet of an access point if building
size permits, and as approved by the Fire Code Official. Access shall mean a
fire lane, hydrant and an opening to the building interior.



   (B)   Fire lanes shall be provided to a clear width of not less than
20 feet with an all weather surface constructed to meet the approval of the
Village Engineer for a weight carrying capacity of not less than that
required to support a 48,000-pound vehicle.



   (C)   Where fire lanes are required, there shall be provided
accessible adequate fire hydrants every 300 feet along the required fire
lanes on water mains as approved by the Village Engineer; except that, in no
instance shall the water mains be required to exceed the size of the serving
village main.



   (D)   Required fire lanes may be used for parking; provided, that
there is no obstruction to the clear width required in division (B) of this
section.



   (E)   Fire lanes shall be marked with standard signs for enforcement
of no parking requirements.



(Ord. 2008-10-57, passed 10-20-2008)



§ 16-5-5  TEMPORARY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES OF LAND.



   (A)   The Community Development Director, with the written
concurrence of the Village Engineer and the Fire Code Official, or their duly
authorized designees, may authorize the temporary use of a building,
structure or parcel of land in any zoning district for a building, structure
or use of land that does not conform with the regulations prescribed
elsewhere in this chapter for the zoning district in which it is located;
provided, however, that, such use will not have a potential adverse impact on
surrounding properties or public health, safety and general welfare, and
shall not exceed a period of six months.



   (B)   Requests for temporary uses for periods in excess of six
months, or those determined by the Community Development Director as having a
potential adverse impact on surrounding properties, shall require the Village
Board’s approval. The Village Board shall only grant approval of such
temporary uses for specified periods of time and subject to such conditions
as the Village Board determines to be appropriate to protect against any
potential adverse impact on surrounding properties and for safeguarding the
public health, safety and general welfare. Such approval shall be considered
pursuant to a public hearing in accordance with the requirements of this
section, or may be considered in accordance with § 1-1-17 if so authorized
by the Village Manager.



   (C)   The provisions of this chapter shall not be so construed as to
deny the temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a
municipal or other public election.



   (D)   Temporary buildings for construction purposes are allowed for
a period not to exceed such construction and when located on the same lot
where such construction is being undertaken or a contiguous lot thereto, and
not located within 50 feet of an off-site residential use.



   (E)   Requests for temporary uses shall be made in writing and shall
be accompanied by the following:



      (1)   A current plat of survey or accurate site plan showing
the proposed location of the temporary building, structure or use;



      (2)   The name and contact information for the party
responsible for the placement and general conditions of the temporary
building, structure or use; and



      (3)   Written authorization from the property owner for the
placement of the temporary building, structure or use, and contact
information for the owner.



(Ord. 2008-10-57, passed 10-20-2008)



§ 16-5-6  GARY AND NORTH AVENUE CORRIDOR REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Relationship to the rest of the Zoning Code.



      (1)   All provisions of the Zoning Code, to the extent that
they do not conflict with the standards delineated in this section, shall
remain in full force and effect for all properties subject to the provisions
of this section.



      (2)   The standards found in this section shall be used by
property owners, developers, village staff members, the Plan Commission and
the Village Board during the design and review of development and
redevelopment proposals within the Gary Avenue and North Avenue Corridors.
These standards and criteria complement and add to those contained within the
Village’s Comprehensive Plan, Gary Avenue Corridor Plan, the Zoning Code
and other land use regulations. In the event of conflict between regulatory
ordinances, those contained in this section shall take precedence over all
others.



   (B)   Identification of the Gary and North Avenue  Corridors.



      (1)   The Gary Avenue Corridor regulations apply to those
properties designated in Figure 1, Gary Avenue Corridor Boundaries. The
Corridor includes two general areas. The first area includes those properties
abutting Gary Avenue, and within a depth not exceeding 400 feet from the
nearest Gary Avenue right-of-way line. Such properties are all within the
Gary Avenue Corridor Plan area which runs along both sides of Gary Avenue
from the southerly village boundary to the northerly village boundary. The
second area includes the area adjacent to the intersection of Gary Avenue and
Lies Road specifically bounded by 1,400 feet west of the nearest Gary Avenue
right-of-way line and 1,300 feet north of the nearest Lies Road right-of-way
line at the northwest corner of Gary Avenue and Lies Road; 850 feet west of
the nearest Gary Avenue right-of-way line and 1,200 feet south of the nearest
Lies Road right-of-way line at the southwest corner of Gary Avenue and Lies
Road; and approximately 1,200 feet east of the nearest Gary Avenue
right-of-way line to the nearest railroad right-of-way line and 400 feet
north and south of the nearest Lies Road right-of-way line at the northeast
and southeast corners of Gary Avenue and Lies Road.



      (2)   For any lot that abuts Gary Avenue directly, other than
a single-family residential lot, the lot line abutting the Gary Avenue
right-of-way shall be considered the front lot line.



      (3)   The North Avenue Corridor regulations apply to those
properties designated in Figure 2, North Avenue Corridor Boundaries. The
Corridor includes those properties within the corporate limits abutting North
Avenue, and within a depth not exceeding 400 feet from the nearest North
Avenue right-of-way line. Such properties are all within the North Avenue
Corridor Plan area which runs along both sides of North Avenue from the
easterly village boundary to the westerly village boundary.



      (4)   For any lot that abuts Gary Avenue directly, other than
a single-family residential lot, the lot line abutting the Gary Avenue
right-of-way shall be considered the front lot line.



   Figure 1: Gary Avenue Corridor Boundaries







 



   Figure 2: North Avenue Corridor Boundaries







 



   (C)   Purpose.



      (1)   The Gary Avenue and North Avenue Corridors and the
development within them are major factors influencing the visual and
environmental quality of the village. At full development, the Corridor will
contain the village’s Town Center, other retail nodes, significant
industrial and employment concentrations, public institutions, recreational
facilities and residential development. Due to the intensity of these land
uses, Gary Avenue and North Avenue represent the heart of the village, as
well as a prominent image to those passing through the community.



      (2)   Recognizing the importance of the Gary Avenue Corridor,
the village adopted a beautification plan for the Gary Avenue Corridor. To
coordinate private development with the public improvements envisioned by the
beautification plan, and given the prominence and importance of the North
Avenue Corridor, the village has established regulations applicable to the
Gary Avenue and North Avenue Corridors within the Zoning Code. These
regulations promote orderly development of land within the Corridors in a
manner consistent with established goals and policies of the village. As a
result of these requirements, development in the Corridors will be designed
with greater design sensitivity and generally higher quality than might have
occurred in the absence of specific guidelines.



      (3)   The purpose of the Gary Avenue and North Avenue
Corridors is to:



         (a)   Create a unified, harmonious and high-quality
visual environment throughout the Gary Avenue and North Avenue Corridors,
thereby identifying them as special areas with a unique identity within the
village and the region;



         (b)   Promote high-quality design through improved
development standards within the Corridors. These standards, which govern
site planning, building design, and landscaping will enable the village to
enhance what otherwise might result in aesthetically and economically lower
quality strip development;



         (c)   Foster a distinctive and positive image for the
village and for the Gary Avenue and North Avenue Corridors which function as
principal gateway into the village; and



         (d)   Protect and enhance wetlands and other significant
natural resources through use of careful site design, protective easements,
sensitive alignment and design of roadways and utilities, incorporation of
natural features, landscaping and massing of trees.



   (D)   Intent. The village intends that all development and
redevelopment within the Gary Avenue and North Avenue Corridors should strive
toward the highest level of quality in both design and construction. Nothing
in these provisions is intended to stifle creativity or artistic expression
nor is anything in these provisions intended to impede the economic use of
land. Rather, the provisions are intended to challenge design professionals
to create extraordinary sites and buildings within a context that is unique
to the village. The criteria, by which all new development and redevelopment
in the Corridors shall be reviewed, are as follows:



      (1)   Consistency with all provisions of the Comprehensive
Plan and the Gary Avenue Corridor Plan, as amended from time to time; all
provisions of the Zoning, Subdivision and Sign Codes not specifically
overridden by the provisions of this section; and all other applicable
regulations of this Code of Ordinances;



      (2)   Conservation of the natural conditions found on each
site where desirable, through minimized removal of trees and other vegetation
and soil, and through enhancement of natural wetlands;



      (3)   Establishment throughout the Corridors of harmonious
physical and visual relationships among existing, new and proposed buildings,
open spaces, natural terrain and plant materials and placements, with the
intent of creating a unique and unified appearance for the entire Corridor;



      (4)   Creation of unified site designs with a sense of
internal and interrelated order, that provide desirable environments for site
users and visitors and the community as a whole and that consider all site
elements, including: the relationship of buildings to surrounding land forms;
grading; architectural design; building, parking and loading-dock
orientation; building height; use of human-made materials, including paving;
site furnishings (lighting, outdoor seating, signage and the like);
landscaping (retention of natural vegetation, plant selection and placement,
retention and incorporation of water features, and the like); and other
visible outdoor site elements;



      (5)   Creation of a suitable balance between the amount and
arrangement of open space, landscaping and view protection on the one hand
and the design and function of human-made features on the other. Achieving
this balance should take into account screening, buffering, size and
orientation of open spaces, personal and property security, and localized
wind and solar effects;



      (6)   Provision of safe and adequate access to and from the
site, giving ample consideration to the location and number of access points
from public streets, the safety and convenience of merging and turning
movements, and traffic management and mitigation; and



      (7)   The provision of interior drives, parking areas,
pathways and walkways adequate to handle anticipated needs and to safely
buffer pedestrians and cyclists from motor vehicles where necessary for the
safety and convenience of on-site vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian
circulation.



   (E)   Application of standards.



      (1)   The provisions within this section shall be applicable
to properties identified as within the Gary Avenue and North Avenue Corridors
and within the corporate limits of the village at the time these regulations
are adopted. Properties which lie within the jurisdiction of DuPage County
shall not be subject to these regulations until such time as they are annexed
by the village.



      (2)   The provisions within this section shall not be
applicable to interior alterations, re-roofing, re-surfacing of existing
parking spaces, maintenance or painting.



      (3)   The provisions within this section shall be applicable
to all new developments within the Corridors.



      (4)   Application of these standards to existing development
shall be initiated upon exterior additions to structures or upon significant
changes to buildings or property as follows. Whether a change is significant
shall be determined by the Community Development Director on the basis of the
purpose and intent of the Gary and North Avenue Corridor regulations.



         (a)   Use. Any changes in the use of an existing
building or property shall conform to the standards set forth in division (F)
below, Uses Permitted Within the Gary Avenue and North Avenue Corridors.



         (b)   Lot standards. Any subdivision or significant
change in the size or dimensions of a property shall conform with the
standards set forth in division (G) below, Lot Standards.



         (c)   Access. Any significant change to the access
between the site and Gary Avenue or North Avenue shall conform with the
standards set forth in division (H) below, Access.



         (d)   Site design, grading and drainage. Any significant
change in the grading or drainage on the site shall conform with the
standards set forth in division (I) below, Site Design, Grading and Drainage,
and division (M) below, Landscape Design and Site Furnishings.



         (e)   Setbacks. Any building addition or other
significant change in the building setback shall conform with the standards
set forth in division (J) below, Required Setbacks and the open space and
adjacent setback area shall conform with division (M) below, Landscape Design
and Site Furnishings.



         (f)   Architectural design. Any significant change in
the building facade design such as changes in the location or types of
windows, doors or other features, shall conform with the standards set forth
in division (K) below, Architectural Design, and division (J) below, Required
Setbacks. Painting or repair of the existing facade, a minor addition of
windows or doors, or a minor modification of windows or doors shall not
constitute a significant change, provided the Community Development Director
determines that such alterations do not violate the purpose and intent of the
Gary and North Avenue Corridor Regulations.



         (g)   Parking. Any significant addition to or
reconstruction of parking spaces shall conform with the standards set forth
in division (L) below, Parking, and division (M) below, Landscape Design and
Site Furnishings. With the addition of new parking areas equal to or greater
than the number of spaces existing prior to adoption of this section,
existing parking areas shall be required to be screened with landscape
material in accordance with division (L)(3)(c) below.



         (h)   Landscaping. Removal of existing landscape
materials shall not be permitted unless the remaining landscaping conforms
with division (M) below, Landscape Design and Site Furnishings. The addition
of new landscape material or the relocation or replacement of existing
landscape material shall be permitted without conforming to the requirements
of this section when no other site improvements are involved. Fence
construction or removal shall be addressed separately from the remainder of
the landscape requirements. Changes in fencing shall be required to conform
with division (M)(21) below only and not with the remainder of division (M)
below. Changes in landscaping, and not fencing, shall not require additional
conformance with division (M)(21) below.



         (i)   Signage. Signage shall conform with the standards
set forth in division (K) below, Architectural Design, and division (M)
below, Landscape Design and Site Furnishings. Signage for new development
shall be included in the Gary Avenue or North Avenue Corridor Development
Plans, and shall be subject to review and approval by the Plan Commission as
per the procedures defined in division (N) below. New or replacement ground
signs and pole signs placed on existing, developed properties shall be
subject to review and approval by the Plan Commission as per the procedures
defined in division (N) below. New or replacement wall signs placed on
existing, developed properties must meet the purpose and intent of the
corridor regulations, as determined by the Community Development Director,
and review by the Plan Commission shall not be required; however, the
applicant may appeal the decision of the Community Development Director in
accordance with § 6-11-22. The provisions within this section shall not be
applicable to the changing of the face of existing signage.



         (j)   Variances. In the event of unusual circumstances,
or a particular hardship, the developer or property owner may request that
the Plan Commission adjust the applicability of this section to existing
development. For the purpose of this section, all properties that were
improved with structures prior to adoption of the Gary Avenue and North
Avenue Corridor regulations shall be considered unique and the Plan
Commission shall use flexibility in consideration of variances to the
requirements of this section. When reviewing a request, the Plan Commission
shall consider the following factors:



            1.   The cost of the proposed property improvement
as compared to the cost of the applicant adhering to the strict letter of
this section;



            2.   The existing site design and the location of
existing structures; and



            3.   The magnitude and impact of the proposed
improvement on the Gary Avenue and North Avenue Corridors.



   (F)   Uses permitted within the Gary Avenue and North Avenue
Corridors. Uses within the Gary Avenue and North Avenue Corridors shall be
permitted pursuant to the Zoning Code, as amended, of the village.



   (G)   Lot standards.



      (1)   The minimum dimensions of lots shall be as required by
the Zoning Code.



      (2)   Whenever a person owns or controls property and seeks to
subdivide that property and create one or more new parcels of land that are
less than five acres in size, the owner shall be required to present and
receive approval of a master plan which shows the manner in which the parcel
from which the new parcels are being created is proposed to be developed. A
master site plan shall show all proposed parcel sizes, building locations,
parking areas and locations, and access. Particular attention shall be given
to access patterns.



      (3)   Existing parcels of record that are less than five acres
in size at the time of adoption of this section shall not be required to be
part of a master site plan for surrounding properties. However, the developer
shall be encouraged to consider the site’s relationship to adjacent
properties when planning new development or re-development.



      (4)   All changes to the size or dimension of lots shall
adhere to the village Subdivision Code.



   (H)   Access. Vehicular access onto Gary Avenue shall be provided in
accordance with the ordinances and practices of DuPage County and the
village. Vehicular access onto North Avenue shall be provided in accordance
with the ordinances and practices of the State Department of Transportation
and the village.



   (I)   Site design, grading and drainage.



      (1)   Service areas and drives shall not hinder consumer
access, parking, driveways, walkways or entries. Service areas shall be out
of sight from the public roadways, paved, curbed and internally drained.



      (2)   Internal site drainage is the responsibility of the site
developer and shall be provided for all development pursuant to and village
codes.



      (3)   Pedestrian facilities should be considered within the
site and between adjacent sites where such facilities will improve
circulation, increase safety or promote decreased use of the automobile.



      (4)   Grading of retention ponds and other drainage courses or
facilities shall be designed to enhance the function of the facility and the
aesthetics of the site. Specific criteria for grading are provided as follows
to achieve these goals.



         (a)   Drainage channels shall be placed in less visible
locations, and shall receive a naturalized treatment including landscaping of
native vegetation so that the structure appears as an integral part of the
environment.



         (b)   Drainage features shall be incorporated as an
integral part of the project design in order to enhance the overall quality
and aesthetics of a site, to provide attractive open space, and to preserve
the natural character of the area.



         (c)   Where grading is substantial, as in the case of
retention ponds, variable undulating slopes shall be used to create a more
pleasing and natural appearance.



         (d)   Hard edges and slopes left by grading operations
shall be given a rounded appearance that closely resembles the natural
contours of the land, including varied rather than constant angles.



         (e)   Slopes adjacent to Gary Avenue, North Avenue or
other roadways shall be modulated by sufficient berming, regrading and
landscaping to create visually interesting and pleasing streetscapes.



         (f)   Non-contaminated soil remaining from cut
operations shall be retained on-site whenever possible and be used to
modulate the terrain and to create interesting land forms and improve site
aesthetics.



      (5)   Site designs and configurations that tend to catch and
accumulate trash, leaves and dirt shall be avoided. In addition, provisions
for cleaning the site shall be considered in the design.



   (J)   Required setbacks.



      (1)   Building locations shall reflect consideration for
roadway visibility, existing site features and parking lot circulation.



      (2)   The minimum building setback from the Gary Avenue
right-of-way shall be 60 feet for properties in all zoning districts, except
for the residential districts which shall be as required by the Zoning Code.
The maximum building setback from the street right-of-way for all buildings
shall be 100 feet; except that, no maximum setback shall apply to
single-family residences.



      (3)   The minimum building setback from the North Avenue
right-of-way shall be 100 feet for properties in all zoning districts.



      (4)   For both the Gary Avenue Corridor and the North Avenue
Corridor, no road or parking lot pavement of any type shall be within the
first 30 feet of property from the right-of-way except for approved entry
drives and properties which were improved with buildings or parking lots at
the time of the adoption of this section, which shall be permitted to
encroach no more than ten feet into this required setback.



   (K)   Architectural design. This section provides architectural
regulations and guidelines to the Plan Commission, village staff and owners
and occupants of land along Gary Avenue and North Avenue in order to promote
the objectives of the Gary Avenue and North Avenue Corridors regulations.



      (1)   Multi-tenant, mixed-used developments shall be
constructed with compatible materials and design characteristics including
building material, roof lines, color and landscaping.



      (2)   Each building in B-1, B-2 or B-3 Zoning Districts shall
have a pedestrian arcade or canopy fronting the store for shade, identity and
pedestrian scale. Arcades should visually and/or physically link retail and
office functions within a shopping center to protect pedestrian patrons of
the center.



      (3)   Attempts should be made to design improvements to be
compatible with the existing built and natural environments. New materials
should be the same or complement existing materials.



      (4)   Monotony shall be avoided within projects and between a
project and its surroundings. Site characteristics to be evaluated for this
purpose include building and plant materials, colors, textures, shapes,
massing, rhythms of building components and details, signage, height,
roof-line and setback. Facades of buildings shall incorporate such design
features as changes in materials, color, fenestration or other significant
visual relief provided in a manner or at intervals in keeping with the size,
mass and scale of the building and its views from public ways.



      (5)   The following materials shall not be used in any front
facade or side facade:



         (a)   Unfinished pre-cast concrete or unfinished
poured-in-place concrete;



         (b)   Fabricated metal, not to include high-quality
decorative architectural material, covering more than 25% of the wall area
visible from any public way; and



         (c)   Box signs.



      (6)   The following materials shall not be used on any part of
a building:



         (a)   Materials with no proven record of durability or
ease of maintenance in the intended  application; and



         (b)   Materials or construction methods used for one
aspect or portion of a project that are significantly lower in quality than
those used for the balance of that project, such that this one aspect or
portion is or rapidly becomes an eyesore or detriment to the project as a
whole.



      (7)   Building designs and configurations that tend to catch
and accumulate trash, leaves and dirt shall be avoided. In addition,
provisions for washing and cleaning buildings, other structures and building
grounds shall be considered and included in the design.



      (8)   All building components, such as windows, doors, wall
signs, eaves, soffits and parapets, shall be proportionate to the facade of
the building and shall relate well to one another.



      (9)   Mechanical equipment, satellite dishes and other utility
hardware, whether located on the roof or exterior of the building or on the
ground adjacent to it, shall be screened from view from public ways with
materials identical to or strongly similar to building materials or by heavy
landscaping that will be effective in winter, or they shall be located so as
not to be visible from any public ways. Use of parapet walls or pitched roof
elements to screen equipment is encouraged. In no case shall wooden fencing
be used as a rooftop equipment screen.



      (10)   Screening of approved service yards, refuse and
waste-removal areas, loading docks, truck-parking areas and other places
which tend to be unsightly shall be accomplished by use of walls, fencing,
dense planting or any combination of these elements. Screening shall block
views from public ways and shall be equally effective in winter and summer.



   (L)   Parking.



      (1)   The minimum required setback for on-site roadways,
parking and pavement shall be as set forth in divisions (J)(3) and (J)(4)
above, Required Setbacks.



      (2)   All parking lots will be paved and curbed. Parking lot
drainage will be subject to review by the Village Engineer. Parking areas in
front of the building shall gradually slope upward toward the building at a
slope not exceeding 5%, nor less than 0.5%. Ideally, the building will be
slightly elevated on a foundation constructed on the excavated soil to reduce
the visual barrier caused by automobiles adjacent to the roadway and result
in better visibility for the owner/tenant.



      (3)   Landscaping shall be provided within parking lots
pursuant to the following standards and the standards located in division (M)
below, Landscape Design and Site Furnishings.



         (a)   A minimum of 10% of all parking lot area shall be
landscaped to improve their appearance, provide shade and break up the
expanse of pavement. This percentage of landscaping is in addition to the
open space requirement of division (M) below, Landscape Design and Site
Furnishings.



         (b)   Landscaping shall be planted in islands of at
least 120 square feet with curbs and in the amount required by division (M)
below, Landscape Design and Site Furnishings. Such landscaped islands shall
be provided at both ends of each parking row and for each 20 parking bays.



         (c)   Except where facing a building, the front and side
parking lot perimeters shall provide a landscaped screen pursuant to the
point requirements for landscaped screens in division (M) below, Landscape
Design and Site Furnishings.



         (d)   All landscaping shall be properly located so as to
not obstruct the visibility of motorists or pedestrians. Where access drives
intersect or meet public rights-of-way, landscaping shall not be installed in
necessary sight triangles.



         (e)   When a parking lot is located within the required
front or street side building setback, the parking area shall include a
landscaped screen around the perimeter of the parking lot. The area of the
parking lot which is within the required building setback shall be excluded
from the landscaped setback requirement but shall be landscaped with the
landscaped screen and according to the requirements for interior parking lot
landscaping.



      (4)   Light fixture luminaires within parking lots shall be
provided in accordance with this code.



   (M)   Landscape design and site furnishings.



      (1)   For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions apply.



         LANDSCAPE ELEMENT. Includes all forms of planting and
vegetation, ground forms, rock groupings, water features and patterns, and
all visible construction, except buildings and utilitarian structures.



         LANDSCAPED BERMS. Earthen, landscaped and usually
human-made forms similar to a ridge which is typically three to four feet in
height and provides a visual barrier, usually within a landscaped setback,
buffer or screen.



         LANDSCAPED BUFFERS. Designated strips of land 15 feet in
depth which are within setbacks but require a higher intensity of landscaping
to help mitigate the impact of development upon development within lower
intensity zoning classifications on adjacent land.



         LANDSCAPED SCREENS. Designated densely landscaped strips
five feet in depth which are intended to screen objectionable uses from the
view of development within lower intensity zoning classifications on adjacent
land.



         LANDSCAPED SETBACKS. All land on a site which is within the
required front or street side building setbacks.



         OPEN SPACE. Land within a particular site that is neither
covered by building structures nor used for automobile parking or circulation.



         SITE FURNISHINGS. Include any structure, other than
buildings, visible from any public way and any street hardware (objects not
commonly referred to as structures) located in streets and public ways and
outside of buildings. Site furnishings may include but are not limited to
signs, decorative paving treatments, fences, walls, railings, artwork,
transformers, utility access boxes, lighting standards and arrays, and other
visible site appurtenances.



      (2)   Landscaping standards within this section are not
applicable to single-family residential development, except division (M)(22)
below, which regulates fence material and height.



      (3)   Installation and maintenance of landscaping.



         (a)   All landscaping materials shall be installed in
accordance with the current planting procedures established by the American
Association of Nurserymen.



         (b)   Minimum dimensions for plant materials at
installation shall be as follows:



 

Evergreens
 
6-foot height


Ornamental trees
 
2-inch caliper


Shade trees
 
2-1/2-inch caliper


Shrubs
 
2-1/2-foot height with a 36-inch ball



 



         (c)   All landscaping materials shall be maintained
according to the requirements of this section, in good condition so as to
present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance and shall be kept free of
refuse and debris. Plant material not in this condition shall be replaced or
maintained to meet these requirements.



      (4)   Landscaping shall be provided according to a point
system. Points are accumulated according to the value given a specific plant
type as indicated below. Species within each plant type are listed in
division (O) below, Plant List.



         (a)   Plant types shall be given the following point
values:



 



Bedding plant areas and ground cover
 
1/2 point per square foot


Evergreens
 
275 points per tree


Ornamental lighting standards


   Standards which adhere to a design theme
 
10 points per lighting standard


   Site furnishings which adhere to a design theme and enhance the
aesthetics or usability of a site
 
10 points per furnishing


Ornamental trees
 
250 points per tree


Shade trees
 
225 points per tree


Shrubs up to 3 feet in  height
 
35 points per shrub


Shrubs 4 to 12 feet in  height
 
70 points per shrub




 



         (b)   The required point values are as follows.



            1.   Open space areas shall be landscaped to a
point value no less than 0.05 per square foot.



            2.   Landscaped setbacks shall be landscaped to a
point value no less than 0.35 per square foot.



            3.   Landscaped buffers shall be landscaped to a
point value no less than one and one-half per square foot.



            4.   Landscaped screens shall be landscaped to a
point value no less than two per square foot.



            5.   Required landscaped areas within parking lots
shall be landscaped to a point value no less than one-half per square foot.



            6.   Retention and detention ponds shall be
landscaped to a point value equal to the landscaped requirements for the area
in which it is located.



            7.   Motor vehicle service or sales uses shall be
landscaped an additional 20% over the values listed in divisions (M)(4)(b)1.
through 4. above. This shall not include retail sale, wholesale, warehousing
or manufacturing of motor vehicle parts.



            8.   Point value requirements for specific uses
may be appropriate, and are established within this section wherever
regulations for such a use are contained.



      (5)   Building and parking structures or areas may consume 80
to 905 of the site according to standards set forth in Figure 2, Open Space
Requirements. The balance of the site shall be devoted to open space.
Landscape setbacks may be included in open space calculations.



   Figure 2:  Open Space







 



      (6)   Within a landscaped setback, no more than 75% of the
point requirements may be achieved by the same plant type.



      (7)   Suggested groupings for trees are in informal blocks
adjacent to the development, scattered as individuals, or as small groups in
intensively landscaped areas.



      (8)   Where retail or business uses abut institutional or
residential uses, a landscape buffer shall be installed and maintained across
the length of the property and within the required building setback for that
yard.



      (9)   Where industrial uses abut institutional or residential
uses, a landscaped screen shall be installed and maintained across the length
of the property and within the required building setback for that yard.



      (10)   Landscaping materials shall be selected from the
approved plants and trees listed in division (O) below, Plant List.
Deviations from this list will be subject to approval by the Plan Commission.



      (11)   The grades of all walks, parking spaces, terraces, and
other paved areas shall conform with the requirements of the State
Accessibility Act. In addition, they shall provide an inviting and stable
appearance for walking.



      (12)   All landscape treatments shall strive to preserve and
enhance natural features, enhance architectural features, strengthen vistas
and provide intermittent shade. Where significant value is placed upon such
features, the Planning Division may recommend and the Plan Commission may
assign point values to such features that would count toward the required
landscaping point value for the site.



      (13)   Unity of design is encouraged and may be achieved by
repetition of certain plant varieties and other materials, and by correlation
with native prairie environments or adjacent developments where appropriate.



      (14)   Retention ponds shall be enhanced with appropriate
landscaping and use of wetland plants. Retention ponds shall be located
pursuant to division (I) above, Site Design, Grading and Drainage.
Landscaping shall not interfere with the retention pond’s function.



      (15)   Plant material shall be selected for interest in its
structure, texture and color, and for its ultimate growth size. Plants shall
be used that are indigenous to the area and others that are hardy, harmonious
to the design and good in appearance.



      (16)   In locations where plants will be susceptible to injury
by pedestrian or vehicular traffic, they shall be protected by appropriate
curbs, tree guards or similar devices.



      (17)   Consideration shall be given to the special needs of
plants surrounded by impervious surfaces.



      (18)    In areas where general planting will not prosper,
other solutions such as fences, stone walls, raised planters or ground covers
shall be used. Carefully selected plants shall be included in these solutions
wherever possible.



      (19)   Exterior lighting shall enhance the building design and
adjoining landscape. Lighting standards and fixtures shall be of a design and
size compatible with the building and adjacent areas.



      (20)   Site furnishings located on private property shall be
designed as part of the site’s architectural concept and landscape.
Materials and colors shall be in harmony with buildings, surroundings and
other furnishings; scale shall be appropriate to the site and the design; and
proportions shall be attractive.



      (21)   Site furnishings and landscaping located in any public
way or on other public property shall be harmonious with the design of
adjacent buildings, with the appearance of Gary Avenue or North Avenue in the
vicinity, and with the general character of the village.



      (22)   Fences shall comply with the requirements of the
village Fence Code (Ch. 6, Art. 12). Fences which are located within the Gary
Avenue or North Avenue Corridors shall comply with the standards set forth in
this section. Fencing material with no proven record of durability or ease of
maintenance, or which is known to be of low aesthetic quality, shall not be
used.



         (a)   Fencing for new development shall be included in
the Gary Avenue or North Avenue Corridor Development Plans, and shall be
subject to review and approval by the Plan Commission as per the procedures
defined in division (N) of this section. Chain link, stockade or material
which is not of a sufficient level of quality shall not be permitted



         (b)   New or replacement fencing placed on existing,
developed properties must meet the purpose and intent of the corridor
regulations, as determined by the Community Development Director, and review
by the Plan Commission shall not be required; however, the applicant may
appeal the decision of the Community Development Director in accordance with
§ 16-11-22.



         (c)   Maintenance of existing fencing shall not be
subject to the corridor regulations, provided the new portion of fence shall
be of the same type as the existing fence.



         (d)   New or replacement fencing placed on existing
residential properties shall not be subject to the corridor regulations.



   (N)   Review and approval procedures. Except for individual
single-family homes, all new construction, subsequent construction, exterior
remodeling, expansion or demolition of structures shall be reviewed and
approved by the Plan Commission prior to commencement of any on-site building
or construction activity. Such review of projects shall follow the procedures
outlined below.



      (1)   Preliminary sketch. The applicant shall prepare a
readable sketch which depicts building size and location and parking lot
configuration including auto capacity. This sketch shall also include
driveway size and location, building and parking setbacks, landscaping areas
and preliminary utility layout. This preliminary sketch shall be reviewed by
Planning Division staff and staff from other appropriate village divisions.
Appropriate comments shall be submitted to the applicant which detail not
only specific requirements which will apply to the property, but design
features which are desirable to the village as well.



      (2)   Registered professional architect, landscape architect.
The applicant shall engage a registered professional architect and landscape
architect to prepare Gary Avenue or North Avenue Corridor Development Plans.
The applicant may provide evidence of the ability to prepare Gary Avenue or
North Avenue Corridor Development Plans through the use of personnel already
in the applicant’s employ.



      (3)   Gary Avenue or North Avenue Corridor Development Plans.
These plans represent final site layout and design and shall incorporate
comments generated from the preliminary sketch and shall include utility
service, exterior design renderings, elevations, materials, landscaping,
signage, exterior lighting and colors. These plans shall be presented in the
format typically produced by a registered, professional architect or engineer
as required by the Planning Division and/or Engineering Department staff. The
Plan Commission shall review the Gary Avenue or North Avenue Corridor
Development Plans within 30 days of its receipt by the Planning Division
unless the applicant requests an extension. The Plan Commission shall take
one of the following actions upon reviewing the Gary Avenue or North Avenue
Corridor Development Plans:



         (a)   Return the Gary Avenue or North Avenue Corridor
Development Plans to Planning Division staff with recommendations for further
refinement and an extension of processing time to address particular issues;



         (b)   Approval of the Gary Avenue or North Avenue
Corridor Development Plans;



         (c)   Approval of the Gary Avenue or North Avenue
Corridor Development Plans subject to conditions; or



         (d)   Denial of the Gary Avenue or North Avenue Corridor
Development Plans.



      (4)   Refining plans. When the plans have been returned for
refinement, the applicant shall be responsible for refining the plans in
accordance with the comments stated by the Plan Commission. In the case of
the resubmittal of revised Gary Avenue or North Avenue Corridor Development
Plans, in their review, the Plan Commission shall consider if all issues
identified as part of the previous reviews have been addressed. The Plan
Commission shall review revised Gary Avenue or North Avenue Corridor
Development Plans within 30 days of its receipt by the Planning Division
unless the applicant requests an extension.



      (5)   Right of appeal. The applicant shall have the right to
appeal decisions of the Plan Commission to the Village Board. If an appeal is
desired, the applicant shall submit, in writing, a request for appeal and
specific reasons for the appeal to the Community Development Department. The
Village Board may grant modifications to the



requirements contained within the corridor regulations when the Board can
identify specific justification for the modification. The Village Board shall
review the appeal request within 30 days of its receipt by the Community
Development Department unless the applicant requests an extension.



   (O)   Plant list. This division (O) presents common plant types and
their corresponding point values. This division (O) shall be used to
determine landscaping point values as required by the Zoning Code. Point
values for plant types that do not appear in this division (O) shall be
considered on a case by case basis.



 

Shade Trees (225 points per tree)


Botanical Name
 
Common Name
 
*Salt Tolerance




Acer Plantanoides
 
Norway Maple
 
T


Acer Rubrum
 
Red Maple
 
I


Acer Saccharum
 
Sugar Maple
 
I


Acer Saccharum “Columnare”
 
Columnar Sugar Maple
 
I


Acer Saccharum “Green Mountain”
 
Green Mountain Sugar Maple
 
I


Acer Saccharum “Wright Brothers”
 
Wright Brothers Sugar Maple
 
I


Aesculus Glabra
 
Ohio Buckeye
 
S


Aesculus Hippocastatum
 
Horsechestnut
 
S


Betula Nigra
 
River Birch
 
T


Celtis Occidentalis
 
Hackberry
 
T


Ginkgo Biloba
 
Ginkgo
 
T


Gleditsia Triacanthos “Inermis”
 
Thornless Honeylocust
 
T


Gynocladus Dioicus
 
Kentucky Coffee Tree
 
T


Larix Decidua
 
European Larch
 
T


Liriodendron Tulipifera
 
Tulip Tree
 
S


Phellodendron Amurense
 
Amur Corktree
 
S


Quercus Bicolor
 
Swamp White Oak
 
T


Quercus Ellipsoidalis
 
Hills Oak
 
T


Quercus Macrocarpa
 
Bur Oak
 
T


Quercus Robur
 
English Oak
 
T


Quercus Rubra
 
Red Oak
 
T


Quercus Velutina
 
Black Oak
 
T


Tilia Americana
 
American Linden
 
I


Tilia Americana “Fastigiata”
 
Pyramidal American Linden
 
I


Tilia Americana “Redmond”
 
Redmond Linden
 
I


Tilia Cordata
 
Little Leaf Linden
 
I


Tilia Cordata “Chancellor”
 
Chancellor Linden
 
I


Tilia Cordata “Glenleven”
 
Glenleven Linden
 
I


Tilia Cordata “Olympic”
 
Olympic Linden
 
I


Tilia X Euchlora
 
Crimean Or Redmond Linden
 
I


Tilia Platyphyllos
 
Big-Leaf Linden
 
I


Tilia Vulgaris
 
European Linden
 
I


Taxodium Distichum
 
Baldcypress
 
T


Zelkova Serrata
 
Zelkova
 
S


Zelkova Serrata “Greenvase”
 
Greenvase Zelkova
 
S




 



 

Ornamental Trees  (250 Points per tree)


Botanical Name
 
Common Name
 
*Salt Tolerance




Acer Ginnala
 
Amur Maple
 
T


Amelanchier Canadensis
 
Juneberry
 
T


Cercis Canadensis
 
Eastern Redbud
 
S


Cornus Alternifolia
 
Pagoda Dogwood
 
S


Cornus Mas
 
Cornelian Cherry Dogwood
 
S


Crataegus Crusgalli
 
Cockspur Hawthorn
 
S


Crataegus Crusgalli “Inermis”
 
Thornless Cockspur Hawthorn
 
S


Crataegus Phaenopyrum
 
Washington Hawthorn
 
S


Crataegus Viridis
 
Winter King Hawthorn
 
S


Magnolia Stellata
 
Star Magnolia
 
T


Malus “Adams”
 
Adams Crabapple
 
T


Malus Floribunda
 
Jap. Flowering Crabapple
 
I


Malus “Red Splendor”
 
Red Splendor Crabapple
 
I


Malus “Snowdrift”
 
Snowdrift Crabapple
 
I


Malus Sieboldi Zumi “Calocarpa”
 
Zumi Crabapple
 
T


Pyrus Calleryana “Chanticleer”
 
Chanticleer Flowering Pear
 
S


Pyrus Calleryana “Redspire”
 
Redspire Flowering Pear
 
S


Pyrus Calleryana “Whitehouse”
 
Whitehouse Flowering Pear
 
S


Syringa Japonica
 
Japanese Tree Lilac
 
T


Viburnum Prunifolium
 
Blackhaw Viburnum
 
T




 



 

Evergreens  (275 Points per tree)


Botanical Name
 
Common Name
 
*Salt Tolerance




Juniperus Chinensis
 
Chinese Juniper
 
I


Juniperus Communis
 
Common Juniper
 
I


Juniperus Virginiana
 
Red Cedar
 
I


Picea Glauca Densata
 
Black Hills Spruce
 
I


Pinus Nigra
 
Austrian Pine
 
I


Pinus Sylvestris
 
Scotch Pine
 
I




 



 

Shrubs  (4 - 12 [70 Points per shrub]; 0 - 3  [35 Points per shrub])


Botanical Name
 
Common Name
 
*Salt Tolerance




Aronia Arbutifolia
 
Red Chokeberry
 
T


Aronia Melanocarpa
 
Black Chokeberry
 
T


Berberis Thunbergii
 
Japanese Barberry
 
S


Berberis Thunbergii “Crimson”
 
Crimson Pygmy Barberry
 
S


Cornus Isanti
 
Isanti Dogwood
 
S


Cornus Racemosa
 
Grey Dogwood
 
S


Corylus Americana
 
American Hazelnut
 
I


Cotoneaster Apiculatus
 
Cranberry Cotoneaster
 
T


Euonymous Alatus
 
Burning Bush
 
S


Euonymous Alatus Compacta
 
Dwarf Burning Bush
 
S


Forsythia “Arnold Dwarf”
 
Arnold Dwarf Forsythia
 
I


Forsythia Viridissima “Bronxensis”
 
Bronx Greenstem Forsythia
 
I


Forsythia X Intermedia
 
Border Forsythia
 
I


Hamamelis Vernalis
 
Vernal Witchazel
 
T


Hamamelis Virginiana
 
Common Witchazel
 
T


Hypericum
 
St. Johnswort
 
T


Ilex Verticillata
 
Winterberry Holly
 
S


Ligustrum Vulgare
 
Common Privet
 
S


Ligustrum X Vicary
 
Golden Vicary Privet
 
S


Lonicera Clavey
 
Clayey’s Dwarf Honeysuckle
 
I


Potentilla Fruticosa
 
Pontentilla
 
T


Rhus Aromatica
 
Fragrant Sumac
 
T


Rhus Glabra
 
Smooth Sumac
 
T


Rhus Typhina
 
Staghorn Sumac
 
T


Ribes Alpinum
 
Alpine Current
 
T


Spirea Bumalda “Goldflame”
 
Goldflame Spirea
 
S


Spirea Japonica “Little Princess”
 
Little Princess Spirea
 
S


Spirea Van Houttei
 
Van Houtt Spirea
 
S


Syringa Patula “Miss Kim”
 
Miss Kim Korean Lilac
 
T


Syringa Vulgaris
 
Common Lilac
 
T


Taxus Spp
 
Yew
 
S


Viburnum X Carlcephalum
 
Fragrant Viburnum
 
I


Viburnum Carlesii “Compacta”
 
Dwarf Koreanspice Viburnum
 
I


Viburnum Dentatum
 
Arrowwood Viburnum
 
I


Viburnum Lentago
 
Nannyberry Viburnum
 
I


Viburnum Trilobum
 
American Cranberry Bush
 
I


Viburnum Trilobum Compactum
 
Dwarf Cranberry Bush
 
I




 



 

Groundcover  (1/2 point per square feet)


Botanical Name
 
Common Name
 
*Salt Tolerance




Cotoneaster Adpressa
 
Creeping Cotoneaster
 
T


Cotoneaster Dammeri
 
Bearberry Cotoneaster
 
T


Cotoneaster Horizontalis
 
Rock Spray Cotoneaster
 
T


Cotoneaster Horizontalis “Hessei”
 
Hesse Cotoneaster
 
T


Euonymus Fortunei “Colorata”
 
Purpleleaf Wintercreeper
 
I


Euonymus Fortunei Vegetus
 
Bigleaf Wintercreeper
 
I


Hedra Helix
 
Ivy
 
I


Juniperus Chinensis Procumbens
 
Jap. Garden Juniper
 
I


Juniperus Chinensis Sargentii
 
Sargent Juniper
 
I


Juniperus Conferta
 
Shore Juniper
 
I


Juniperus Horizontalis
 
Creeping Juniper
 
I


Pachysandra Terminalis
 
Jap. Pachysandra
 
I


Polygonum Reynoutria
 
Dwarf Fleeceflower
 
T


Rhus Aromatica “Gro-Low”
 
Grow-Low Sumac
 
T


Sedum Spurium “Dragon’s Blood”
 
Sedum
 
I


Vinca Minor Bowles
 
Myrtle
 
I




 



 

Grasses  (1/2 point per square feet)


Botanical Name
 
Common Name
 
*Salt Tolerance




Calamagrostis Acutifolius “Stictus”
 
Feather Reed Grass
 
T


Deschampsia Caesptiosa
 
Tufted Hair Grass
 
S


Elymus Glaucus
 
Blue Lyme Grass
 
T


Helictotrichon Sempervirens
 
Blue Oat Grass
 
S


Miscanthus Sinensis “Gracillimus”
 
Maiden Grass
 
T


Miscanthus Sinensis Purpurascens
 
Purple Maiden Grass
 
T


Miscanthus Sinensis “Silberfeder”
 
Silver Maiden Grass
 
T


Miscanthus Sinensis “Variegatus”
 
Striped Eulalia Grass
 
T


Pennisetum Alopercuroides
 
Fountain Grass
 
T


Penn. Alopercuroides “Hamelin”
 
Dwarf Fountain Grass
 
T


Sesleria Autumnalis
 
Autumn Moor Grass
 
T


Sporobolus Heterolepsis
 
Prairie Drop Seed
 
T




 



 

Hardy Perennials/Wildflowers  (1/2 point per square feet)


Botanical Name
 
Common Name
 
*Salt Tolerance




Acorus Calamus
 
Sweet Flag
 
T


Allium Cernuum
 
Wild Onion
 
T


Amorpha Canescens
 
Leadplant
 
T


Anemone Cylindrica
 
Thimbleweed
 
T


Antennaria Sp
 
Pussytoes
 
T


Aquilegia Canadensis
 
Columbine
 
T


Asclepias Incarnata
 
Red Milkweed
 
T


Asclepias Tuberosa
 
Butterfly Weed
 
T


Aster Laevis
 
Smooth Aster
 
T


Baptisia Leucantha
 
White Wild Indigo
 
T


Callirhoe Triangulata
 
Poppy Mallow
 
T


Coreopsis Palmata
 
Stiff Coreopsis
 
T


Delphinium Tricorne
 
Wild Larkspur
 
S


Dicentra Cucullaria
 
Dutchman’s Breeches
 
S


Dodecatheon Meadia
 
Shooting Stars
 
S


Echinacea Pallida
 
Pale Purple Coneflower
 
T


Echinacea Purpurea “Magnus”
 
Purple Coneflower
 
T


Eryngium Yuccifolium
 
Rattlesnake Master
 
T


Euphorbia Corollata
 
Flowering Spurge
 
T


Geranium Maculatum
 
Wild Geranium
 
S


Geum Triflorum
 
Prairie Smoke
 
T


Helianthus Occidentalis
 
Western Sunflower
 
T


Hemerocallis Spp
 
Daylily
 
T


Hydrophyllum Virginianum
 
Virginia Waterleaf
 
S


Iris Virginica Shrevei
 
Blue Flag Iris
 
T


Liatris Pyscostachya
 
Gayfeather
 
T


Lilium Superbum
 
Turkscap
 
T


Lithospermum Croceum
 
Puccoon
 
T


Lupinus Perennis
 
Lupine
 
T


Mertensia Virginica
 
Bluebells
 
S


Mondarda Fistulosa
 
Bee Balm
 
T


Sparganium Eurycarpum
 
Large Fruited Burreed
 
S


Tephrosia Virginiana
 
Goatsrue
 
S


Petalostemum Purpureum
 
Purple Prairie Clover
 
T


Soldago Sp
 
Goldenrod
 
T


Uvularia Grandflora
 
Yellow Bellwort
 
S


Tradescantia Ohiensis
 
Spiderwort
 
T


Viola Pedata
 
Pansey Violet
 
T


Perovskia Atriplicifolia
 
Russian Sage
 
T


Ranunculus Rhomboideus
 
Prairie Buttercup
 
T


Rudbeckia Hirta
 
Black-Eyed Susan
 
T


Veronicastrum Virginicum
 
Culversroot
 
T


Ratibida Pinnata
 
Yellow Coneflower
 
T


Silphium Terebinthinaceum
 
Prairie Dock
 
T


Sangiunaria Canadensis
 
Bloodroot
 
S


Sisyrinchium Campestre
 
Blue-Eyed Grass
 
T


Mondarda Punctata
 
Spotted Bee Balm
 
T


Phlox Divaricata
 
Blue Phlox
 
T


Polygonum Coccineum
 
Marsh Smartweed
 
S


Sagittaria Latifolia
 
Arrowhead
 
S




 



*Salt Tolerance Levels:  T = Tolerant  I = Intermediate  S = Sensitive



(Ord. 95-07-35, passed 7-10-1995; Ord. 2000-04-29, passed 4-17-2000; Ord.
2006-09-56, passed 9-18-2006; Ord. 2011-10-34, passed 10-3-2011; Ord.
2011-12-43, passed 12-19-2011)



§ 16-5-7  ABOVE-GROUND SERVICE FACILITIES.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish general
guidelines for the construction and placement of above-ground service
facilities (“service facility” or “service facilities”), as defined
herein, in the village. The goals of this section are to encourage the
location of service facilities in non-residential areas: to minimize the
total number of service facilities throughout the community; to encourage
users of service facilities to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas
where the adverse impact on the community is minimal: to encourage users of
service facilities to configure them in a manner that minimizes the adverse
visual impact; and to enhance the ability of the providers of services to
provide such services to the community quickly, efficiently and effectively.



   (B)   Applicability. No service facility shall be erected or
installed except in compliance with the provisions of this section. Service
facilities located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the
village shall be exempt from the requirements of this section, provided a
lease, license or franchise agreement authorizing such service facilities has
been approved by the Village Board. Where conflicts exist between this
section and the remainder of the Carol Stream Zoning Code, the provisions of
this section shall govern.



   (C)   General definitions, guidelines and performance standards.



      (1)   Definitions. As used in this section and unless the
context clearly requires otherwise, the terms ABOVE-GROUND SERVICE FACILITY
and SERVICE ENTITY shall have the meaning ascribed to them in § 16-18-1.



      (2)   Additional use permitted on lot. For purposes of
determining whether the installation of a service facility complies with
district bulk regulations, including, but not limited to, setback and lot
requirements, the dimensions of the entire zoning lot shall control, even
though the service facility may be located on leased property within such
zoning lot.



      (3)   Number of service facilities. Only one service facility
per service entity shall be located on any zoning lot.



      (4)   Sound, lighting, color and appearance. No visible or
audible signals or lights or illumination shall be permitted on a service
facility. Service facilities shall be of earth-tone colors and be maintained
in good condition, including, but not limited to, being free of peeling paint
and graffiti, and shall be maintained as level.



      (5)   Signage. No advertising shall be allowed on any service
facility, other than a plaque no larger than four inches by six inches
identifying the service entity, which shall be required.



      (6)   Compatibility with structure. When included as part of
an existing building or structure, the service facility shall be of a
material and color, or shall be screened using building materials of a
material and color, which substantially match the exterior of the building or
structure, and shall be located or screened in an aesthetically acceptable
manner so as not to be visible from a vantage point of six feet high at the
property lines of adjacent properties and adjacent rights-of-way. The
Community Development Director shall determine whether the material and color
of a service facility mounted on a building, structure or rooftop matches the
building, structure or rooftop and is screened from adjacent rights-of-way
and properties.



      (7)   Abandonment. In the event the use of any service
facility has been discontinued for a period of 180 consecutive days, the
service facility shall be deemed to be abandoned. Determination of the date
of abandonment shall be made by the Community Development Director
(“Director”), who shall have the right to request documentation and/or
affidavits from the service entity regarding the determination of the service
facility’s term of use. Upon the Director’s determination and written
notification to the service entity of such abandonment, the service entity
shall have an additional 90 days with which to either: reactivate the actual
use of the service facility, transfer the service facility to another service
entity which makes actual use of the service facility, or dismantle and
remove the service facility and notify the Director in writing of the
completion of such removal. At the earlier date of either 270 days from the
date of discontinuance without reactivation or completion of dismantling and
removal, any special use permit and/or zoning variation approval for the
service facility shall automatically expire without further action by the
Director.



      (8)   Equipment and non-interference. Mobile or immobile
equipment not used in direct support of a service facility shall not be
stored or parked on the site of a service facility unless and while repairs
to such facility are being made. Backup generators shall only be operated
during power outages and for testing and maintenance purposes, and shall not
be placed on-site except when in use or where integrated within the service
facility’s cabinet. Noise attenuation measures shall be included to reduce
noise levels to satisfy applicable state and village performance standards.
Testing and maintenance of generators shall only take place on weekdays
between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. Service facilities shall not
physically interfere with access to existing structures or utilities.



      (9)   Substantial written evidence of denial. In the course of
reviewing any request for approval required under this section, the combined
Board or the Village Board, as the case may be, shall act within a reasonable
period of time after the request is duly filed, taking into account the
nature and scope of the request.



      (10)   Petition for amendment. Should the application of this
section have the effect of prohibiting a person or entity from providing
services to all or a portion of the village, such provider may petition for a
variation from this section in the manner described in § 16-15-6.



      (11)   Nonconformities. Any service facility installed and
operating prior to enactment of the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law
of 2007 (220 ILCS 5/21-100 et seq.), which would be otherwise prohibited by
or subject to this section, shall be considered a lawful, existing,
nonconforming use and/or structure, as the case may be, and shall be subject
to the rules on existing nonconforming lots, buildings, structures and uses
provided in Ch. 16, Art. 14, of the Carol Stream Zoning Code.



      (12)   Independent technical expert. The Community Development
Director is explicitly authorized to employ on behalf of the village an
independent technical expert to review any technical materials submitted by
the service entity or by other participants submitting an application or
petition, including, but not limited to, those materials required under this
section. The applicant or petitioner shall pay all reasonable costs of said
review, including any administrative costs incurred by the village. Hourly
rates charged by the independent technical expert shall not exceed those
hourly rates customarily charged by similar technical experts within the
engineering profession. Any confidential, proprietary or other such
information exempted from disclosure by the Illinois Freedom of Information
Act, being 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq., and disclosed to the village or the expert
hired shall remain confidential and exempted from public disclosure in
accordance with the Illinois Freedom of Information Act.



   (D)   Administrative approvals.



      (1)   General.



         (a)   The Community Development Director may
administratively approve the uses listed in division (D)(2) of this section.
Nevertheless, all such uses shall comply with division (C) of this section,
and all other applicable ordinances. Above-ground service facilities are
subject to the bulk regulations of the Carol Stream Zoning Code and are
subject to the regulations of the Carol Stream Building Codes.



         (b)   Each applicant for administrative approval shall
apply to the Community Development Director for a building permit, which
application shall include: a plat of survey, engineering plans, site plans,
electrical plans, landscape plans, structure elevations, and other documents
and plans as may be deemed necessary. Said plans and documents shall provide
the information set forth in divisions (F)(2) and (F)(3) of this section.



         (c)   The Community Development Department shall respond
to each such application, resubmission or supplemental application within 30
days after receiving it by either approving the application, approving it
with conditions, denying it, describing the additional information necessary
to consider the application complete, or requesting additional information to
determine whether the application complies with this chapter. If the
Community Development Department fails to respond to the applicant within
said 30 days, or such additional time as is reasonably necessary to obtain
the additional information from the applicant and review it, then the
application shall be deemed to be denied.



         (d)   If an administrative approval is denied, the
applicant may appeal said denial in accordance with the provisions of the
Carol Stream Zoning Code concerning appeals of administrative decisions.



         (e)   The Community Development Director may refer an
application for administrative approval, that otherwise meets the standards
contained herein, to be considered and approved as required by division (F)
of this section if the Community Development Director determines in writing
that the public interest would be furthered by requiring a special use permit
to construct the service facility in question.



      (2)   Specific administratively-approved uses. The following
uses shall be approved by the Community Development Department after
conducting an administrative review unless the Community Development Director
concludes that the public interest would be furthered by requiring a special
use permit in conformance with division (D)(1)(e) of this section.



         (a)   Service facilities installed within the rear yard
in any zoning district; provided, the service facility is set back three feet
from the side property line and five feet from the rear property line; and
further provided:



            1.   A service facility shall not be located
within a 250-foot radius from any existing or approved service facility;



            2.   The separation requirement of division
(D)(2)(a)1. of this section may be waived by the Community Development
Director for the I Industrial District, the B-2 General Retail District, the
B-3 Service District and the B-4 Office, Research and Institutional Business
District; provided that, the applicant establishes:



               a.   No other site or current technology
could be used to provide intended services to the residents of the village;
and



               b.   A denial of a permit for the proposed
site would create a gap in providing intended services to the residents of
the village.



            3.   A service facility shall be landscaped with
an evergreen and/or deciduous hedge equal in height at the time of planting
to the service facility, and installed and maintained in accordance with
division (F)(3) of this section; and



            4.   If one or more of the foregoing factors do
not exist, the Community Development Director shall inform the applicant that
it may request a special use permit in conformance with division (F) of this
section.



         (b)   Service facilities installed within the interior
side yard in any non-residential zoning district and in any residential
zoning lot that, maintains a non-residential principal use and/or structure
(school, park or church); and further provided:



            l.   The service facility is set back three feet
from the side property line;



            2.   A service facility shall not be located
within a 250-foot radius of any existing or approved service facility; and



            3.   A service facility shall be landscaped with
an evergreen and/or deciduous hedge equal in height at the time of planting
to the service facility, and installed and maintained in accordance with
division (F)(3) of this section.



   (E)   Prohibited uses.



      (1)   Residential yards. Service facilities are prohibited in
the front yard or side yard adjoining a street of any lot used for
residential purposes within the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zoning Districts.



      (2)   Prohibited equipment. Above-ground service facilities
containing any device that creates an undue risk to the public’s health,
safety and welfare are prohibited from every zoning district.



   (F)   Special use permits.



      (1)   General. The following provisions shall govern the
issuance of special use permits.



         (a)   Service facilities not permitted to be approved
administratively pursuant to division (D) of this section, and not otherwise
prohibited by division (E) of this section, shall require a special use
permit. Special use permit applications for service facilities shall be
processed and heard in conformance with the requirements of the Zoning Code.



         (b)   In granting a special use permit, conditions may
be imposed to the extent the Village Board determines necessary to minimize
any adverse effect of the proposed service facility. Where a service facility
is to be located in a front yard or a side yard adjoining a street, the
special use permit shall require that the service facility be no closer than
five feet from the lot line of a front yard or a side yard adjoining a
street, or such greater distance as determined by the Village Board.



         (c)   Any information of an engineering nature that the
applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical or electrical, shall be
certified by a professional engineer, licensed in the State of Illinois.



         (d)   Any application for a special use permit required
by this section must include evidence of the property owner’s written
consent to the service entity locating the service facility on the subject
property, including an acknowledgment that such property owner has read and
acknowledges the obligations set forth in § 16-15-7(F)(3).



      (2)   Factors considered in granting special use permits. In
addition to the standards identified in § 16-15-8 of the Zoning Code, the
following factors may be considered in determining whether to recommend or
issue a special use permit:



         (a)   Whether the service facility is the smallest size
capable of providing the intended service, as determined by the Community
Development Director;



         (b)   Proximity of the service facility to residential
district boundaries;



         (c)   Nature and intensity of uses on adjacent and
nearby properties;



         (d)   Topography of site and surrounding areas;



         (e)   Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;



         (f)   Design of the service facility, with particular
reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or
eliminating visual obtrusiveness; and



         (g)   The physical relationship between the service
facility and existing structures and utilities.



      (3)   Landscaping/screening. The following requirements shall
govern the landscaping surrounding service facilities requiring a special use
permit.



         (a)   A service facility shall be landscaped/screened
with a variety of plant materials that effectively screen the view of the
service facility from adjacent property and public rights-of-way on a
year-round basis. In some cases, such as a service facility sited on a large,
wooded lot, natural growth around the property perimeter may be a sufficient
buffer. Appropriate care and maintenance of plant material shall be provided
to keep such growth alive and in good condition. Diseased or dead plant
material shall be replaced. All trees shall be maintained until established.
All trees not in a vigorous growing condition after one growing season shall
be replaced at the beginning of the next succeeding planting season.



         (b)   In locations where the visual impact of the
service facility would be and is likely to remain minimal for the foreseeable
future, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived.



         (c)   The property owner and the service entity shall be
jointly and severally liable for the landscaping and screening obligations
set forth in this division (F)(3).



   (G)   Fire damage. Any above-ground service facility that
spontaneously combusts, explodes or otherwise becomes set afire for any
reason shall not be removed from its location until such time as the village,
the Fire Protection District or their designee can investigate the cause
thereof and develop regulatory regulations for minimizing the risk in the
future.



(Ord. 2008-10-49, passed 10-6-2008)



ARTICLE 6:  ZONING DISTRICTS



Section



   16-6-1   Zoning districts



   16-6-2   Zoning District Map and boundaries of districts



   16-6-3   Zoning of annexed land



§ 16-6-1  ZONING DISTRICTS.



   For the purpose and provisions herein, the village is hereby organized
into the following districts.



   (A)   Floodplain District.



      (1)   F-1 - Floodways; and



      (2)   F-2 - Flood Fringes.



   (B)   Residence District.



      (1)   R-1 - One-Family Residence District;



      (2)   R-2 - One-Family Residence District;



      (3)   R-3 - One-Family Residence District; and



      (4)   R-4 - General Residence District.



   (C)   Business District.



      (1)   B-1 - Local Business District;



      (2)   B-2 - General Business District;



      (3)   B-3 - Service District; and



      (4)   B-4 - Office, Research and Institutional Building
District.



   (D)   Industrial District. I - Industrial District.



   (E)   Agricultural District. A - Agricultural District.



§ 16-6-2  ZONING DISTRICT MAP AND BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Zoning District Map. The districts and their boundaries are as
shown upon a zoning district map entitled “Official Zoning Map of Carol
Stream, Illinois”, dated May, 1974 and revised 3-17-1975, which map and all
amendments thereto and all notations, references, and other information shown
thereon are hereby incorporated and made a part of this chapter, with the
same force and effect as if such Zoning District Map, amendments, notations,
references and other information were fully herein set forth. The original
Zoning District Map, properly attested to, shall be kept on file with the
Village Clerk.



   (B)   District boundaries. When uncertainty exists with respect to
the boundaries of the various districts shown on the zoning map and made a
part of this  chapter, the following rules shall apply.



      (1)   District boundary lines shall be on the lines of
railroads, highways, streets or easements or the boundary lines of sections,
quarter sections, divisions of sections, tracts or lots, or such lines
extended unless otherwise indicated.



      (2)   In areas not subdivided into lots and blocks, whenever a
district is indicated as a strip adjacent and parallel to a street or
highway, the depth of such strips shall be in accordance with the dimensions
shown on the maps measured at right angles from the centerline of the street
or highway, and the length of frontage shall be in accordance with dimensions
shown on the maps from sections, quarter sections or division lines in
centerlines of streets, highways or railroad rights-of-way unless otherwise
indicated.



      (3)   Where a lot held in one ownership and of record on the
effective date of this chapter is divided by a district boundary line, the
entire lot shall be construed to be within the less restricted district;
provided that, this shall not apply if it increases the frontage of the lot
by more than 25 feet required in the less restricted district.



      (4)   Floodplain boundaries on the zoning map are
approximations of the floodway map prepared by the Federal Insurance
Administration and contained within Ch. 6, Art. 9, and Ch. 7, Art. 7, of the
village Code of Ordinances, flood prone areas. Floodplain limits as shown on
the above map shall be controlling in determining the area included in the
floodplain on the Zoning District Map for the village



   (C)   Zoning of streets, easements, public ways, waterways and
railroad rights-of-way. All streets, easements, public ways, waterways and
railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be
deemed to be in the same zone as the property immediately abutting upon such
streets, easements, public ways, waterways and railroad rights-of-way. Where
any of the above rights-of-way serve as district boundaries, the zoning of
such areas, unless otherwise designated, shall be deemed to be the same as
that of the abutting property up to such centerline.



§ 16-6-3  ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND.



   (A)   Any area hereafter annexed to the village shall, upon such
annexation, be automatically zoned R-1, being defined as the highest
restricted use zone within this chapter, unless such property has been
otherwise zoned after preannexation zoning hearing as provided in division
(B) of this section.



   (B)   Any property owner desiring annexation to the village
contingent upon obtaining a zoning classification other than the R-1 and/or a
special use permit, shall submit an annexation petition to the Village Board
conditioning such annexation on obtaining the stipulated zoning change and/or
the special use permit. Upon payment of the required fee by the property
owner, the Village Board shall refer the petition to the Plan Commission for
public hearing. Thereafter, the same procedure shall be followed as in other
hearings requesting a change in zoning districts or the granting of a special
use permit. If the Village Board does not approve the stipulated zoning
change and/or special use permit, or does not agree to execute an annexation
agreement with the owner, then the owner may withdraw the petition to annex,
but shall not receive a refund of any fees paid to the village.



ARTICLE 7:  FLOODWAYS AND FLOOD FRINGE AREAS



Section



   16-7-1   F-1 Floodways



   16-7-2   F-2 Flood Fringes



Cross-reference:



   Flood prone areas, see Ch. 6, Art. 9



   Storm water detention, see Ch. 7, Art. 9



   Subdivisions, see Ch. 7, Art. 7



§ 16-7-1  F-1 FLOODWAYS.



   Floodway areas have been established on the zoning map as such areas as
will be subject to substantial flooding as a result of the flood having a
100-year recurrence interval. The subdivision of such floodways and the
development of structures and uses within such floodways are governed by Ch.
6, Art. 9, and Ch. 7, Art. 7, of the village code of ordinances. These
provisions contain numerous regulations affecting the subdivision and
development within floodways. Because a buyer or user or prospective buyer or
user of property frequently consults the Zoning Code of a municipality prior
to taking any action regarding that land, the corporate authorities have
determined that the areas designated as F-1 floodways, although principally
regulated by the provisions contained in ordinances other than the Zoning
Code should, nonetheless, be established as zoning districts under this
Zoning Code. The subdivision, development or use of property within an F-1
zone may only take place in accordance with the provisions of the other
zoning category attributable to that land (for example R-1, B-1 and the like)
and such other regulations contained within the Zoning Code and the other
ordinances of the village regarding areas designated as floodways.



§ 16-7-2  F-2 FLOOD FRINGES.



   Flood fringe areas have been established on the zoning map as such
areas as will be subject to substantial flooding as a result of the flood
having a 100-year recurrence interval. The subdivision of such flood fringes
and the development of structures and uses within such flood fringes are
governed by Ch. 6, Art. 9, and Ch. 7, Art. 7, of the village code of
ordinances. These provisions contain numerous regulations affecting the
subdivision and development within flood fringes. Because a buyer or user or
prospective buyer or user of property frequently consults the Zoning Code of
a municipality prior to taking any action regarding the land, the corporate
authorities have determined that the areas designated as F-2 Flood Fringes,
although principally regulated by the provisions contained in ordinances
other than the Zoning Code should, nonetheless, be established as zoning
districts under this Zoning Code. The subdivision, development or use of
property within an F-2 zone may only take place in accordance with the
provisions of the other zoning category attributable to that land (for
example R-1, B-1 and the like) and such other regulations contained within
the Zoning Code and the other ordinances of the village regarding areas
designated as flood fringes.



ARTICLE 8:  RESIDENCE DISTRICT



Section



   16-8-1   General requirements



   16-8-2   R-1 One-Family Residence District



   16-8-3   R-2 One-Family Residence District



   16-8-4   R-3 One-Family Residence District



   16-8-5   R-4 General Residence District



§ 16-8-1  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The residence districts set forth herein are established in
order to protect public health and promote public safety, convenience,
comfort, morals and welfare. These general goals include, among others, the
following specific purposes:



      (1)   To protect residential areas against fire, explosion,
noxious fumes, offensive noise, smoke, vibrations, dust, odors, heat, glare
and other objectionable factors;



      (2)   To protect residential areas to the extent possible and
appropriate against unduly heavy motor vehicle traffic, especially through
traffic, by alleviating congestion and promoting off-street parking;



      (3)   To protect residential areas against undue congestion of
public streets and other public facilities by controlling the density of
population through regulation of the bulk of the buildings;



      (4)   To protect and promote the public health and comfort by
providing for ample light and air to buildings and the windows thereof;



      (5)   To promote public comfort and welfare by providing for
usable open space on the same zoning lot with residential development;



      (6)   To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations to
meet the probable need for future residential expansions, and to meet the
need for necessary and desirable services in the vicinity of residences which
increase safety and amenity for residents and which do not exert
objectionable influences; and



      (7)   To promote the best use and development of residential
land in accordance with a comprehensive land use plan, to promote stability
of residential developments and to protect the character and value of land
and improvements and so strengthen the economic base of the Village of Carol
Stream.



   (B)   In the various residence districts indicated on the Official
Zoning Map, no land shall be used and no building or structure shall be
erected or altered, nor used or intended to be used, in whole or in part, for
any other use than one or more of the uses designated in this article as a
permitted use or special use and under conditions specified in the residence
district in which the land, building or structure is or shall be located,
with the exception of uses lawfully established on the effective date of this
chapter; provided that, such uses, buildings or structures rendered
nonconforming by this chapter shall be subject to the regulations of Ch. 16,
Art. 14, "Nonconforming Lots, Buildings, Structures and Uses".



   (C)   General district standards.  Uses of all structures in the
residence districts are subject to the general standards and regulations of
this chapter. In addition, all uses located in the residence districts shall
be subject to the following district standards.



      (1)   Accessory buildings, structures and uses. All buildings,
structures and uses shall conform to the applicable requirements for
accessory buildings, structures and uses as set forth in § 16-12-1.



      (2)   Landscaping. All lot and parkway areas not covered with
buildings, parking lots, drives or sidewalks shall be covered with turf,
plant material or other permanent forms of landscaping, which shall be
maintained.



      (3)   Multi-family or non-residential uses. Required yards
adjoining streets may be occupied by sidewalks, lighting standards, flag
poles, landscaping, vehicular directional and traffic control signs and
similar facilities.



      (4)   Off-street parking and loading. All uses shall conform
to the applicable requirements for off-street parking and loading as set
forth in Art. 13 of this chapter.



(Ord. 2011-10-34, passed 10-3-2011)



§ 16-8-2  R-1 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The R-1 One-Family Residence District is established
to encourage the orderly transition of land from agricultural to low density
residential use, to provide areas well suited as to location and topography,
to meet the market demands for large lots, and to prohibit any uses which are
incompatible. The principal use of land is for single dwellings on large
lots. Since the Floodplain District and Agricultural District are established
due to particular soil or environmental characteristics, this R-1 Zone shall
be considered the highest restrictive use under the provisions of this
chapter.



   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted:



      (1)   One-family detached dwellings and permitted accessory
uses;



      (2)   Parks and forest preserves when publicly owned and
operated;



      (3)   Allowable home occupations;



      (4)   Family community residence; provided:



         (a)   They have obtained a required state license or
certification or the operator has received licensing or certification
required by the state to operate community residences;



         (b)   They are located not less than 1,000 feet from any
existing community residence as measured from lot line to lot line;



         (c)   Prior to occupancy, a certificate of zoning
compliance is applied for and received; and



         (d)   The home shall conform to the type and outward 
appearance of the residences in the area in which it is located.



      (5)   Temporary permitted use:  carnival, in compliance with
§ 10-2-12.



   (C)   Special uses.



      (1)   Purpose. One of the principal objectives of this Zoning
Code is to provide for a compatible arrangement of uses of land and
buildings, consistent with the requirements and welfare of the village. To
accomplish this objective, most types and kinds of uses are classified as
permitted in one or more of the Districts establish by this Zoning Code. The
uses set forth in this article, however, because of their unique
characteristics, only can be located properly in some district or districts
upon consideration in each case of the impact of such a use upon neighboring
land and of the public need for such a use at the particular location. Such
uses, hereby designated as special uses, fall into two categories:



         (a)   Uses either municipally operated, or operated by
regulated public utilities or uses traditionally affected with a public
interest; and



         (b)   Uses entirely private in character but of such 
an unusual nature that their operation may give rise to unique problems with
respect to their  impact upon neighboring property or public facilities.



      (2)   Special uses. The following uses may be allowed by
special use permit in accordance with the provisions of § 16-15-8.



         (a)   Athletic or swimming facility (public, private or
non-profit);



         (b)   Churches and other places of worship, including
accessory uses such as convents, rectories, residences for church personnel,
day care and pre-school;



         (c)   Golf courses, regulation size or “par 3”,
including ancillary uses normally provided, such as restaurants including the
sale of alcoholic beverages, residential uses for guests, manager and other
employees, but not including commercially operated driving ranges or
miniature golf courses; and, provided that, no clubhouse or accessory
buildings shall be located nearer than 500 feet to any dwelling on another
zoning lot;



         (d)   Growing of farm, garden and plant nursery crops in
the open on more than 30% of the lot; provided that, no livestock or poultry
are kept, and no offensive odors or dust are created; and, further provided
that, no retail sales are conducted from a store or stand erected or
maintained on the premises;



         (e)   Planned unit developments according to the
requirements of Art. 16 of this Zoning Code;



         (f)   Private recreational areas when not operated for
profit;



         (g)   Public uses, police and fire stations, libraries,
telephone exchanges, sewage lift stations, electric substations and other
similar public service or governmental uses;



         (h)   Railroad rights-of-way and trackage where now
existing, but not including reclassification yards, terminal facilities or
maintenance facilities;



         (i)   Schools, public, denominational or private,
elementary and high, including accessory uses such as, or similar to,
pre-school, day care centers, early learning centers, playgrounds and
athletic fields auxiliary thereto;



         (j)   Community center, which provides a range of social
services such as counseling, recreation, day care, adult education and
religious programs;



         (k)   Family community residences and group community
residences occupied by up to ten persons with disabilities plus support
staff, located less than 1,000 feet from any existing community residence, or
for which the state does not require a license or certification; provided:



            1.   The Village President and Board of Trustees
find that the cumulative effect of such uses would not alter the residential
character of the neighborhood, would not create an institutional setting, and
its operation would not create an adverse effect on surrounding properties;



            2.   They have obtained a required state license
or certification or the operator has received licensing or certification
required by the state to operate community residences; and



            3.   Prior to occupancy, a certificate of zoning
compliance is applied for and received.



         (l)   Group community residences are subject to the
following conditions.



            1.   No such home shall be located less than 1,000
feet from any existing community residence as measured from lot line to lot
line; provided, however, that, this spacing requirement may be waived if the
Village President and Board of Trustees find that the cumulative effect of
such uses would not alter the residential character of the neighborhood,
would not create an institutional setting, and by its operation would not
create an adverse effect on surrounding properties.



            2.   If the state requires a license or
certification for the proposed community residence, the community residence
has obtained the required state license or certification, or the operator has
received licensing or certification required by the state to operate
community residences.



            3.   Applicant shall submit a statement of the
exact nature of the home, the qualifications of the agency that will operate
the home, the number and type of personnel who will be employed, and the
number and nature of the residents who will live in the home.



            4.   The home shall to the extent possible,
conform  to the type and outward appearances of the residences in the area
in which it is located.



            5.   Prior to occupancy, a certificate of zoning
compliance is applied for and received.



         (m)   Holiday or seasonal exhibition, show or sales.



            1.   The Village Board, in granting a special use,
shall establish the period during which the special use may take place and
its maximum hours of operation.



            2.   Except for vehicular parking, no portion of
an exhibition, show or sale which takes place in whole or in part outdoors
shall be located nearer than 50 feet from the nearest lot line of a lot in a
residential use.



            3.   No exhibition, show or sale which takes place
in whole or in part outdoors shall, without written authorization from the
office of the Director of Community Development, place its facilities upon
any required paved parking areas. Required paved parking spaces shall mean
the minimum number of parking spaces required to be provided for the
principal use.



            4.   No holiday or seasonal exhibition, show or
sale which is scheduled to last more than one day shall be granted a special
use until the Chief of Police shall approve a parking plan submitted by the
applicant. The Chief of Police shall review the plan to make certain that
adequate pro-vision has been made for the safe ingress and egress of vehicles
to the site and to and from parking areas, the marking of parking areas and
maneuvering lanes and lighting for evening events.



         (n)   Special offices such as lawyers, doctors,
dentists, accountants, insurance agents or other similar professional office
type facilities only in existing structures which were formerly used as
churches or schools and whose property abuts or is directly across the street
from a business or industrial zoning district; and, provided that, the uses
possesses adequate off-street parking in accordance with this Zoning Code.



   (D)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking and loading shall be
provided as required or permitted in Art. 13 of this Zoning Code.



   (E)   Minimum lot size.



      (1)   Every one-family detached dwelling shall be located on a
lot having an area of not less than 20,000 square feet, and a width at the
established building line of not less than 100 feet.



      (2)   All non-residential permitted or special uses of
buildings as permitted herein shall be located on a tract of land having an
area of not less than 20,000 square feet with a minimum width of 100 feet at
the building line.



      (3)   Minimum lot sizes for residential special uses shall be
prescribed and conditions stipulated at the time a special use permit is
authorized as provided in § 16-15-8.



   (F)   Yard areas. No building shall be erected or enlarged unless
the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with such
building structures or enlargements.



      (1)   Front yard: there shall be provided a front yard of not
less than 40 feet in depth.



      (2)   Side yards: an interior side yard on each side of the
principal structure of not less than ten feet; where a side yard adjoins a
street, the minimum width of such yard shall be not less than 25 feet. On
lots upon which a non-residential use is erected or enlarged, there shall be
an interior side yard of not less than 15 feet; where a side yard adjoins a
street, the minimum width of such yard shall be not less than 25 feet.



      (3)   Rear yard: a rear yard depth of not less than 30 feet.



      (4)   Detached accessory buildings and permitted obstructions:
refer to Art. 12 of this Zoning Code.



   (G)   Maximum lot coverage. Not more than 30% of an individual
single-family lot may be occupied by buildings and structures, including
accessory buildings except when structural coverage includes lot area covered
by a swimming pool or by a deck which allows water to penetrate into the
ground underneath the deck and where the area underneath the deck is covered
with agricultural paper, cloth or other pervious sheeting in which case only
the area of the swimming pool or deck shall be permitted to exceed 30% of the
lot area up to a maximum of 35% of the lot area.



   (H)   Building height. No building shall exceed a height of 35 feet.



   (I)   Minimum floor area per dwelling. Each dwelling shall provided
a minimum of 1,500 square feet of floor area.



   (J)   Patio door. A patio door on the side of a building at any
floor level is prohibited unless there is ten feet between the building and
the required side yard.



(Ord. 90-09-86, passed 9-25-1990; Ord. 90-11-94, passed 11-13-1990; Ord.
92-08-91, passed 8-11-1992; Ord. 94-05-46, passed 5-24-1994; Ord. 99-12-64,
passed 12-6-1999; Ord. 2011-10-34, passed 10-3-2011)



§ 16-8-3  R-2 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The R-2 One-Family Residence District is established
to provide low density areas in which the principal use of land is for
single-family dwellings.



   (B)   Permitted uses. Any use permitted in the R-1 One-Family
Residence District.



   (C)   Special uses. The following uses may be allowed by special use
permit in accordance with the provisions of Art. 15 of this Zoning Code.



      (1)   As in the R-1 District, plus;



      (2)   Cemeteries, including crematories and mausoleums in
conjunction therewith; and



      (3)   Colleges and universities, including dormitories,
fraternities, sororities and other accessory buildings necessary for
operation, but not including business colleges or trade schools when operated
for profit.



   (D)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking and loading facilities
shall be provided as required or permitted in Art. 13 of this Zoning Code.



   (E)   Minimum lot size.



      (1)   Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected
shall be located on a lot having an area of not less than 15,000 square feet,
and a width at the established building line of not less than 80 feet.



      (2)   All non-residential permitted or special uses as allowed
of buildings as permitted herein shall be located on a tract of land having
an area of not less than 15,000 square feet with a minimum width at the
building line of not less than 80 feet.



      (3)   Minimum lot sizes for special uses shall be prescribed
and conditions imposed at the time a special use permit is authorized, as
provided in § 16-15-8.



   (F)   Yard areas. No buildings shall be erected or enlarged unless
the following yards are provided and maintained.



      (1)   Front yard: there shall be provided a front yard of not
less than 40 feet in depth.



      (2)   Side yards: an interior side yard on each side of the
principal structure of not less than eight feet; where a side yard adjoins a
street, the minimum width of such yard shall be not less than 25 feet. On
lots upon which a non-residential use is erected or enlarged, there shall be
an interior side yard of not less than 15 feet; where a side yard adjoins a
street, the minimum width of such yard shall be not less than 25 feet.



      (3)   Rear yard: a rear yard of not less than 30 feet.



      (4)   Detached accessory buildings and permitted obstructions.
Refer to Art. 12 of this Zoning Code for location of accessory buildings and
structures and permitted obstructions in the required yard areas.



   (G)   Maximum lot coverage. Not more than 30% of the lot area may be
occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory buildings, except
when structural coverage includes lot area covered by a swimming pool or by a
deck which allows water to penetrate into the ground underneath the deck and
where the area underneath the deck is covered with agricultural paper, cloth
or other pervious sheeting in which case only the area of the swimming pool
or deck shall be permitted to exceed 30% of the lot area up to a maximum of
35% of the lot area.



   (H)   Building height. No building shall exceed a height of 35 feet.



   (I)   Minimum floor area per dwelling. Each dwelling shall provide
the following minimum floor area:



      (1)   Three-bedroom or less dwellings:  1,250 square feet;



      (2)   Four-bedroom dwellings:  1,400 square feet; and



      (3)   Rooms designated as a den, study, library or similar use
shall be counted as a bedroom in computing the minimum floor area.



   (J)   Patio door. A patio door on the side of a building at any
floor level is prohibited unless there is ten feet between the building and
the required side yard.



(Ord. 99-12-64, passed 12-6-1999; Ord. 2011-10-34, passed 10-3-2011)



§ 16-8-4  R-3 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The R-3 One-Family Residence District is established
to provide areas of higher density than the R-1 and R-2 One-Family Residence
Districts.



   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted:  any use
permitted in the R-1 and R-2 One-Family Residence Districts.



   (C)   Special uses. The following uses may be allowed by special use
permit in accordance with the provisions of § 16-15-8: as in the R-1 and R-2
Residence Districts.



   (D)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking and loading facilities
shall be provided as required or permitted in Art. 13 of this Zoning Code.



   (E)   Minimum lot size.



      (1)   Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected
shall be located on a lot having an area of not less than 10,000 square feet
and a width at the established building line of not less than 75 feet.



      (2)   All non-residential permitted or special uses of
buildings as permitted herein shall be located on a tract of land having an
area of not less than 10,000 square feet and a width at the established
building line of not less than 75 feet.



      (3)   Minimum lot sizes for special uses prescribed and
conditions imposed at the time a special use permit is authorized, as
provided in § 16-15-8.



   (F)   Yard areas. No building shall be erected or enlarged unless
the following yards are provided and maintained.



      (1)   Front yard: there shall be provided a front yard of not
less than 25 feet in depth unless 75% of the lots on a block have existing
structures, in which case the front yard shall be determined as the average
depth of all front yards of existing structures.



      (2)   Side yards: an interior side yard on each side of the
principal structure of not less than seven and one-half feet; where a side
yard adjoins a street, the minimum width of such yard shall be not less than
25 feet. On lots upon which a non-residential use is erected or enlarged,
there shall be an interior side yard of not less than 15 feet; where a side
yard adjoins a street, the minimum width of such yard shall be not less than
25 feet.



      (3)   Rear yards: a rear yard of not less than 30 feet.



      (4)   Detached accessory buildings and permitted obstructions:
refer to Art. 12 of this Zoning Code for location of accessory buildings and
structures and permitted obstructions in the required yard areas.



   (G)   Maximum lot coverage. Not more than 30% of the lot area may be
occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory buildings, except
when structural coverage includes lot area covered by a swimming pool or by a
deck which allows water to penetrate into the ground underneath the deck and
where the area underneath the deck is covered with agricultural paper, cloth
or other pervious sheeting in which case only the area of the swimming pool
or deck shall be permitted to exceed 30% of the lot area up to a maximum of
35% of the lot area.



   (H)   Building height. No building shall exceed a height of 35 feet.



   (I)   Minimum floor area per dwelling. Each dwelling shall provide
the following minimum floor area:



      (1)   Three or less bedroom dwellings:  1,000 square feet;



      (2)   Four or more bedroom dwellings:  1,150 square feet; and



      (3)   Rooms designated as a den, study, library or similar use
shall be counted as a bedroom in computing the minimum floor area.



   (J)   Patio door. A patio door on the side of a building at any
floor level is prohibited unless there is ten feet between the building and
the required side yard.



(Ord. 99-12-64, passed 12-6-1999; Ord. 2011-10-34, passed 10-3-2011)



§ 16-8-5  R-4 GENERAL RESIDENCE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The R-4 General Residence District is established as
a general residence district to provide for a wider variety of dwelling
accommodations with a higher density of dwelling units; to provide for
multiple-family dwellings with adequate open space for family living.



   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted:



      (1)   One-family detached dwellings  and permitted accessory
uses;



      (2)   One-family  attached  dwellings  and  permitted
accessory uses;



      (3)   Multiple-family dwellings (manor homes, apartments and
the like);



      (4)   Family community residences, provided:



         (a)   They have obtained a required state license or
certification or the operator has received licensing or certification by the
state to operate community residences;



         (b)   They are located not less than 1,000 feet from any
existing community residence as measured from lot line to lot line; provided,
however, that up to two such homes may be located on the same zoning lot; and



         (c)   Prior to occupancy, a certificate of zoning
compliance is applied for and received;



      (5)   Nursing homes;



      (6)   Residential care homes of up to ten persons; and



      (7)   Temporary permitted use: carnival, in compliance with §
10-2-12.



   (C)   Special uses. The following uses may be allowed by special use
permit in accordance with the provisions of the Art. 15 of this Zoning Code:



      (1)   Any use permitted as a special use in the R-1 or R-3
Districts;



      (2)   Boarding house, lodging house or rooming house;



      (3)   Housing for the elderly and convalescent homes;



      (4)   In a planned unit development, those residential uses
permitted under the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts in accordance with the
regulations set forth relating to those districts, except as such regulations
may be modified according to the requirements of this code; and



      (5)   Day care centers, pre-school learning centers and
nursery schools.



         (a)   One parking space shall be provided for each
employee. The Plan Commission may recommend and the Village Board may require
the provision of a loading zone.



         (b)   All facilities shall have a fenced-in yard area
for outside play activities, which includes a fence of no greater than five
feet in height or as permitted by the Fence Code (Ch. 6, Art. 12).



         (c)   Signage shall be limited to ten square feet within
this district.



   (D)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking and loading facilities
shall be provided as required or permitted in Art. 13 of this Zoning Code.



   (E)   Minimum lot size.


Lot area per dwelling unit (sq. ft.) 20,000 10,000 7,500 4,500 4,300 
 


 
Land Area per Dwelling Unit in Square Feet
(Density in Units per Acre)


Bedrooms
 
Single- Family
 
Two- Family
 
Multiple Single- Family
 
Multi- Family


4 or more
 
10,000

(4.356)
 
10,000

(4.356)
 
5,400

(8.067)
 
5,400

(8.067)


3
 
10,000

(4.356)
 
10,000

(4.356)
 
4,500

(9.680)
 
4,800

(9.075)


1, 2 and efficiency
 
10,000

(4.356)
 
10,000

(4.356)
 
4,150

(10.496)
 
4,300

(10.130)


NOTES TO TABLE:

(1) The lot size for single-family units is calculated as the platted lot,
which excludes rights-of-way and common open space.

(2) The lot size for two-family units is calculated as the platted lot for
the two dwelling units, which excludes rights-of-way and common open space.

(3) The lot size for multiple single-family units is calculated as the area
of the project including open space, but excluding public and private roads
and rights-of-way.

(4) The lot size for multiple-family units is calculated as the area of the
project including open space, but excluding public and private roads and
rights-of-way.

(5) Minimum lot sizes for special uses shall be prescribed and conditions
stipulated at the time a special use permit is authorized, as provided for in
§ 16-15-8.



 



   (F)   Minimum floor area per dwelling unit. Each dwelling unit shall
provide the following minimum floor area. Measurements are exclusive of
common halls and stairways or other common areas for the multiple-family
dwellings.



 

Bedrooms
 
Single- Family
 
Two- Family
 
Multiple Single- Family
 
Multi- Family


2
 
1,000
 
1,000
 
1,000
 
900


3
 
1,000
 
1,000
 
1,000
 
1,000


4 or more
 
1,150
 
1,150
 
1,150
 
1,150


NOTE TO TABLE:

Rooms designated as a den, study, library or similar use shall be counted as
a bedroom in computing the minimum floor area.



 



   (G)   Yard areas. No building shall be erected or enlarged unless
the following yards are provided and maintained.



      (1)   Front yard: there shall be provided a front yard of not
less than 40 feet, plus one foot for each one foot by which the building
height exceeds 25 feet.



      (2)   Side yards: in the R-4 General Residence District, the
minimum interior side yard requirements for permitted uses shall be not less
than those itemized below.



         (a)   For single-family and two-family dwellings, there
shall be a side yard on each side of each building of ten feet.



         (b)   For row buildings containing three or four units
there shall be a side yard on each side of each building of 12-1/2 feet.



         (c)   For buildings containing more than four units,
there shall be a side yard on each side of the building of 15 feet, plus five
additional feet for each additional story above two stories in height.



         (d)   For special uses, the interior side yards shall be
as specified in the special use permit, but in no case shall the interior
side yards be less than 15 feet on each side of the building, plus one foot
for each two feet by which the building height exceeds 15 feet.



         (e)   Minimum corner side yard: in an R-4 General
Residence District, the minimum corner side yard requirements for permitted
uses shall be not less than those itemized below:



            1.   For buildings containing two or more dwelling
units: 25 feet;



            2.   No accessory building on a reversed corner
lot shall project beyond the front yard required on the adjacent lot to the
rear, nor be located nearer than ten feet to the side lot line of such
adjacent lot;



            3.   For permitted non-residential uses: 25 feet
plus one foot for each two feet by which the building height exceeds 15 feet;
and



            4.   For special uses, corner side yards shall be
as specified in the special use permit, but in no case shall such side yard
be less than 25 feet, plus one foot for each two feet by which the building
height exceeds 15 feet.



      (3)   Rear yard: there shall be a rear yard of not less than
30 feet. However, there shall be a rear yard of not less than 40 feet around
the perimeter of all different land uses (single-family, two-family, multiple
single-family, multiple-family, commercial and industrial) or when the lot
abuts an arterial street.



   (H)   Maximum lot coverage.



      (1)   For single-family, two-family or multiple single-family
dwellings, not more than 30% of the lot area may be covered by buildings and
structures, including accessory buildings or uses except when structural
coverage includes lot area covered by a swimming pool or by a deck which
allows water to penetrate into the ground underneath the deck and where the
area underneath the deck is covered with agricultural paper, cloth or other
pervious sheeting in which case only the area of the swimming pool or deck
shall be permitted to exceed 30% of the lot area up to a maximum of 35% of
the lot area.



      (2)   For multi-family dwellings, a combination of building
and pavement coverage shall not exceed 50% of the net lot area, including,
but not limited to, roads, sidewalks, parking lots.



   (I)   Patio door. A patio door on the side of a building at any
floor level is prohibited unless there is ten feet between the building and
the required side yard.



(Ord. 90-09-86, passed 9-25-1990; Ord. 99-12-64, passed 12-6-1999; Ord.
2011-10-34, passed 10-3-2011)



ARTICLE 9:  BUSINESS DISTRICT



Section



   16-9-1   General requirements



   16-9-2   B-1 Local Retail District



   16-9-3   B-2 General Retail District



   16-9-4   B-3 Service District



   16-9-5   B-4 Office, Research and Institutional Building District



§ 16-9-1  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Business district regulations govern the development and use
of the full range of business and commercial establishments needed to provide
service to the citizens of the village and its trading area. Regulations in
the various business districts provide for the groupings of compatible
business and commercial establishments in accordance with their function and
extent of services.



   (B)   In the various business districts indicated on the Official
Zoning Map, no land shall be used and no building or structure shall be
erected or altered, and used or intended to be used, in whole or in part, for
any other use than one or more of the uses designated hereinafter as a
permitted use or special permitted use and under conditions specified in the
business district in which the land, building or structure is or shall be
located, except a use lawfully established on the effective date of this
chapter; provided that, such uses, buildings or structures rendered
nonconforming by this chapter shall be subject to regulations herein.



   (C)   All business, service, storage, merchandise, display and where
permitted, repair and processing, shall be conducted wholly within an
enclosed building, except where they may otherwise be permitted to operate
under this chapter.



   (D)   Processes and equipment employed, and goods processed or sold,
shall be limited to those which are not objectionable by reason of odor,
dust, smoke, cinders, gas, noise, vibration, refuse matter or water-carried
waste, and such that they do not conflict with performance standards as
herein set forth in the industrial district regulations.



   (E)   All establishments shall be for trade and service at retail
directly to consumers, and all goods produced or serviced on the premises
shall be sold or serviced at retail, except for specific uses where wholesale
sales or processing and fabricating of goods, materials and products for
general distribution are permitted.



   (F)   Required yards adjoining streets may be occupied by drives,
off-street parking spaces, sidewalks, lighting standards, flag poles,
landscaping, vehicular directional and traffic control signs and similar
facilities, provided off-street parking spaces shall be in accordance with
the regulations as set forth in Art. 13 of this Zoning Code.



   (G)   All lot and parkway areas not covered with buildings, parking
lots, drives or sidewalks shall be covered with turf, plant material or other
permanent forms of landscaping, which shall be maintained.



(Ord. 2011-10-34, passed 10-3-2011)



§ 16-9-2  B-1 LOCAL RETAIL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose. The B-1 Local Business District, as herein
established, is designed to meet the day to day convenience shopping and
service needs of persons residing in adjacent residential areas.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Barbershops;



      (2)   Beauty parlors;



      (3)   Book and stationery stores;



      (4)   Clothes pressing establishments;



      (5)   Drugstores;



      (6)   Dry cleaning and laundry receiving stations; with or
without on-site processing;



      (7)   Florist shops;



      (8)   Convenience food markets, meat markets, bakeries and
delicatessens;



      (9)   Gift shops;



      (10)   Launderettes, automatic self-service types or hand;



      (11)   Millinery shops;



      (12)   Shoe repair stores;



      (13)   Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a
period not to exceed the duration of such construction;



      (14)   Variety stores;



      (15)   Accessory use;



      (16)   Package liquor stores (class C license);



      (17)   Temporary permitted use: carnival, in compliance with
§ 10-2-12; and



      (18)   Temporary outdoor demonstrations and exhibitions of
merchandise, to be located on the same zoning lot, and in conjunction with
the permanent use found on the lot, and those permitted uses under the
definition of an open sales lot (see Art. 18 of this Zoning Code); such
display or sale shall be for a maximum of ten days and no more than twice
during any calendar year.



      (19)   Outdoor storage, display and sale of propane tanks,
provided such use is accessory to the principal permitted use on the zoning
lot, and subject to the following performance standards:



         (a)   The propane tank storage facility shall be located
immediately adjacent to the principal building or structure, and shall be
limited to a maximum of 20 square feet in ground area.



         (b)   The location on site and appearance shall be
subject to review and approval by the Community Development Director, or his
or her designee, in order to minimize the visual impact of the propane cages
from the public right-of-way.



         (c)   The placement of a propane cage on a sidewalk
shall comply with the Illinois Accessibility Code.



         (d)   Signage advertising the propane shall be located
on the propane cage only.



         (e)   The propane facility shall comply with all
applicable codes and regulations as determined by the Community Development
Department and the Carol Stream Fire Protection District.



      (20)   Limited outdoor seating, subject to the following
performance standards and approval by the Community Development Director, or
his or her designee:



         (a)   Outdoor service or consumption of alcohol is
prohibited.



         (b)   Seating area shall be ancillary to a restaurant or
food service business.



         (c)   Seating area shall only be located on a paved
pedestrian access area, sidewalk or other hard-surfaced area adjacent to the
tenant space.



         (d)   The seating area must be located outside of the
required setbacks, parking spaces and landscape islands.



   (C)   Special uses.



      (1)   Planned unit development according to the requirements
of this code;



      (2)   Electric or telephone substations and utility service
uses;



      (3)   Governmental uses;



      (4)   Day care center, pre-school learning center and nursery
school; and



      (5)   Shopping plazas.



   (D)   Floor area ratio. Not to exceed 0.6.



   (E)   Lot area. The net land area for each business establishment
shall not be less than 2,500 square feet.



   (F)   Off-street parking and off-street loading. In accordance with
regulations as set forth in Art. 13 of this Zoning Code.



   (G)   Yards.



      (1)   Front yards: not less than 80 feet in depth.



      (2)   Side yards.



         (a)   Interior lots.



            1.   Interior side yards shall not be required,
unless the lot is adjacent to a residential property.



            2.   If a lot is adjacent to a residential
property, a 20-foot side yard is required, and the yard must be landscaped
and screened in such a manner so as to create an effective buffer between the
business and residential uses. An access drive may occupy up to half of the
required side yard, if screening is provided.



            3.   If a side lot line abuts a public alley, then
the depth of the required side yard may be reduced by an amount equal to
one-half of the right-of-way width of such alley. If such alley is adjacent
to a residential property, screening must be provided.



         (b)   Corner lots. A side yard adjoining a street shall
be in accordance with regulations herein for a front yard.



      (3)   Rear yards: not less than 25 feet in depth. If a lot is
adjacent to a residential property, a 40-foot rear yard is required, and the
yard must be landscaped and screened in such a manner so as to create an
effective buffer between the business and residential uses. If a rear lot
line abuts a public alley, then the depth of the required rear yard may be
reduced by an amount equal to one-half of the right-of-way width of such
alley. If such alley is adjacent to a residential property, screening must be
provided.



(Ord. 92-03-29, passed 3-24-1992; Ord. 93-07-60, passed 7-13-1993; Ord.
93-11-110, passed 11-23-1993; Ord. 2007-04-14, passed 4-16-2007; Ord.
2011-10-34, passed 10-3-2011; Ord. 2014-02-06, passed 2-3-2014; Ord. 2015-
03-02, passed 3-2-2015)



§ 16-9-3  B-2 GENERAL RETAIL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent. The B-2 General Retail District is designed to cater
to the needs of a larger consumer population than is served by the B-1 Local
Retail District.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Uses permitted in a B-1 District;



      (2)   Antique shops;



      (3)   Art and school supply stores;



      (4)   Art galleries;



      (5)   Beauty parlors and barbershops or similar personal
service shops;



      (6)   Bakery shops or shops selling similar commodities where
the commodities may be produced on the premises; but all such production
shall be either sold at retail on the premises or sold in stores owned and
operated by the producing company;



      (7)   Bicycle sales, rental and repairs;



      (8)   Candy and ice cream stores;



      (9)   Camera and photographic supply stores;



      (10)   Carpet and rug stores;



      (11)   China and glassware stores;



      (12)   Clothing and costume rental shops;



      (13)   Coin and philatelic stores;



      (14)   Currency exchanges;



      (15)   Custom dressmaking;



      (16)   Department stores;



      (17)   Dry goods stores;



      (18)   Electric and household appliance  stores;



      (19)   Flower shops with conservatories;



      (20)   Furrier shops, including the incidental storage and
conditioning of furs;



      (21)   Furniture stores, including upholstery when conducted
as part of the retail operation and secondary to the principal use;



      (22)   Haberdashery;



      (23)   Hobby shops and retail of items to be assembled or used
away from the premises;



      (24)   Interior decorating shops, including upholstery and
making of draperies, slip covers and other similar articles, when conducted
as part of the retail operations and secondary to the principal use;



      (25)   Jewelry stores, including watch repair;



      (26)   Job printing shops;



      (27)   Leather goods and luggage stores;



      (28)   Libraries and reading rooms;



      (29)   Locksmith shops;



      (30)   Musical instruments, sales and repairs;



      (31)   Office equipment sales and service;



      (32)   Office supply stores;



      (33)   Optometrists;



      (34)   Paint and wallpaper stores;



      (35)   Pawnshops;



      (36)   Photography studios, including the development of film
and pictures, when conducted as part of the retail business on premises;



      (37)   Physical culture and health service, gymnasiums and
reducing salons, masseurs and public baths;



      (38)   Picture framing when conducted for retail trade on the
premises only;



      (39)   Post offices;



      (40)   Radio and television broadcasting studios;



      (41)   Restricted production and repair, limited to the
following: art, needlework, clothing, custom manufacturing and alterations
for retail only, jewelry from precious metals, watches, dentures and optical
lenses;



      (42)   Sales and display rooms;



      (43)   Schools, music, dance or business;



      (44)   Sewing machine sales and service, household machines
only;



      (45)   Shoe stores;



      (46)   Sporting goods stores;



      (47)   Tailor shops;



      (48)   Temporary outdoor demonstrations and exhibitions of
merchandise, to be located on the same zoning lot, and in conjunction with
the permanent use found on the lot, and those permitted uses under the
definition of an open sales lot (see Art. 18 of this Zoning Code); such
display or sale shall be for a maximum of ten days and no more than twice
during any calendar year;



      (49)   Theaters, except open-air drive-in theaters;



      (50)   Tobacco shops;



      (51)   Toy shops;



      (52)   Offices, businesses and professional buildings of less
than 6,000 square feet;



      (53)   Wearing apparel shops;



      (54)   Veterinary clinics (outpatient, no overnight boarding);



      (55)   Grocery stores;



      (56)   Domestic pet training/obedience school with no
overnight boarding;



      (57)   Domestic pet service;



      (58)   Temporary permitted use: carnival, in compliance with
§ 10-2-12;



      (59)   Restaurants, indoor, sit-down, without a bar area;



      (60)   Restaurants, carry-out; and



      (61)   Auction house, subject to the following performance
standards:



         (a)   Total floor area of business not to exceed 7,500
square feet;



         (b)   Outdoor storage or display of merchandise is
prohibited;



         (c)   Auctions must be conducted completely inside an
enclosed building; and



         (d)   Parking required as set forth in § 16-13-3(D) of
this chapter.



   (C)   Special uses.



      (1)   Those permitted in a B-1 District;



      (2)   Additional building on a lot, such building limited to
no more than 50 square feet of floor area; provided, such building is used
for a general drop-off center, newsstand, photo processing drop-off,
ticketron and other similar uses;



      (3)   Banks and financial institutions;



      (4)   Clubs and lodges, private, fraternal or religious;



      (5)   Hospitals and first-aid stations for the treatment of
emergency cases;



      (6)   Hotels, motels serving transient guests, hotel
apartments;



      (7)   Dyeing and cleaning establishments operated as an
accessory to some other use or uses permitted by this section; provided,
permits for proper combustibles are obtained from the village;



      (8)   Offices, business and professional, of more than 6,000
square feet;



      (9)   Pet supply shops, with ancillary use for the sale of
fish and other small aquatic animals, small mammals and birds (no cats, dogs
or larger domestic animals, nor exotic animals);



      (10)   Taverns;



      (11)   Drive-up service window, ancillary to a permitted or
special use;



      (12)   Game rooms when operated as an accessory use to a
restaurant, tavern, pub or hotel and containing no more than one amusement
device for each 400 square feet of total floor area occupied by the principal
use. In no case shall such accessory game room contain more than 20 amusement
devices;



      (13)   Veterinary clinics with indoor overnight boarding;



      (14)   Shopping plazas;



      (15)   Shopping centers;



      (16)   Restaurants, with bar area;



      (17)   Outdoor seating, ancillary to a restaurant, tavern, or
food service business, including the service and consumption of alcohol, or
otherwise not in conformance with the standards for limited outdoor seating
set forth elsewhere in this chapter;



      (18)   Auction house greater than 7,500 square feet in total
floor area, subject to the following performance standards:



         (a)   Outdoor storage or display of merchandise is
prohibited;



         (b)   Auctions must be conducted completely inside an
enclosed building; and



         (c)   Parking required as set forth in § 16-13-3(D) of
this chapter.



      (19)   Public meeting halls.



   (D)   Floor area ratio. Not to exceed 0.6.



   (E)   Lot area. The net land area for each business establishment
shall be not less than 5,000 square feet.



   (F)   Off-street parking and off-street facilities. In accordance
with applicable regulations as set forth in Art. 13 of this Zoning Code.



   (G)   Yards.



      (1)   Front yard: not less than 80 feet in depth.



      (2)   Side yards.



         (a)   Interior side yards shall not be required, unless
the lot is adjacent to a residential property.



         (b)   If a lot is adjacent to a residential property, a
25-foot side yard is required, and the yard must be landscaped and screened
in such a manner so as to create an effective buffer between the business and
residential uses. An access drive may occupy up to half of the required side
yard, if screening is provided.



         (c)   If a side lot line abuts a public alley, then the
depth of the required side yard may be reduced by an amount equal to one-half
of the right-of-way width of such alley. If such alley is adjacent to a
residential property, screening must be provided.



         (d)   If a side yard adjacent to a residential property
is less than 40 feet in width, a solid wall or solid fence shall be provided
along the property line. Such fence or wall shall be uniformly painted, and
shall comply with the requirements of the village’s Fence Code (Ch. 6, Art.
12).



         (e)   Corner lots. A side yard adjoining a street shall
be in accordance with regulations herein for a front yard.



      (3)   Rear yard: not less than 40 feet in depth. If a lot is
adjacent to a residential property, the yard must be landscaped and screened
in such a manner so as to create an effective buffer between the business and
residential uses. If a rear lot line abuts a public alley, then the depth of
the required rear yard may be reduced by an amount equal to one-half of the
right-of-way width of such alley. If such alley is adjacent to a residential
property, screening must be provided.



(Ord. 90-11-95, passed 11-13-1990; Ord. 92-12-123, passed 12-8-1992; Ord.
92-04-33, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 92-12-123, passed 12-8-1992; Ord. 93-07-60,
passed 7-13-1993; Ord. 94-01-07, passed 1-11-1994; Ord. 95-04-16, passed
4-3-1995; Ord. 2005-08-44, passed 8-1-2005; Ord. 2007-04-14, passed
4-16-2007; Ord. 2008-11-61, passed 11-17-2008; Ord. 2011-10-34, passed
10-3-2011; Ord. 2015-03-02, passed 3-2-2015)



§ 16-9-4  B-3 SERVICE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent. The B-3 Service District is designed to provide sites
for more diversified business types, which, by nature of their use, place a
greater impact on the land and the surrounding uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Uses permitted in the B-1 and B-2 Districts;



      (2)   Animal hospitals;



      (3)   Blueprinting and photocopying establishments;



      (4)   Boat sales;



      (5)   Bowling alleys and structures accommodating recreational
activities;



      (6)   Building material establishments for the sale of
dimension lumber, millwork, cabinets and other building materials; provided
that, no milling, planing, jointing or manufacture of millwork shall be
conducted on the premises;



      (7)   Caskets and casket supplies;



      (8)   Catering establishments;



      (9)   Contractor’s or construction offices, such as
building, concrete, electrical, masonry, painting, plumbing, refrigeration
and roofing;



      (10)   Dog kennels;



      (11)   Exterminating shops;



      (12)   Frozen food stores, including locker rental in
conjunction therewith;



      (13)   Garden supply and feed stores;



      (14)   Greenhouses and/or nurseries; provided, heating plants
for greenhouse operations conform with applicable performance standards for
the Industrial District;



      (15)   Ice storage and sales limited to five tons capacity;



      (16)   Linen, towel, diaper and similar supply services;



      (17)   Machinery sales within a structure;



      (18)   Mail order houses;



      (19)   Meat markets, including the sale of meats and meat
products to restaurants, hotels, clubs or other similar establishments when
conducted as a part of the retail business on the premises;



      (20)   Monument sales;



      (21)   Motor vehicle and equipment sales and service (to
include motorcycles);



      (22)   Municipal or privately owned recreational buildings or
community centers;



      (23)   Orthopedic and medical appliance stores, but not
including the assembly or manufacture of such articles;



      (24)   Pet shops;



      (25)   Plumbing showrooms;



      (26)   Printing and publishing establishments having not more
than 25 employees other than office and building service employees;



      (27)   Service, cleaning or repair shops for personal
household or garden equipment, or where such shops are operated as accessory
uses to other uses permitted by this section;



      (28)   Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors;



      (29)   Accessory use;



      (30)   Grocery stores; and



      (31)   Temporary permitted use: carnival, in compliance with
§ 10-2-12.



   (C)   Special uses.



      (1)   Those special uses permitted in the B-1 and B-2
Districts;



      (2)   Auto laundries;



      (3)   Auto service stations, including minor services
customarily incidental thereto, facilities for chassis and gear lubrication,
and vehicle washing; but not including the sale of vehicles new or used;



      (4)   Storage garages, indoor or outdoor, overnight or more
permanent, for repair and servicing of automobiles and trucks, including body
repair and painting, but not including auto wrecking yards, truck terminals
and motor freight parking areas;



      (5)   Outdoor recreation and amusement establishments
including archery ranges, swimming pools, skating rinks, golf driving ranges,
miniature golf courses, miniature railroads, merry-go-rounds and other
mechanical rides;



      (6)   Open sales lots, ancillary to a permitted or special use;



      (7)   Riding academies and public stables;



      (8)   Taverns;



      (9)   Theaters and automobile drive-in theaters;



      (10)   Trailer sales;



      (11)   Electronic game rooms;



      (12)   Billiards/pool halls;



      (13)   Shopping plazas;



      (14)   Shopping centers;



      (15)   Retail and wholesale sales and display rooms and
distribution facilities;



      (16)   Indoor children’s recreational and party facility;



      (17)   Landscape waste transfer station, provided:



         (a)   The use shall not be located in conjunction with a
greenhouse, landscape nursery, garden supply, landscape contractor or other
such use on the same site.



         (b)   The site shall be located not less than 500 feet
from any existing residential property, as measured from lot line to lot line.



         (c)   The operator shall have obtained all required
permits, licensing and certifications required by the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency to operate a landscape waste transfer station.



         (d)   The use may include accessory uses that are judged
ancillary and customary to the operation of a landscape waste transfer
station, such as outdoor storage of supplies and equipment, onsite equipment
maintenance and repair, and above-ground fuel storage.



      (18)   Automobile and commercial vehicle fueling plaza.



   (D)   Floor area ratio. Not to exceed 0.6.



   (E)   Lot area. The net land for each business establishment shall
be not less than 20,000 square feet.



   (F)   Off-street parking and off-street loading. In accordance with
applicable regulations as set forth in Art. 13 of this Zoning Code.



   (G)   Yards.



      (1)   Front yards: not less than 100 feet in depth.



      (2)   Side yards.



         (a)   Interior side yards shall not be required, unless
the lot is adjacent to a residential property.



         (b)   If a lot is adjacent to a residential property, a
25-foot side yard is required, and the yard must be landscaped and screened
in such a manner so as to create an effective buffer between the business and
residential uses. An access drive may occupy up to half of the required side
yard, if screening is provided.



         (c)   If a side lot line abuts a public alley, then the
depth of the required side yard may be reduced by an amount equal to one-half
of the right-of-way width of such alley. If such alley is adjacent to a
residential use, screening must be provided.



         (d)   If a side yard adjacent to a residential property
is less than 40 feet in width, a solid wall or solid fence shall be provided
along the property line. Such fence or wall shall be uniformly painted, and
shall comply with the requirements of the village’s Fence Code (Ch. 6, Art.
12).



         (e)   Corner lots. A side yard adjoining a street shall
be in accordance with regulations herein for a front yard.



      (3)   Rear yards: not less than 40 feet in depth. If a lot is
adjacent to a residential property, the yard must be landscaped and screened
in such a manner so as to create an effective buffer between the business and
residential uses. If a rear lot line abuts a public alley, then the depth of
the required rear yard may be reduced by an amount equal to one-half of the
right-of-way width of such alley. If such alley is adjacent to a residential
use, screening must be provided.



   (H)   Required conditions. Except as may otherwise be granted by
special use, all business, service, repair or processing, storage or
merchandise display shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building or
behind a uniformly painted solid fence conforming to the village’s Fence
Code 9 (Ch. 6, Art. 12 ), except for establishments of the drive-in type
offering goods or services directly to customers seated in passenger
vehicles, and off-street parking and loading.



   (I)   Spacing between buildings. Spacing between two or more
detached buildings on a lot shall be as approved by the Village Board of
Trustees.



(Ord. 93-07-60, passed 7-13-1993; Ord. 93-11-97, passed 11-9-1993; Ord.
2002-09-59, passed 9-16-2002; Ord. 2009-02-03, passed 2-2-2009; Ord.
2011-10-34, passed 10-3-2011; Ord. 2014-08-42, passed 8-18-2014; Ord. 2015-
07-15, passed 7-20-2015)



§ 16-9-5  B-4 OFFICE, RESEARCH AND INSTITUTIONAL BUILDING DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent. The Office, Research and Institutional Building
District is designed to accommodate office uses, office sales uses and
certain basic services.



   (B)   Permitted uses. The following regulations shall apply in all
B-4 Districts and no building, structure or premises, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter, shall be erected, altered or used, except for one
or more of the following uses:



      (1)   Any of the following office uses: executive,
administrative, professional, such as accounting, writing, clerical,
stenographic, drafting and sales subject to the limitations contained below;



      (2)   Medical offices, including clinics;



      (3)   Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations and
similar uses;



      (4)   Publicly owned buildings, exchanges and public utility
offices, but not including storage yards, transformer stations, substations
or gas regulator stations;



      (5)   Personal service establishments, including barbershops,
beauty shops and health salons;



      (6)   The warehousing and printing of books, pamphlets and
other periodicals when carried out in conjunction with an adjacent office
use; and



      (7)   Temporary permitted use: carnival, in compliance with §
10-2-12.



   (C)   Special uses. An accessory use customarily related to a
principal use authorized by this section, such as a pharmacy, stores limited
to corrective garments or bandages, or an optical company may be permitted;
provided, it is within the building to which it is accessory and does not
have a direct outside entrance for customers.



      (1)   Planned unit developments in accordance with provisions
of this chapter.



      (2)   Research laboratories.



      (3)   Total senior life care facilities.



      (4)   Regional religious institution.



      (5)   Full-time school as an ancillary use to the principal
use of regional religious institution, provided that parking is provided in
accordance with the requirements of § 16-13-3 of this code.



      (6)   Retail sale of used or donated household items for
fundraising purposes as an ancillary use to the principal use of regional
religious institution, provided that parking is provided in accordance with
requirements of § 16-13-3 of this code.



      (7)   Union halls and training facilities.



      (8)   Medical cannabis dispensing organization.



   (D)   Required conditions.



      (1)   No interior product or service display shall be visible
from the exterior of the building, and the total area devoted to display,
including both the objects displayed and the floor space set aside for
persons observing the displayed objects, shall not exceed 15% of the usable
floor area of either the first or second story, or the basement.



      (2)   The outdoor storage of goods or material shall be
prohibited.



      (3)   Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or material,
beyond that normally incidental to the above permitted uses, shall be
prohibited.



   (E)   Floor area ratio. Not to exceed 0.6.



   (F)   Lot area. As in the B-1 District.



   (G)   Off-street parking and off-street loading. In accordance with
regulations as set forth in Art. 13 of this Zoning Code.



   (H)   Yards. As in the B-1 District.



(Ord. 99-02-08, passed 2-1-1999; Ord. 2006-09-49, passed 9-5-2006; Ord.
2012-12-40, passed 12-3-2012; Ord. 2014-09-45, passed 9-2-2014)



ARTICLE 10:  INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT



Section



   16-10-1   General requirements



   16-10-2   I Industrial District



   16-10-3   R&D Research and Development District



§ 16-10-1  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No lot, parcel or tract of land shall be used, and no building
or structure shall be erected, altered or remodeled for any of the following
uses or uses similar thereto: abattoirs, arsenals, crematories, creosote
treatment or manufacture; fat rendering, fertilizer manufacture; fireworks or
explosive manufacture or storage; dumping reduction or other processing of
garbage, dead animals, offal or refuse, except as customarily incidental to a
permitted principal use; ore reduction, petroleum processing or refining,
pyroxylin manufacture, natural or synthetic rubber, caoutchouc or gutta
percha manufacture or treatment; salt works, sauerkraut manufacture, soap
manufacture, shelters; stockyard or slaughter of animals or fowl; tallow,
grease or lard manufacture, or treatment; tanning, curing or storage of
rawhides or skins; tar distillation or manufacture; or cement, concrete or
asphaltic concrete mixing plants.



   (B)   No activities involving the storage, utilization, or
manufacture of materials or products which decompose by detonation shall be
permitted except such as are specifically licensed by the village, or are
used as customarily incidental to the operation of a principal use in such
quantities, and in a manner conforming with applicable performance standards
set forth hereafter. Such materials shall include, but shall not be confined
to: all primary explosives such as lead oxide, lead styphnate, fulminates and
tetracene; all high explosives such as TNT, RDS, HMX, PETN and picric acid;
propellants and components thereof such as nitrocellulose, black powder,
boron hydrantes, hydrazine and its derivatives; pyrotechnics and fireworks
such as magnesium powder, potassium chlorate and potassium nitrate; blasting
explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerine; unstable organic compounds
such as acetylides, tetrazoles, perchloric acid, perchlorates, chlorates,
hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than 35%; and nuclear fuels,
fissionable materials and products and reactor elements such as Uranium 235
and Plutonium.



   (C)   Unless specifically permitted, all business, processing,
storage and all other activities and operations shall be conducted within
completely enclosed buildings. If permitted as a special use such operation
or activity shall be screened by a fence. See the village’s Fence Code for
further regulations (Ch. 6, Art. 12).



   (D)   Performance standards: any use established in the Industrial
District which involves the manufacture, production, processing, assembly,
repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing or testing of materials, goods or
products shall be operated in such a manner as to comply with applicable
performance standards as hereinafter set forth governing noise, smoke,
particulate matter, toxic or noxious matter, odors, fire and explosive
hazards, vibration, radiation or glare or heat for the district in which such
use shall be located; and no use already established on the effective date of
this chapter shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further
conflict with, applicable performance standards for the district in which
such use is located.



      (1)   Noise. Each land use must conform to the standards set
forth from time to time by the State Environmental Protection Agency. Such
standards shall include, but not be limited to, the requirements as outlined
in the publication entitled State of Illinois Noise Pollution Control
Regulations, dated 8-9-1973, as amended.



      (2)   Vibration.



         (a)   In the Industrial District, no activity or
operation shall cause or create earthborne vibrations in excess of the
displacement values given below. Measurements shall be made at or beyond the
adjacent lot line or the nearest Residence District boundary line, as
described below: vibration displacements shall be measured with an instrument
or complement of instruments capable of simultaneously measuring in three
mutually perpendicular directions. The maximum vector shall be less than the
vibration displacement permitted. For the purpose of this chapter, steady
state vibrations are vibrations which are continuous, or vibrations in
discrete impulses more frequent than 100 per minute. Discrete impulses which
do not exceed 100 per minute shall be considered impact vibrations.



         (b)   The maximum permitted dis-placements shall be
determined in each district by the following formula:



   D =  K ÷ f



   D   =   Displacement in inches



   K   =   A constant to be determined by reference to the following
tables



   f   =   The frequency of the vibration transmitted through the
ground expressed in cycles per second



         (c)   The maximum earth displacement permitted at the
points described below shall be determined by use of the formula in the
preceeding division (D)(2)(b) of this section and the appropriate K constant
shown in Table 1.



   Table 1



   Values of K to be used in Vibration Formula:



 

Location
 
K




In any neighboring lot:


   Steady state
 
0.008


   Impulsive
 
0.015


   Less than 8 pulses per 24-hour period
 
0.037


In any Residence District:


   Steady state
 
0.003


   Impulsive
 
0.006


   Less than 8 pulses per 24-hour period
 
0.015




 



      (3)   Smoke and particulate matter. Each land use must conform
to the standards set forth from time to time by the State Environmental
Protection Agency. Such standards shall include, but not be limited to, the
standards adopted by the State Air Pollution Control Board, dated 4-14-1972,
as amended, entitled State of Illinois Air Pollution Control Regulations.



      (4)   Toxic matter. Each land use must conform to the
standards set forth from time to time by the State Environmental Protection
Agency. Such standards shall include, but not be limited to, the standards
adopted by the State Air Pollution Control Board.



      (5)   Odorous matter. Each land use must conform to the
standards set forth from time to time by the State Environmental Protection
Agency. Such standards shall include, but not be limited to, the standards
adopted by the State Air Pollution Control Board, dated 4-14-1972, as
amended, entitled State of Illinois Air Pollution Control Regulations.



      (6)   Fire and explosion hazards.



         (a)   Detonable materials. In accordance with village
Ord. 384, passed 11-13-1973, as amended.



         (b)   Flammable solids.



            1.   In the Industrial District, the storage,
utilization or manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from
incombustible to moderate burning is permitted; provided that, all Village
Building Codes and Fire Prevention Codes are complied with.



            2.   In the Industrial District, the storage,
utilization or manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from free
to active burning to intense burning is permitted; provided that, all Village
Building Codes and Fire Prevention Codes are complied with.



         (c)   Flammable liquids and gases. The storage of
flammable liquids shall be permitted only in accordance with village Ord.
384, passed 11-13-1973, as amended. Below ground gas storage tanks shall not
exceed a total storage capacity of 50,000 gallons.



      (7)   Glare.



         (a)   In the Industrial District, any operation or
activity producing glare at night shall be conducted so that direct and/or
indirect illumination from the source of light on the lot shall not cause
illumination in excess of one-half foot candle when measured in the Residence
District.



         (b)   Flickering or intense sources of light shall be
controlled or shielded so as not to cause a nuisance across lot lines. When
street lighting produces illumination in excess of one foot candle at any
point in the Residence District, the contribution by light sources from
within the Industrial District measured at the same point shall not exceed
50% of the street lighting.



      (8)   Radiation hazards.



         (a)   Release outside property lines: in the Industrial
District, the release of radioactive materials or the emission of ionizing
radiation outside of property lines shall be in accordance with the rules and
regulations as set forth from time to time by the state, as published in
Rules and Regulations for Prevention of Radiation Hazards, adopted 4-18-1961,
as amended.



         (b)   Unsealed radioactive materials: in the Industrial
District, unsealed radioactive materials shall not be manufactured, utilized
or stored except when such materials are stored in a fireproof and radiation
proof container at or below ground level.



      (9)   Water pollution. Each land use must conform to the
standards set forth from time to time by the State Environmental Protection
Agency. Such standards shall include, but not be limited to, the requirements
as published in the pamphlet entitled Water Pollution Regulations of
Illinois, dated 3-7-1972, as amended.



§ 16-10-2  I INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   Any establishment, the principal use of which is an
office use or the manufacturing, fabricating, processing, assembly,
repairing, storing, cleaning, servicing, researching or testing of materials,
goods or products, and accessory office uses directly incidental thereto;
provided that, such operations conform with performance standards, and other
regulations set forth in § 16-10-1;



      (2)   Temporary permitted use: carnival, in compliance with §
10-2-12;



      (3)   Sexually oriented businesses in compliance with Art. 19
of the Village Zoning Code;



      (4)   Temporary outdoor demonstrations and exhibitions of
merchandise to be located on the same zoning lot and in conjunction with the
permanent use found on the lot; such display or sale shall be for a maximum
of ten days and no more than twice during any calendar year;



      (5)   Indoor kennel and boarding facility; and



      (6)   Photography studios, commercial, including ancillary
services normally provided.



   (B)   Special uses.



      (1)   Automobile laundries;



      (2)   Auto service stations;



      (3)   Building material sales and storage;



      (4)   Buildings or structures exceeding 50 feet in height;



      (5)   Cartage, express and parcel establishments;



      (6)   Contractor’s office and shops;



      (7)   Garages and parking lots for motor vehicles not
incidental to a permitted use;



      (8)   Greenhouses and nurseries;



      (9)   Medical and rehabilitation facility;



      (10)   Mini-warehouses. Special conditions are as follows:



         (a)   Floor area ratio not more than 0.5;



         (b)   Aisle width not less than 28 feet;



         (c)   Prohibited storage items or uses:



            1.   Flammable liquids;



            2.   Highly combustible or explosive materials;



            3.   Hazardous chemicals;



            4.   Garage sales;



            5.   Retail business activities;



            6.   Servicing or repair of motor vehicles and
equipment; and



            7.   Outside storage of any kind.



         (d)   A minimum of two points of ingress and egress
shall be provided to a mini-warehouse site;



         (e)   Multiple buildings are allowed; and



         (f)   An on-site manager office/living quarters is
allowed.



      (11)   Motor freight terminals;



      (12)   Motor vehicle and equipment sales and service;



      (13)   Municipal or privately owned recreation building;



      (14)   Outdoor activities and operations;



      (15)   Planned unit development, in accordance with provisions
of Art. 16 of this Zoning Code;



      (16)   Public open space;



      (17)   Public service and utility uses;



      (18)   Radio and television towers;



      (19)   Restaurants, including the sale of liquor in
conjunction therewith;



      (20)   Retail sales as an ancillary use to the principal
industrial use; provided that, a parking ratio of 1:250 square feet of floor
area is established for each use;



      (21)   Meat processing, packaging, storage and warehousing;



      (22)   Union halls and training facilities;



      (23)   Dance studios;



      (24)   Equipment and machinery rental operations;



      (25)   Towing operation, including a screened, temporary
outdoor vehicle storage area; and



      (26)   Medical cannabis cultivation center.



   (C)   Floor area ratio. Not more than 0.8.



   (D)   Minimum lot size. One acre.



   (E)   Front yards.



      (1)   Front yard width shall be not less than 75 feet.



      (2)   Front yard building setback shall be:



         (a)   Sixty feet from the right-of-way line of any
existing or proposed street having a right-of-way width of 80 feet or more; or



         (b)   Forty feet from the right-of-way line of any
existing or proposed street having a right-of-way width of less than 80 feet.



      (3)   The storage of building, construction, manufacturing
material and equipment and the parking of trucks shall not be permitted in
any front yard or side yard adjoining a street.



      (4)   The front yard shall be kept clear of all structures,
except as permitted in § 16-12-2(C).



   (F)   Side yards.



      (1)   Two side yards, neither of which is less than ten feet
wide, except a side yard adjoining a lot in a Residence District shall be not
less than 70 feet wide and a side yard abutting a street shall be not less
than 40 feet wide, except when the side yard is across the street from a
Residence District, not less than 60 feet wide. If a side yard is adjacent to
a residential property, it shall be landscaped and screened in such a manner
so as to create an effective buffer between the industrial and residential
uses.



      (2)   Corner lots. A side yard adjoining a street shall be in
accordance with regulations herein for a front yard.



   (G)   Rear yards. Rear yard widths shall not be less than 75 feet.
Rear yard depths shall not be less than 20 feet. If a rear yard is adjacent
to a residential property, it shall be landscaped and screened in such a
manner so as to create an effective buffer between the industrial and
residential uses.



   (H)   Yards, general.



      (1)   Increased setbacks: front, side and rear yards as
required above shall be increased by one foot for each one foot of building
height in excess of 25 feet.



      (2)   Landscaping and maintenance: all lot and parkway areas
not covered with buildings, parking lots, drives or sidewalks shall be
covered with turf, plant material or other permanent forms of landscaping,
which shall be maintained.



   (I)   Regulations along district boundaries.



      (1)   There shall be no storage yards or buildings within 100
feet from the centerline of the right-of-way of a road separating the
Industrial District from a Residential District. If no street exists, the
setback shall be the distance between principal residential buildings and the
land use or structure mentioned above. However, where no residential
structures exist or are located farther than 100 feet from the industrial
property line, the normal setbacks and yard requirements as outlined
elsewhere in this chapter shall apply.



      (2)   In the case where property surrounding an Industrial
District is currently zoned residential either in the county or the village,
but the adopted future land use plan shows a proposed compatible land use,
the setback and yard requirements shall be as set forth elsewhere in this
chapter.



   (J)   Off-street parking and off-street loading. In accordance with
regulations as set forth elsewhere in this chapter.



   (K)   Height of buildings and structures. No building or structure
within the Industrial District shall  exceed 50 feet in height, except upon
the granting of a special use permit by the Village Board.



(Ord. 90-12-101, passed 12-11-1990; Ord. 91-02-12, passed 2-26-1991; Ord.
91-03-22, passed 3-26-1991; Ord. 91-06-42, passed 6-11-1991; Ord. 94-05-46,
passed 5-24-1994; Ord. 94-06-52, passed 6-14-1994; Ord. 94-11-98, passed
11-21-1994; Ord. 95-01-02, passed 1-3-1995; Ord. 99-05-30, passed 5-17-1999;
Ord. 2000-10-79, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-12-75, passed 12-16-2002; Ord.
2010-06-37, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 2010-09-45, passed 9-7-2010; Ord.
2011-10-34, passed 10-3-2011; Ord. 2014-09-45, passed 9-2-2014)



§ 16-10-3  R&D RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.



   (A)   Intent.



      (1)   The R&D Research and Development District is intended to
provide for innovative, well-designed and maintained facilities along the
North Avenue corridor in an environment that is characterized by extensive
setbacks and yard areas, imaginative landscaping and high-quality
architecture, that will provide screening and landscaping necessary to create
a proper relationship with adjacent residential and non-residential areas,
and that is suitable for corporate headquarter facilities that have a mix of
office, training, research, production,  warehouse and ancillary uses.



      (2)   The term PRODUCTION, as used herein, is intended to
include such activities as the fabricating, processing, assembly, packaging,
repairing, storing, cleaning, compounding, distillation, testing, treatment
and/or servicing of materials, goods or products in a clean environment.



      (3)   Production uses that have the potential to cause
undesirable adverse impacts to the environment in the form of noise, air or
water pollution, such as metal processing (i.e., forging, stamping, casting,
electrolytic plating) and chemical products (i.e., polishing, ink or inked
ribbon, soap, washing or cleaning, preserving), are considered unacceptable
and shall not be allowed.



      (4)   The facilities will have a higher percentage of office
area dedicated to administrative, training and/or research functions as
compared to a typical industrial facility.



         (a)   Large, architecturally coordinated buildings are
encouraged.



         (b)   Activities within the R&D District shall be
limited to ensure that the high quality of the environment shall be
maintained within the district and the surrounding Residential Districts that
may abut.



   (B)   Permitted uses.



      (1)   No allowable use in the R&D District is designated as
permitted.



      (2)   All of the allowable uses in the R&D District are
designated as special uses as listed in § 16-10-3(C) below.



   (C)   Special uses.



      (1)   General R&D uses.



         (a)   MIXED USE FACILITY. Any establishment, the
principal use of which has a mix of uses that include office, training,
research and development, production and/or warehousing uses; provided that,
such operations conform with performance standards and other regulations set
forth in § 16-10-1 of this Zoning Code. Any establishment whose principal
use is warehousing shall not be considered a MIXED USE FACILITY and shall not
be allowable in the R&D District;



         (b)   Research, engineering and testing laboratories;



         (c)   Offices; and



         (d)   Outdoor activities and operations as an ancillary
use to the principal research and development use.



      (2)   Service R&D uses.



         (a)   Banks and financial institutions;



         (b)   Day care centers, pre-school learning centers, and
nursery schools;



         (c)   Hotels;



         (d)   Immediate care medical facilities;



         (e)   Restaurants, including the sale of liquor in
conjunction therewith; and



         (f)   Retail sales as an ancillary use to the principal
research and development use.



      (3)   Public R&D uses.



         (a)   Public open space; and



         (b)   Public service and utility uses.



      (4)   Conditions.



         (a)   Any special use granted within the R&D Research
and Development District shall be by ordinance.



            1.   The ordinance shall contain such conditions
as are necessary to ensure that the facilities associated with the special
use, as proposed, are constructed in accordance with the submissions
presented at the time that the ordinance is adopted.



            2.   The ordinance shall provide the extent to
which the construction shall conform to those attachments made a part of the
special use ordinance, which shall govern the nature of the development.



         (b)   Typically, the facilities associated with a
special use shall be required to be constructed and operated in
“substantial accordance” with the plan submitted.



         (c)   In certain instances, the extent of conformity to
the submitted plans may be subjected to a higher or lower standard.



         (d)   The documents to be attached, relating to the
conditions to be imposed on the special use, will typically include a site
plan, architectural renderings, a landscaping plan and, in some cases,
interior design elements and a traffic and pedestrian flow plan.



         (e)   Other plans may be required, depending on the
nature of the special use requested.



         (f)   No development may take place on the property
except for that authorized in the ordinance.



   (D)   Floor area ratio. Not to exceed 0.5.



   (E)   Lot area.



      (1)   General R&D uses. The minimum lot area for general R&D
uses shall not be less than five acres.



      (2)   Public and service R&D uses. The minimum lot area for
public and service R&D uses, which are not ancillary to a general R&D use,
shall not be less than two acres.



   (F)   Off-street parking and off-street loading.



      (1)   Off-street parking and off-street loading shall be in
accordance with applicable regulations, as set forth in Art. 13 of this
Zoning Code.



      (2)   Trucks and semi trailers shall not be parked or stored
out-of-doors overnight, in the parking lot or on the premises, except within
an enclosed loading dock or garage, or within a walled sight screen
enclosure, screened from view from public ways and residential properties,
open to the sky, constructed of the same masonry exterior materials as the
principal building, and equal in height to the height of the first floor of
the principal building. However, temporary parking overnight, not to exceed
one business day, may be permitted for delivery vehicles that arrive after
normal business hours.



   (G)   Yards.



      (1)   Front yards:  not less than 80 feet.



      (2)   Side yards: not less than 75 feet when adjacent to
non-residential property, and not less than 100 feet when adjacent to
residential property. If a side yard is adjacent to a residential property,
it shall not contain off-street parking or loading facilities, and must be
landscaped and screened in such a manner so as to create an effective buffer
between the industrial and residential uses.



      (3)   Side yards adjoining a street: not less than 80 feet.



      (4)   Rear yards: not less than 75 feet when adjacent to
non-residential property, and not less than 100 feet when adjacent to
residential property. If a rear yard is adjacent to a residential property,
it shall not contain off-street parking or loading facilities, and must be
landscaped and screened in such a manner so as to create an effective buffer
between the industrial and residential uses.



      (5)   Landscaping and maintenance: all lot and parkway areas
not covered with buildings, parking lots, drives or sidewalks shall be
covered with turf, plant material or other permanent forms of landscaping,
which shall be maintained.



   (H)   Building height. No building shall exceed four stories, nor
shall it exceed 45 feet in height, except that where any building located on
a property adjacent to a Residential District exceeds 25 feet in height, the
yard requirements adjacent to the residential properties shall be increased
by ten feet for each foot of building height over 25 feet.



   (I)   Required conditions.



      (1)   Minimum office space. In mixed use facilities, a minimum
of 20% of the total area of any building space used by a single business
shall be office area dedicated to administrative, training and/or research
functions.



      (2)   Landscape buffer.



         (a)   A landscape buffer of a minimum width of 100 feet
shall be provided adjacent to residential property.



         (b)   This buffer shall contain a continuous berm
(minimum eight foot in height), evergreen trees (minimum six foot in height)
at an amount equal to 30 feet on center, deciduous trees (minimum two and
one-half-inch caliper) at an amount equal to 30 feet on center, and shrubs
(minimum three foot in height) at an amount equal to six feet on center.



   (K)   Architectural design. This division provides architectural
regulations and guidelines to the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals,
village staff and owners and occupants of land within the R&D District.



      (1)   Multi-tenant, mixed-used developments shall be
constructed with compatible materials and design characteristics, including
building material, roof lines, color and landscaping.



      (2)   Attempts should be made to design improvements to be
compatible with the existing built and natural environments. New materials
should be the same or complement existing materials.



      (3)   Monotony shall be avoided within projects and between a
project and its surroundings.



         (a)   Site characteristics to be evaluated for this
purpose include building and plant materials, colors, textures, shapes,
massing, rhythms of building components and details, height, roof-line and
setback.



         (b)   Facades of buildings shall incorporate such design
features as changes in materials, color, fenestration, or other significant
visual relief provided in a manner or at intervals in keeping with the size,
mass and scale of the building and its views from public ways.



      (4)   The following materials shall not be used in any front
facade or side facade:



         (a)   Unfinished, pre-cast concrete or unfinished,
poured-in-place concrete; and



         (b)   Fabricated metal covering more than 25% of the
visible wall area.



      (5)   The following materials shall not be used on any part of
a building:



         (a)   Materials with no proven record of durability or
ease of maintenance in the intended application; and



         (b)   Materials or construction methods used for one
aspect or portion of a project that are significantly lower in quality than
those used for the balance of that project, such that this one aspect or
portion is or rapidly becomes an eyesore or detriment to the project as a
whole.



      (6)   Building designs and configurations that tend to catch
and accumulate trash, leaves and dirt shall be avoided. In addition,
provisions for washing and cleaning buildings, other structures and building
grounds shall be considered and included in the design.



      (7)   All building components, such as windows, doors, eaves,
soffits and parapets, shall be in proportion with the facade of the building
and shall relate well with one another.



      (8)   Mechanical equipment, satellite dishes and other utility
hardware, whether located on the roof or exterior of the building or on the
ground adjacent to it, shall be screened from view from public ways with
materials identical to or strongly similar to building materials or by heavy
landscaping that will be effective in winter, or they shall be located so as
not to be visible from any public ways.



         (a)   Use of parapet walls or pitched roof elements to
screen equipment is encouraged.



         (b)   In no case shall wooden fencing be used as a
rooftop equipment screen.



      (9)   Screening of approved service yards, refuse and
waste-removal areas, loading docks, truck-parking areas and other places that
tend to be unsightly shall be accomplished by use of walls, fencing, dense
planting or any combination of these elements. Screening shall block views
from public ways and residential properties and shall be equally effective in
winter and summer.



(Ord. 2000-01-07, passed 1-17-2000; Ord. 2002-11-72, passed 11-18-2002; Ord.
2011-10-34, passed 10-3-2011)



ARTICLE 11:  AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT



Section



   16-11-1   Purpose



   16-11-2   A Agricultural District



§ 16-11-1  PURPOSE.



   The long-range goal for agricultural land use in the village is to
preserve the most valuable of all natural resources, that of fertile land for
agricultural pursuits and to protect the land best suited for farming from
premature urbanization. The Agricultural District regulations are, therefore,
designed to regulate the use of land and structures within the areas of the
village where soil and topographic conditions are best adapted to the pursuit
of agriculture and utilization of other natural land resources, and
preservation of land for future non-agricultural uses. It is essential that
open areas be maintained for future private, semipublic or public uses
requiring large sites that will be required as expansion of, or complementary
to, increasing urbanized development of the village.



§ 16-11-2  A AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted:



      (1)   Agriculture. An area which is used specifically for the
purpose of producing crops, livestock, poultry or dairy products. Structures
and land uses for the pursuit of agriculture are not subject to the
regulations of this chapter, except farm structures and uses established
after the effective date of this chapter shall conform with the applicable
setbacks as herein established;



      (2)   Railroad rights-of-way;



      (3)   Public utilities;



      (4)   Accessory uses:



         (a)   Those customarily accessory to the pursuit of
agriculture; provided that, permanent structures for the shelter of
livestock, poultry and other farm animals shall be located not less than 100
feet from a lot line; and



         (b)   Roadside stands for the sale of produce and
poultry grown and raised on or in the immediate area of the premises, but not
including live animals; and, provided that, such stand shall contain not more
than 600 square feet of floor area. Each roadside stand shall have facilities
approved by the Director of Community Development for vehicular ingress and
egress, and adequate off-street parking.



      (5)   Temporary permitted use: carnival, in compliance with §
10-2-12.



   (B)   Lot size.



      (1)   Existing residential use. A subdivision for the purpose
of the sale or transfer of ownership of one lot, or one single-family
dwelling, which contains an existing residential structure, shall be allowed
upon a zoning lot of at least 30,000 square feet in area; provided that, all
other requirements of this chapter are complied with.



      (2)   Non-farm residence. Every one-family detached dwelling
hereafter erected shall be located on a zoning lot having an area of not less
than five acres, and a width at the established building line of not less
than 300 feet. All or part of the zoning lot may be devoted to permitted
agricultural uses. There shall be only one dwelling on a zoning lot.



   (C)   Building setback line. Every building hereafter erected or
enlarged shall provide and maintain a setback from the public street in
accordance with the following requirements:



      (1)   Primary thoroughfares: 60 feet from the property line or
110 feet from the centerline of the right-of-way, whichever distance is
greater;



      (2)   Collector thoroughfares: 50 feet from the property line
or 90 feet from the centerline of the right-of-way, whichever is greater; and



      (3)   All other streets: 50 feet from the property line or 80
feet from the centerline of the right-of-way, whichever is greater.



   (D)   Side yards. Each building hereafter erected or remodeled shall
have a side yard on each side of each building of not less than ten feet.



ARTICLE 12:  SUPPLEMENTAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS



Section



   16-12-1   Accessory buildings, structures and uses



   16-12-2   Permitted yard obstructions



   16-12-3   Performance standards



   16-12-4   Sales or construction trailers, automobiles, recreational
vehicles and mobile homes



   16-12-5   Use of model homes



   16-12-6   Home occupations



§ 16-12-1  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES.



   (A)   Accessory buildings, structures and uses shall be compatible
with the principal use and shall not be established prior to the
establishment of the principal use, and unless accessory to an agricultural
use, such use shall not include the keeping, propagation or culture of
pigeons, poultry, rabbits, bees or livestock, whether or not for profit.



   (B)   Radio or broadband telecommunications poles, towers and
antennas, not more than 55 feet in height above ground, shall be permitted as
accessory or detached structures on lots in any district. Such structures
shall not be placed in a position as to present a hazard to any utility
lines. Such structures shall be further regulated as follows.



      (1)   Antenna structures or parabolic dish antenna structures
shall not be located in any front or side yards adjoining a street and shall
be constructed and maintained in compliance with the manufacturer’s
specifications.



      (2)   No parabolic dish antenna structure in excess of three
feet in diameter shall be mounted on or over, bracketed or guyed to any
principal building or structure.



      (3)   No dish antenna located upon a roof may exceed five feet
in height as measured vertically from the roof which supports it to the top
of the antenna or dish when positioned for operation.



      (4)   All portions of the dish antenna, in any orientation to
the sky, must meet the minimum side and rear yard building setback
requirements for the lot on which it is placed and shall be at least ten feet
from any property line with no part of any antenna, wire, cable or guy wire
crossings or extending over or beyond any property line.



      (5)   The location of a dish antenna in excess of three feet
in diameter for a roof mounted antenna or ten feet in diameter for a ground
mounted antenna in any Residential, Business or Industrial District shall be
subject to the granting of a variation by the Zoning Board of Appeals after a
public hearing thereon.



      (6)   The village shall assume no liability in case of
personal injury or property damage arising in connection with or as a result
of the erection, placement or maintenance of any antenna.



      (7)   A minimum of 50% of the area around the dish must be
planted in landscape material which is at least one-half as tall as the
overall height of the dish antenna.



      (8)   The ground mounted dish antenna shall be as near to the
rear of the house on which it shares a lot as possible.



      (9)   No more than one dish antenna shall be allowed on a lot
of one acre or less.



   (C)   Except as otherwise regulated herein, an accessory building,
structure or use hereafter established, erected, altered, enlarged or moved
on a lot shall conform with the following.



      (1)   Height.  No residential accessory building, including
detached garages, shall be more than one story, or 15 feet in height in
accordance with the definition of building height set forth elsewhere in this
code, except as follows: no shed or storage building for garden equipment and
household items accessory to residential structures shall be more than one
story, nor more than 13 feet in height at its highest elevation. The height
of a shed or storage building specified herein shall be the maximum height
allowable, notwithstanding the definition of building height set forth
elsewhere in this code.



      (2)   Location.  An accessory building or structure, either
detached from or attached to the principal building, shall not be located in
a front yard, interior side yard or side yard abutting a street, except for
permitted obstructions as set forth elsewhere in division (C)(3) below and §
16-12-2(C). There shall be a minimum separation of five feet between a
detached storage structure and the principal building. Above-ground service
facilities shall be located in accordance with the regulations contained in
§ 16-5-7.



      (3)   Setbacks.



         (a)   A detached accessory building or structure,
including sheds, playhouses, greenhouses, gazebos, detached decks, swimming
pools, detached garages and storage buildings, shall not be located closer
than five feet to the interior side or rear lot line.



         (b)   On a reverse corner lot, a detached accessory
building or structure may be located not nearer to the rear lot line than the
distance of the required side yard for the lot adjoining the rear lot line,
and not nearer to the side street line than the required front yard on such a
lot adjoining the rear lot line.



         (c)   Gazebos, outdoor fireplaces, playground equipment,
sheds, playhouses, greenhouses, storage buildings, swimming pools, patios,
decks and terraces may be located within a side yard adjacent to a street,
not less than 15 feet from the lot line adjacent to the street, if the yard
is enclosed with an allowable solid fence a minimum of four feet in height.



      (4)   Service walks.  Service walks shall be permitted on
residential properties without a permit where they are no wider than four
feet at any point and set back a minimum of one foot from any side or rear
property line. When located parallel to a driveway, a service walk may be
located adjacent to the driveway and shall not be considered part of the
driveway for the purpose of determining driveway width. Service walks shall
not be located within the public right-of-way, except to connect to a public
sidewalk.



      (5)   Easements. With the exception of fences and driveways,
no accessory structures shall be permitted to be located within any public
utility or drainage easement unless written authorization is provided by the
applicable utility companies and the village.



      (6)   Number of detached storage structures.  There shall be
no more than two detached storage structures per single-family residential
property. Detached storage structures shall include but not be limited to
detached garages, sheds, playhouses, greenhouses, and other similar
structures, but shall not include gazebos, pools, or other recreational
facilities. 



         (a)   Detached storage structures less than or equal to
64 square feet in area shall not require a building permit, but shall comply
with all other applicable code and ordinances including but not limited to
requirements regarding number, setbacks, height, and lot coverage.



         (b)   Detached storage structures less than or equal to
64 square feet in area which do not require a building permit need not
maintain the five foot separation requirement for other detached storage
structures as set forth in § 16-12-1(C)(2).



   (D)   Criteria for single-family residential driveways. A paved
driveway from the property line  to legal, on-site parking shall be
provided. The location and width of the driveway shall be in  conformance
with the following criteria.



      (1)   Limit of one. No more than one driveway and one curb cut
shall be permitted for each single-family residential lot, except in the case
of a circular driveway in conformance with the standards and requirements as
provided herein.



      (2)   Configuration. The driveway shall be essentially
perpendicular to the street pavement and the principal structure to the
extent possible, shall lead to legal parking such as a garage, carport or
parking pad, and shall not extend across the front of the principal structure
by more than three feet. The driveway may widen from the width at the
property line as specified in division (D)(4) below to the maximum allowable
width as specified below; provided, it does not widen at a rate greater than
one foot of width for each one foot of length.



         (a)   For a property improved with a home having a
one-car wide garage, or a home that originally was built with a one-car wide
garage and for which home the garage has been converted to living space, or
for a home with no attached garage, the driveway may widen to a maximum width
of 20 feet, subject to all other design criteria in this section.



         (b)   For a property improved with a home having a
two-car wide garage, or a home that was originally built with a two-car
garage and for which home the garage has been converted to living space, the
driveway may widen to a maximum width of 30 feet, subject to all other design
criteria in this section.



      (3)   Location. The driveway shall be set back a minimum of
one foot from any side property line.



      (4)   Width at the property line. Driveway width shall not
exceed requirements as set forth herein.



         (a)   Leading to one or two parking spaces or a one- or
two-car garage, or a combination of a parking space and a one-car garage, the
maximum driveway width is 20 feet.



         (b)   Leading to three parking spaces or a three-car
garage, or a combination of a parking space and a two-car garage, the maximum
driveway width is 30 feet; provided, the width of the lot is no less than 80
feet, as measured at the building line.



         (c)   Leading to greater than three parking spaces or
greater than a three-car garage, the maximum width is 30 feet, as measured at
the property line; provided, the width of the lot is no less than 80 feet, as
measured at the building line. The driveway may widen to the combined width
of the parking spaces and garage, even if greater than 30 feet, provided it
does not widen at a rate greater than one foot of width for each one foot of
length.



      (5)   Circular driveways.



         (a)   Location. A lot having a width of 90 feet or more,
measured at the front lot line, and in which the circular driveway is to be
located, may have a circular driveway with two curb cuts located in the
actual front yard.



         (b)   Driveway width. The access driveway leading most
directly to the garage or parking area shall not exceed 20 feet in width, and
the secondary access driveway shall not exceed ten feet in width, measured at
the property line.



   (E)   Smoking shelters shall be permitted as accessory or detached
structures on lots in any district. Such structures shall be further
regulated as follows.



      (1)   The smoking shelter must comply with all requirements of
the Village Building Code and Fire Code.



      (2)   The service and/or consumption of drinks or food in the
smoking shelter is strictly prohibited.



      (3)   The smoking shelter must be located in a rear yard or
interior side yard only, and must conform with the locational requirements
for accessory structures as set forth in this article.



      (4)   The smoking shelter must be constructed on a suitable,
hard surface and must be securely anchored.



      (5)   The floor area of the smoking shelter must be no larger
than 150 square feet.



      (6)   The smoking shelter must be located no closer than 15
feet from any entrance, exit, open window or ventilation intake that serves
an enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited.



      (7)   The smoking shelter must have at least one permanently
clear opening that is not less than 80 inches in height and 60 inches in
width.



      (8)   The smoking shelter may utilize outdoor lighting and
electrical heating fixtures in accordance with the requirements of the Carol
Stream Electrical Code and Fire Code. The smoking shelter must not contain
any other electrical devices nor any mechanical devices, such as televisions
or generators.



      (9)   Temporary smoking shelters must meet the requirements of
this section, and also shall be subject to the regulations of § 16-5-5.



      (10)   Smoking shelters located within the Gary Avenue or
North Avenue Corridors must meet the requirements of § 16-5-6.



   (F)   Donation drop boxes are permitted as accessory structures in
the B-1, B-2 and B-3 Zoning Districts or on properties primarily occupied by
an educational, religious, governmental or charitable use. The boxes shall
only be placed with the property owner’s permission and on properties that
contain an existing and operating permitted or special use. Donation drop
boxes shall be further regulated as follows.



      (1)   No more than two donation drop boxes are allowed on a
zoning lot less than two acres in size. No more than three boxes are allowed
on a zoning lot equal to or greater than two acres in size.



      (2)   All donation drop boxes on any given lot shall be
located adjacent to one another.



      (3)   Each box shall not exceed seven feet in height and 25
square feet in ground area.



      (4)   Boxes shall be located on an asphalt or concrete paved
surface.



      (5)   Boxes shall not be located in a driveway or drive aisle,
and shall not reduce the width of paved clear space for the passage of
pedestrians to less than five feet. Boxes shall not be located in such a way
as to disrupt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.



      (6)   Boxes shall not be located nearer than 40 feet from an
adjoining lot in a Residential Zoning District.



      (7)   Boxes shall not be located nearer than 20 feet from the
right-of-way line of any street other than Gary Avenue or North Avenue.



      (8)   Boxes shall not be located nearer than 30 feet from the
right-of-way line of Gary Avenue or North Avenue.



      (9)   Boxes shall not be located nearer than five feet from a
fire hydrant or fire protection system connection.



      (10)   Boxes shall not occupy or otherwise inhibit the use of
any parking spaces required to meet the parking space requirements for the
uses on the property.



      (11)   Signage on a donation drop box must pertain only to the
owner/operator of that box.



      (12)   Donation drop boxes are permitted to be located within
the Gary Avenue or North Avenue Corridors, and are not subject to the review
and approval procedures specified in § 16-5-6(N). However, donation drop
boxes located within the Gary Avenue or North Avenue Corridors shall be
located so as not to be visible from any public ways, or shall be screened
from view so as not to be visible from public ways with materials identical
to or strongly similar to building materials or by heavy landscaping that
will be effective in winter.



      (13)   A notice must be permanently affixed to each box in a
highly visible location prohibiting the placement of items outside of the
box. The name and 24-hour telephone number of the owner/operator must be
permanently affixed to each box.



(Ord. 92-04-42, passed 4-28-1992; Ord. 93-09-83, passed 9-28-1993; Ord.
2002-08-49, passed 8-19-2002; Ord. 2007-03-11, passed 3-19-2007; Ord.
2008-10-49, passed 10-6-2008; Ord. 2008-11-63, passed 11-17-2008; Ord.
2009-10-51, passed 10-19-2009; Ord. 2010-06-36, passed 6-21-2010; Ord.
2011-06-19, passed 6-20-2011; Ord. 2011-10-34, passed 10-3-2011; Ord.
2017-11-65, passed 11-6-2017)



§ 16-12-2  PERMITTED YARD OBSTRUCTIONS.



   (A)   All obstructions must conform to the standards set forth in
all applicable village ordinances and codes, including, but not limited to,
the Sign, Building, Fence and Electrical Codes.



   (B)   Sight triangle.  On corner lots, within that part of a yard,
courtyard or other open area located with a triangular area of 25 feet from
the point of intersection of the two street rights-of-way lines forming the
corner lot, no buildings, structures or shrubs herein permitted as
obstructions in front yards or side yards adjoining a street shall be
erected, altered or planted which have a height more than 30 inches above the
crown of the street, except that trees and shrubs planted in this area shall
be maintained in a manner that trees shall not have branches lower than eight
feet and shrubs shall not be higher than 30 inches at maturity.



   (C)   Yard obstructions, as herein defined, shall be permitted in
accordance with the following standards as contained in the Table of
Permitted Yard Obstructions, except where such obstructions would encroach
upon the required sight triangle on corner lots or upon easements, or
adversely affect drainage. Unless regulated in the following table, yard
obstructions for properties containing uses other than single-family
residential shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations set forth
elsewhere in this chapter.



 

Table of Permitted Yard Obstructions


F - Denotes permitted obstructions in front yards and side yards adjoining
streets.
S - Denotes permitted obstructions in interior side yards.
R - Denotes permitted obstructions in rear yards.
C - Denotes permitted obstructions in courtyards.




1. Above-ground service facilities.
   * See § 16-5-7 .
 
*
 
*
 
*
 



2. Air conditioning equipment, which shall project no more than 4 feet into a
required yard.
   *Air conditioning equipment shall be permitted in a side yard adjoining
a street, but not a front yard, subject to the following requirements: the
equipment shall be adequately screened with decorative fencing, evergreen
shrubs or other suitable material, on all sides of the equipment visible from
the street, to the satisfaction of the Community Development Director or his
or her designee; and shrubs shall be a minimum of 30 inches in height at time
of planting and shall have no significant gaps between them except as
necessary to service the equipment.
 
*
 
S
 
R
 
C


3. Arbors or trellises.
 
F
 
S
 
R
 
C


4. Architectural features, including ordinary projections of sills, belt
courses, cornices and ornamental features, which shall project no more than
18 inches into a required yard.
 
F
 
S
 
R
 
C


5. Automobile service station fuel pump islands and canopies, provided they
shall be set back at least 35 feet from the lot line.
 
F
 
S
 
R
 
C


6. Automobile service station air and vacuum stations, provided they shall be
set back at least 35 feet from the lot line.
 
F
 
S
 
R
 
C


7. Awnings or canopies, which shall project no more than 3 feet into a
required yard or courtyard.
 
F
 
S
 
R
 
C


8. Balconies, which shall project no more than 4 feet into a required yard.
 
F
 

 
R
 
C


9. Chimneys, attached, which shall project no more than 24 inches into a
required yard or courtyard.
 
F
 
S
 
R
 
C


10. Clotheslines and laundry-drying equipment.
 

 
S
 
R
 



11. Development identification and entry features. (See § 6-11-16(B) for
Sign Code regulations.)
 
F
 
S
 
R
 



12. Eaves and gutters on a principal building or attached accessory building,
subject to the following:
•    Shall project no more than 4 feet into a required front yard,
required side yard adjoining a street or required rear yard.
•    Shall project no more than 24 inches into a required side yard or
courtyard.
 
F
 
S
 
R
 
C


13. Fallout shelters, attached or detached.
 

 

 
R
 



14. Flagpoles.
 
F
 
S
 
R
 
C


15. Garages, detached.
 

 

 
R
 



16. Gazebos. (See § 16-12-1(C) for additional requirements.)
 

 

 
R
 



17. Growing of farm and garden crops in the open.
 

 
S
 
R
 



18. Lawn furniture, such as benches, sun dials, bird baths and similar
architectural features.
 
F
 
S
 
R
 
C


19. Ornamental light standards.
 
F
 
S
 
R
 
C


20. Outdoor fireplaces. (See § 16-12-1(C) for additional requirements.)
 

 

 
R
 



21. Patios, decks and terraces, open (unroofed). (See § 16-12-1(C) for
additional requirements.)
   *Open terraces, decks and patios are only permitted to be located in
the interior side yard of a dwelling unit to serve a patio door facing the
interior side yard.  Such open decks, patios and terraces shall project no
more than 4 feet into the required side yard.
 

 
S*
 
R
 
C


22. Patios, decks and terraces, open (unroofed), elevated greater than 4 feet
above the average level of the adjoining ground. Such elevated open decks,
patios and terraces shall project no more than 10 feet into a required yard.
 

 

 
R
 
C


23. Playground equipment. (See § 16-12-1(C) for additional requirements.)
 

 
S
 
R
 



24. Porches, open, shall be permitted to project no more than 4 feet into the
required front yard or the required side yard adjoining a street.
 
F
 

 

 



25. Service walks.
 
F
 
S
 
R
 



26. Sheds, playhouses, greenhouses, and similar storage buildings.

(See § 16-12-1(C) for additional requirements.)
 

 
S
 
R
 



27. Steps, open, subject to the following:
•    Necessary for access to a principal or accessory building, or
necessary as access to the lot from the street, or located in gardens or
terraces.
•  The steps shall project no more than 4 feet into a required side yard.
 
F
 
S
 
R
 
C


28. Swimming pools, detached  single-family. Swimming pools located on
properties other than detached single-family shall be approved in accordance
with Art. 16, Planned Unit Development. (See § 16-12-1(C) for additional
requirements.)
 

 

 
R
 



29. Tennis courts, basketball courts or other recreational facilities,
detached single-family. Such recreational facilities located on properties
other than detached single-family shall be approved in accordance with Art.
16, Planned Unit Development.
 

 

 
R
 



30. Windows which project no more than 3 feet into a required yard.
 
F
 
S
 
R
 
C




 



(Ord. 93-07-61, passed 7-13-1993; Ord. 93-09-83, passed 9-28-1993; Ord.
2002-08-49, passed 8-19-2002; Ord. 2005-08-44, passed 8-1-2005; Ord.
2008-10-49, passed 10-6-2008; Ord. 2008-11-63, passed 11-17-2008; Ord.
2010-06-36, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 2011-10-34, passed 10-3-2011; Ord.
2017-11-65, passed 11-6-2017)



§ 16-12-3  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   The performance standards for the Industrial District, as set forth in
this chapter, shall also apply to the Residential and Business District.



§ 16-12-4  SALES OR CONSTRUCTION TRAILERS, AUTOMOBILES, RECREATIONAL
VEHICLES AND MOBILE HOMES.



   (A)   Trailers and mobile homes shall not be permitted in any
district as accessory buildings, except when a permit has been issued by the
Community Development Director for a temporary sales or construction office
or storage uses incidental to and only for the period of time of construction
of a building development; provided, such trailers are located on the same or
contiguous lots as the building development.



   (B)   No mobile home shall be used as a dwelling unit on any lot or
tract of land other than one approved as a mobile home park by the village,
and licensed by the State Board of Health. Any such mobile home park shall be
established only as part of a planned unit development and shall not be less
than ten acres in area. Any such mobile home park shall be designated and
operated to meet or exceed the requirements of the United States Standards
Institute Standard for Mobile Home Park Design (ANSI A 119.3, 1971, as
amended) and any such mobile home located therein shall be constructed to
meet or exceed the requirements of the United States Standards Institute
Standards for Mobile Home Design and Construction (USAS A 119.1, 1969, as
amended).



   (C)   Mobile homes shall not be parked or stored in the open on any
lot except for the purpose of display prior to sale. Such parking or storage
may be permitted on a lot in districts where mobile home sales or
manufacturing establishments are permitted, or by special use.



   (D)   In residential areas, major recreational equipment and
trailers may be parked in a required front yard on the driveway; provided
that, such vehicles must be parked not more than 15 feet from the garage or
principal building if there is no garage. Storage, on a seasonal basis, of
major recreational equipment may be located in a side yard (not adjoining a
street), or a rear yard on a non-paved surface; provided that, the
landscaping or other surface material is not torn up and no permanent ruts
are created. Occasional use of not more than seven days out of a 30-day
period as sleeping quarters will be permitted. No connections or use for
living quarters will be allowed as listed below:



      (1)   Connection to sewer;



      (2)   Connection to water for other than filling or
maintenance purposes;



      (3)   Cooking with equipment; and



      (4)   Use of sanitation facilities within equipment.



   (E)   Any person who owns or controls auto-mobile vehicles or
trailers of any kind or type in disrepair, rehabilitation, abandoned or
otherwise creating a hazard or eyesore shall not be allowed to park or store,
or cause or permit to be parked or stored, any such vehicle on any
residentially zoned property other than in completely enclosed buildings.



§ 16-12-5  USE OF MODEL HOMES.



   (A)   The use of model homes in a residential zone beyond the period
of time at which a reasonable number of residences remain unsold to their
first buyer constitutes, under the existing provisions of the Zoning Code, an
improper commercial use within a residential zone. The purpose of this
section is to assist those officials of the village who make decisions
regarding ordinance enforcement as to when, as a matter of policy, ordinance
enforcement shall be initiated against such intrusive commercial uses. Any
person who owns or operates a residential model home in a manner contrary to
this section shall be guilty of violation of this section of the village
code, as well as the more direct violation of operating a commercial use
within a residential zone.



   (B)   The use of model homes within areas zoned residential shall be
governed by the following.



      (1)   Models shall be used only for sales. Models may not be
used for storage purposes or any other purpose not directed toward the
display of a home with interior decoration, a part of which may be used for a
sales office.



      (2)   Landscaped off-street parking shall be provided directly
next to the principal sales office.



      (3)   Customer “guidewalks” shall be constructed on the
model site and shall not extend across sidewalks or into the parkway.



      (4)   In every principal model site, a site plan in a size at
least three feet by three feet shall be prominently displayed which will show
the authorized use of all property within 500 feet of the areas where homes
shown in the model sites may be purchased. The purpose of this provision is
to prevent situations in which home buyers purchase homes and commit to lot
placements without specific knowledge of the nature of the type of
developments which will be constructed nearby. The measurement of 500 feet
shall include both land under the control of the builder and land under the
control of other parties.



      (5)   Exterior display lighting of the models shall be turned
off between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Security lighting may be on
during these hours; however, in no case shall illumination as measured at any
property line of the lot where the light source is located exceed the
standards set forth in § 16-10-1(D)(7)(a). In addition, any security
lighting shall be diffused and shall be directed at the structure itself or
the ground immediately adjacent to the structure. No security or other
lighting shall be directed to reflect into public right-of-way or into any
adjacent lot along the perimeter of the model home lot.



      (6)   Reminders shall be posted in the sales facilities for
customers to be respectful of adjacent property owners’ rights to enjoy the
residential setting in which they have purchased their homes. The sign shall
request that the potential home buyers respect the privacy of home owners who
live in the vicinity of the model sites.



      (7)   Any person who owns or controls a model home area shall
keep the exterior of the property, including any vacant areas, clean of
refuse and rubbish.



      (8)   Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for the use
of a model home, the perimeter of that lot shall be fenced in accordance with
the Fence Code (Ch. 6, Art. 12), with a fence at least three feet in height.



      (9)   No model home area may contain a structure which cannot
be purchased in the adjacent subdivisions which this model home area has been
constructed to serve. In particular, it shall be a violation of this section
to build a model which can only be ordered to be built in an off-site
subdivision.



      (10)   An owner or developer may not utilize a model home
located in one development to sell homes to be constructed in another
development, except under the limited circumstances set forth in this
division (B)(10).



         (a)   Off-site models may only be used for other
developments within the village and may not be used as sales areas for homes
being constructed in other municipalities or in unincorporated areas.



         (b)   Off-site model homes may only be used for a
limited period. That period shall be the shorter of either of the following:



            1.   Nine months from the recording of the first
final subdivision plat for the first subdivision for the off-site location
within the village for which the model homes are to be used as a sales aid; or



            2.   Nine months from the date of the issuance of
the tenth to the last certificate of occupancy in the development for which
the on-site models were originally constructed. In the event that the owner
or developer has not been able to construct model homes at the new location
within the nine-month period set out above, an application for a variance may
be made with the corporate authorities for a period of up to an additional
six months. Such an application shall state with specificity the particular
reason why the owner or developer has been prevented, by factors outside of
his or her control, to complete the model homes at the new location.



(Ord. 96-03-18, passed 3-18-1996)



§ 16-12-6  HOME OCCUPATIONS



   (A)   Intent and purpose.



      (1)   To protect residential areas from adverse impacts that
are sometimes associated with home occupations;



      (2)   Maintain and preserve the character of residential
neighborhoods;



      (3)   Provide for the protection of the health, safety and
welfare of all village residents; and



      (4)   Afford all residents of the village a broad choice in
the use of their home to produce or supplement personal and family income in
our ever changing society.



   (B)   Performance standards.



      (1)   Only lawful activities that involve the performance of a
business or occupation that is a permitted use or special use within the
zoning districts contained within this chapter may be conducted within a home
occupation. Exception: a person who possesses a valid federal firearms
license may carry out that business as a home occupation; provided that, all
other regulations of this section are complied with.



      (2)   It is conducted within the dwelling by a member of the
family residing in the dwelling, and not more than one additional
non-resident assistant or employee on the premises.



      (3)   Home occupations shall not involve the use of any
accessory building, second structure or outside storage of materials or
equipment.



      (4)   There is no display or activity that will indicate from
the exterior of the dwelling that it is being used in whole or in part for
any use other than a dwelling, except one name plate shall be permitted, no
more than one square foot in area which contains only the name of the
occupant of the dwelling and the home occupation conducted therein and is
attached to the dwelling and not illuminated.



      (5)   There shall be no structural alterations or special
construction features inconsistent with a residential use. There shall be no
separate outside entrance provided solely for the occupation.



      (6)   The noise, dust, glare, odors, noxious fumes, vibrations
or smoke emanating from the premises should not exceed that which is normally
produced by a single-family dwelling.



      (7)   Equipment which is necessary to the occupation may be
used; provided, it does not create visible or audible interference in radio
or television receivers or phones and it does not cause fluctuations in line
voltage off the premises.



      (8)   It does not generate significantly greater traffic
volume than normally expected in a residential area, except as outlined
elsewhere in this section, and deliveries to the occupation by the United
States Postal Service, UPS, Federal Express or any other licensed delivery
service do not exceed what would normally be expected in a residential area.



      (9)   The parking of customer’s or client’s vehicles
should not create safety hazards or unusual congestion. If the occupation is
of the type that customers or clients visit the premises frequently, there
shall be no more than four clients or customers in the dwelling unit or on
the premises during any period of 60 consecutive minutes. Motor vehicle
traffic generated by the occupation shall be prohibited from visiting the
premises between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except for child care
operations. Motor vehicle traffic associated with the occupation shall be
limited to no more than four vehicles during any period of 60 consecutive
minutes. The number of additional customers, clients or motor vehicles can be
increased to not more than eight to allow for the type of occupation that
involves classes, demonstrations, meetings, students, day care or other
similar occupations.



      (10)   A day care facility may provide outdoor supervised
recreation on the property during reasonably limited periods.



      (11)   The use shall comply with all local, state or federal
regulations pertinent to the activity involved. The operation shall not be
construed as an exemption from any such regulations, including but not
limited to any regulation or requirement regarding licensing; storage of
drugs, pharmaceuticals, chemicals and the like; the disposal of any drugs,
pharmaceuticals, chemicals and the like.



      (12)   All persons engaging in home occupation activities for
which a federal firearms license is required shall store firearms either in
locked cases or in racks in which the firearms are securely locked to the
racks. Firearms ammunition shall only be stored in locked cases.



      (13)   For the purpose of this section, garage sales are not
considered a home occupation and are not required to comply with the
performance standards contained herein; provided that, a residential property
may conduct a maximum of three garage sales per calendar year, and may
participate in a maximum of five multi-home garage sales per calendar year.
An individual or multi-home garage sale may not exceed four days in duration.



   (C)   Administration procedures.



      (1)   Any person with intent to operate a home occupation must
make application with the Village Clerk.



      (2)   If the Community Development Department determines that
a violation is occurring or has occurred and has not been corrected, it shall
request that the Village Board hold a hearing to revoke or suspend the home
occupation permit or business license or it shall institute an ordinance
enforcement action.



      (3)   The application fee for a home occupation permit is $25
and must be paid at the time of the request.



      (4)   A permit for a home occupation and/or companion business
license, if one is required, shall be issued only to the occupant of the home
and is non-transferable.



      (5)   The Community Development Department may deny the
issuance of a permit for a home occupation for non-compliance with the
criteria set forth in the Zoning Code. Any appeal of the Department’s
decision in regard to denial of a home occupation shall be made to the Zoning
Board of Appeals which shall conduct a hearing, and shall either order a
permit to be granted, or affirm its denial.



      (6)   Inspection: the home occupation applicant shall permit
any reasonable inspection of the premises, as required by law, by the
Community Development Department, to determine compliance with the Zoning
Code regulations.



   (D)   Enforcement.



      (1)   Any person believing that a violation or violations of
these regulations is occurring and who desires that action be taken by the
village shall notify the Community Development Department in writing of such
alleged violations. Within 30 calendar days after receipt by the department
of such written allegations, an investigation of the alleged allegations to
determine the merits thereof will be made. Within ten calendar days after the
Department has completed the investigation, written notice will be given to
the complaining person.



         (a)   If the Department determines that no violation as
alleged or otherwise is occurring, written notification of that decision
shall be given to the complaining person.



         (b)   If the Department determines that a violation is
occurring or has occurred as alleged, notification of that decision and a
time for compliance shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to both the violator and complaining person. The written
notification shall also state what action, if any, will be taken if
compliance is not timely effected.



      (2)   Any person feeling aggrieved by a decision of the
Department may appeal that decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals, which
shall render a recommendation to the Village Board.



   (E)   Nonconforming uses. Any home occupation operating in the
village on the date of the passage of this section (2-9-1988) can continue to
operate so long as it remains in compliance with the prior provisions
regarding home occupations which were in existence at the time the home
occupation commenced. Any new home occupation, or expansion of an existing
use, shall comply with the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 2006-08-41, passed 8-21-2006; Ord. 2009-08-37, passed 8-3-2009)



ARTICLE 13:  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING



Section



   16-13-1   General provisions; parking and loading



   16-13-2   Additional regulations; parking



   16-13-3   Schedule of parking requirements



   16-13-4   Additional regulations; off-street loading



   16-13-5   Schedule of loading requirements



§ 16-13-1  GENERAL PROVISIONS; PARKING AND LOADING.



   (A)   Scope of regulations. The off-street parking and loading
provisions of this chapter shall apply as follows.



      (1)   Accessory off-street parking and off-street loading
facilities shall be provided as required by the regulations of this section
for all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land established in
each district after the effective date of this chapter. Where a building
permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this chapter; and,
provided that, construction is begun within six months of such effective date
and is diligently prosecuted to completion, parking and loading facilities in
the amounts required for the issuance of such building permit may be provided
in lieu of any different amounts required by this chapter.



      (2)   When the intensity of use of any building, structure or
premises shall be increased through addition of dwelling units, gross floor
area, seating capacity or other units of measurement specified herein for
required parking or loading facilities, parking and loading facilities as
required herein shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use.



      (3)   Whenever the existing use of a building or structure
shall hereafter be changed to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall
be provided as required for such new use. However, if the building or
structure was erected prior to the effective date of this chapter, additional
parking or loading facilities are mandatory only in the amount by which the
requirements for the new use would exceed those for the existing use if the
latter were subject to the parking and loading provisions herein.



   (B)   Existing parking and loading facilities. Accessory off-street
parking and/or loading facilities in existence on the effective date of this
chapter and located on the same lot as the building or use served shall not
hereafter be reduced below the requirements of this chapter for a similar new
building or use.



   (C)   Permissive parking and loading facilities. Nothing in this
chapter shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off-street
parking or loading facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings;
provided that, there is adherence to all regulations herein governing the
location, design, improvement and operation of such facilities.



   (D)   Damage or destruction. For any conforming or nonconforming
building or use which is in existence on the effective date of this chapter,
which subsequently thereto is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse,
explosion or other cause, and which is reconstructed, reestablished or
repaired, off-street parking and loading facilities equivalent to any
maintained at the time of such damage or destruction shall be restored or
continued in operation. The Zoning Board of Appeals may vary the requirement
where it would be impossible or economically unfeasible to provide the amount
of required parking on or near the site, and where the continuance of the
non-conformance will not unduly interfere with adjoining uses. However, in no
case shall it be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading
facilities in excess of those required by this chapter for equivalent new
uses or construction.



   (E)   Control of off-site parking facilities. When required parking
facilities are provided on land other than the zoning lot on which the
building or use served by such facilities is located, they shall be and
remain in the same possession or ownership as the zoning lot occupied by the
building or use to which the parking facilities are necessary. No such
off-site parking facilities shall be authorized and no occupancy permit shall
be issued where the plans call for parking other than on the same zoning lot
until and unless the Board of Appeals has reviewed the plans and heard the
applicant and made findings that the common ownership or possession of the
zoning lot and site of the parking facilities are reasonably certain to
continue and that the off-site parking facilities will be maintained at all
times during the life of the proposed use or buildings. If, for any reason,
the parking required by this chapter and provided off-site shall no longer be
available and replacement parking is not provided, the owner and occupant of
the structure for which parking has been diminished shall reduce the size of
the use within one year after the date the parking is lost to make the use
conform to the then available parking.



   (F)   Submission of plot plan. Any application for a building permit
or for a certificate of occupancy where no building permit is required shall
include therewith a plot plan, drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing
any parking or loading facilities to be provided in compliance with this
Zoning Code.



§ 16-13-2  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS; PARKING.



   Off-street parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with
additional regulations hereinafter set forth.



   (A)   Use of parking facilities. Accessory off-street parking
facilities required as accessory to uses herein listed shall be solely for
the parking of motor vehicles of patrons, occupants or employees of the
principal use or building. Off-street parking facilities accessory to
residential use and developed in any Residential District in accordance with
the requirements of this section shall be used solely for the parking of
passenger automobiles owned by occupants of the dwelling structures to which
such facilities are accessory or by guests of such occupants, unless
otherwise permitted in division (F)(3) below. Under no circumstances shall
any person use or allow to be used a required parking facility accessory to
residential structures for the storage of trucks or other commercial vehicles
or for the parking of automobiles belonging to the employees, owners,
tenants, visitors or customers of business or manufacturing establishments,
or for the parking or storage of licensed or unlicenced construction
equipment or vehicles.



   (B)   Joint parking facilities. Off-street parking facilities for
different buildings, structures or uses, or for mixed uses, may be provided
collectively in any zoning district in which separate parking facilities for
each constituent use would be permitted; provided that, the total number of
spaces so located together shall not be less than the sum of the separate
requirements of each use, except as otherwise provided within division (E)(8)
below.



   (C)   Area. A required off-street parking space shall be at least
nine and one-half feet in width and at least 18 feet in length, exclusive of
access drives or aisles, ramps, columns or office or work areas. Enclosed
parking spaces shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven feet. In the
One-Family Residence Districts, coverage of the actual rear yard by the sum
of the detached garage, parking pad and driveway areas shall not exceed 50%
of the actual rear yard area.



   (D)   Access. Each off-street parking space shall open directly upon
an aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide safe and
efficient means of vehicular access to a street or easement in a manner which
will least interfere with traffic movement. Access to single-family
residential driveways shall be in direct line with and of the same width as
the driveway for the dwelling to be served.



   (E)   Design and maintenance.



      (1)   Open and enclosed parking spaces. Accessory parking
spaces may be open to the sky, enclosed or semi-enclosed in a building or
structure.



      (2)   Surfacing. Except as otherwise provided in this Zoning
Code, all open parking spaces and access thereto shall be improved with
all-weather material, in accordance with specifications approved by the
Village Engineer. Areas not surfaced shall be landscaped and planting shall
be maintained in a healthy, growing condition, neat and orderly in
appearance; provided, however, that, the Plan Commission or Village Board may
grant approval for the construction of a temporary parking lot. Such
temporary parking lot shall be constructed of such material including, but
not limited to, gravel, which shall be approved by the Village Engineer as
providing a firm base to vehicles, and such temporary parking lot shall be
adequately drained. A permit to maintain a temporary parking lot shall be
granted only under those circumstances which would make the construction of a
permanent parking lot an economic hardship upon the applicant. Temporary
parking lot permits shall be allowed for up to one non-renewable period of 18
months.



      (3)   Minimum paved area.



         (a)   For lots with a paved area greater than 10,000
square feet, a minimum of 5% of the paved area must be landscaped to create
visual relief.



         (b)   This provision is in addition to the landscaping
of minimum required setbacks and must be used in a fashion that will break
the expanse of the paving.



         (c)   Lots within or adjacent to a Residential District
must further be screened with landscaping, earth berms or fences in such a
manner so as to soften their impact on residential buildings; provided,
however, that in areas within an Industrial District only, the minimum of 5%
of the paved area which must be landscaped may be concentrated in one or two
locations within the parking area rather than being located throughout the
parking area as shall be required in all other zoning districts.



      (4)   Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street
parking areas shall be directed away from residential properties in such a
way as not to create a nuisance.



      (5)   Repair and service. No motor vehicle repair work or
service of any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with any parking
facilities. No gasoline or motor oil shall be sold in conjunction with any
accessory parking facilities.



      (6)   Drainage. All off-street parking area plans shall be
submitted to the Village Engineer for approval of adequate drainage of water.



      (7)   Building permit. No parking lot shall be constructed
unless and until a permit is issued by the Building Official. Applications
for a permit shall be submitted to the Building Official in such form as may
be determined by the Building Official and shall be accompanied with two sets
of plans for the development and construction of the parking lot showing that
the provisions of this section will be fully complied with.



      (8)   Minimum requirements. Plans for the layout of off-street
parking facilities shall be in accordance with the following requirements,
except in the Industrial District, where employee parking space width may be
reduced to nine feet when approved by the Community Development Director.



   REQUIRED MINIMUM PARKING LOT DIMENSIONS IN FEET



 

Parking Pattern
 
Minimum Parking Space Width
A
 
Minimum Maneuvering Lane
B
 
Minimum Parking Space Length
C
 
Minimum Parking Tier Width - Exterior Tier
D
 
Minimum Parking Tier Width - Interior Tier
E


   0 degrees (parallel parking)
 
8 feet
 
12 feet (one-way)

24 feet (two-way)
 
23 feet
 
NA
 
NA


   30 degrees
 
9.5 feet*
 
12 feet (one-way)
 
18 feet
 
17.25 feet
 
12.75 feet


   45 degrees
 
9.5 feet*
 
12 feet (one-way)
 
18 feet
 
19.5 feet
 
15.75 feet


   60 degrees
 
9.5 feet*
 
15 feet (one-way)
 
18 feet
 
20.5 feet
 
17.75 feet


   90 degrees
 
9.5 feet*
 
24 feet (two-way)
 
18 feet
 
18 feet
 
18 feet


* =    Employee parking space widths may be reduced to nine feet in an
Industrial Zoning District when approved by the Community Development
Director.



 



F   =   Six-inch bumper overhang may be used to reduce applicable space
and maneuvering lane requirements when approved by the Community Development
Director.







 



      (9)   Striping. Striping between spaces shall be in the form
of a four inch hair-pin/looped line, 16 inches apart.



   (F)   Location of accessory off-street parking facilities. Accessory
off-street parking spaces shall be provided as required by § 16-13-3.
Required parking spaces shall not be located within the public right-of-way.
The location of off-street parking spaces in relation to the use served shall
be as prescribed hereinafter. All distances specified shall be walking
distances between such parking spaces and a main entrance to the use served.



      (1)   For uses in the Residential District.



         (a)   Parking spaces accessory to multi-family and
non-residential uses shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use
served.



         (b)   Parking lots accessory to multi-family uses shall
not be located more than 30 feet from a convenient entrance to the building.
Parking lots shall be so designed so at least one parking space per dwelling
unit is within 150 feet of a building entrance.



         (c)   Parking spaces accessory to multi-family and
non-residential uses shall not be located nearer than 40 feet from an
adjoining single-family residential lot nor less than 20 feet from a street
right-of-way line. No on-site roadway or parking lot pavement of any type
shall be located within ten feet from a street right-of-way line, except for
approved entry drives.



         (d)   Parking of commercial vehicles. No commercial
vehicles bearing a class designation other than A or B under the provisions
of 625 ILCS 5/3-801 et seq. shall be parked or stored on any residential
premises classified as a Residential District, except when making a delivery
or rendering a service at such premises.



         (e)   No construction equipment or vehicles, or service
equipment or vehicles, shall be parked or stored in a Residential District,
unless such equipment or vehicle is being used for the purpose of
construction, alteration, excavation, service or repair of a property within
a Residential District. In the event that such equipment or vehicle is not
being used in the construction, alteration, excavation, service or repair of
property in a Residential District, such equipment or vehicle shall not be
parked or stored overnight unless it is parked or stored at least 500 feet
from an occupied residence. Maintenance equipment may be stored in a garage
in multi-family properties. Equipment used solely for snow plowing may be
stored on the premises where such equipment will be used during the period
from November 1 through March 31 each season.



      (2)   For uses in Business Districts.



         (a)   All required parking spaces shall be located
within 500 feet of the use served. However, no parking spaces accessory to a
use in a Business District shall be located in a Residential District, except
that private, free, off-street parking accessory to Business District uses
and municipal parking lots may be allowed by special use permit in accordance
with the administrative section of this code (Ch. 16, Art. 15) within 200
feet of the site served and adjacent to any Business District.



         (b)   Parking spaces shall not be located nearer than 40
feet from an adjoining lot in a Residence District, or less than 20 feet from
a street right-of-way line. No on-site roadway or parking lot pavement of any
type shall be located within ten feet of a street right-of-way line, except
for approved entry drives.



      (3)   For uses in Industrial Districts. All required parking
spaces shall be within 500 feet of the use served. Off-street parking spaces
shall not be located less than 20 feet from a street right-of-way line.



   (G)   Landbanking. Landbanking of required parking spaces as
greenspace may be permitted when approved as a variation, provided the owner
of the property demonstrates through employee counts that the total number of
parking spaces required using the square footage parking requirements
outlined herein are not necessary and there is sufficient usable land area
available on the subject property to provide the required parking spaces if
deemed necessary by the village in the future.



(Ord. 91-12-82, passed 12-10-1991; Ord. 92-01-12, passed 1-28-1992; Ord.
92-06-70, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 93-09-83, passed 9-28-1993; Ord. 2002-08-49,
passed 8-19-2002; Ord. 2007-03-11, passed 3-19-2007; Ord. 2011-10-34, passed
10-3-2011)



§ 16-13-3  SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   For the following uses, accessory off-street parking spaces shall be
provided as required hereinafter. Parking spaces required on an employee
basis shall be based on the maximum number of employees on duty or residing,
or both, on the premises at any one time:



 

Class
 
Use
 
Required Spaces




(A) Residential
 
Dormitories
 
Based on demand and Zoning Board of Appeals approval.


Group community residences
 
Based on demand and Zoning Board of Appeals approval.


Hotels/motels
 
1 per dwelling unit and lodging room, plus accessory off-street parking as
specified herein for each accessory use such as restaurants, meeting rooms
and retail shops.


Multiple-family dwelling
 
For apartments with 2 or more bedrooms, there shall be provided 3 per
dwelling unit. For apartments with 1 bedroom, there shall be provided 2 per
dwelling unit.


Single-family dwelling units, two-family dwelling units, multiple
single-family dwelling units
 
3 per dwelling unit.


(B) Schools
 
College or university
 
Based on demand and Zoning Board of Appeals approval.


Commercial, trade or business schools
 
1 per employee and 1 per 2 students, based on the maximum number of students
which can be accommodated with such design capacity.


Elementary or junior high schools, public or private
 
1 per each faculty member and other full time employees.


High schools, public or private
 
1 per each faculty member and other full time employee, plus 1 per each 7
students based on maximum design capacity.


Music or dance schools
 
1 per 200 square feet of floor area.


(C) Service/Office
 
Banks, credit unions, savings and loan association
 
1 per 400 square feet of floor area. Drive-in banks or other similar drive-in
facilities shall provide 4 stacking spaces per teller or customer service
window.


Barber shops
 
1 per 100 square feet of floor area.


Beauty parlor
 
1 per 100 square feet of floor area.


Business and professional offices
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Blueprinting, photocopying and printing shops
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Car washes
 
10 stacking spaces for each wash rack, plus 1 per employee.


Costume rental shops
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Currency exchanges
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Dry cleaning establishments and clothes pressing establishments
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Exterminating shops
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Funeral parlors and undertaking establishments
 
1 per 100 square feet of public accessible floor area, and 1 per parlor
vehicle and 1 per employee.


Garden equipment cleaning and repair shops
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Home appliances cleaning and repair shops
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Interior decorating shops
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Kennels and indoor kennels and boarding facility
 
2 per service bay or 1 for each employee during the peak shift, whichever is
greater.


Laundromats
 
1 per 167 square feet of floor area.


Linen, diaper, supply services
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Locksmith shops
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Motor vehicle service and repair facilities
 
2 per service bay.


Oil change shops
 
2 per service bay, and 2 stacking spaces per service bay.


Photography studios
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Photography studios, commercial
 
1 per 400 square feet of floor area.


Preschool learning centers, nursery schools, day care centers
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Shoe repair shops
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Tailor shops
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Travel agency
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Veterinary clinics and animal hospitals
 
2 per service bay.


(D) Retail
 
Auction house
 
1 per 150 square feet of floor area.


Automobile and commercial vehicle fueling plaza
 
Automobile parking for uses inside the building as required in § 16-13-3,
plus a minimum of three truck parking spaces for each commercial vehicle
fueling lane.


Boat and trailer sales and service
 
1 per 167 square feet of showroom space, 1 per employee and 1 per service bay.


Convenience stores
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Department stores
 
1 per 400 square feet of floor area.


Florist shops
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Furniture and appliance stores
 
1 per 400 square feet of floor area.


Gasoline stations (full service)
 
1 per each island of gasoline pumps, and 2 per service bay.


Gasoline stations (self service)
 
2, and 1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Greenhouse and nurseries
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area, and 1 per 1,000 square feet of outside
sales area.


Motor vehicle sales
 
1 per 400 square feet of floor area.


Motorcycle and snowmobile sales and service
 
1 per 167 square feet of floor area, 1 per employee, and 1 per service bay.


Packaged liquor stores
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Shopping centers and shopping plazas
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area in centers containing up to 10% of the
total floor area devoted to food service. Centers which provide more than 10%
of food service shall provide 6 additional spaces for each additional 1,000
square feet of food service. Centers which include auction houses, cinemas or
fitness centers will be required to meet the parking regulations for those
uses as if they were freestanding.


All other retail stores (unless specified elsewhere in § 16-13-3)
 
4 per 1,000 square feet of floor area.


(E) Food/Tavern/ Restaurant
 
Bakeries (carry-out only)
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Butcher shops, meat markets
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Candy stores
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Catering and banquet facilities
 
Based on demand and Zoning Board of Appeals Approval.


Delicatessens (carry-out only)
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Ice cream stores
 
1 per 100 square feet of floor area.


Restaurant - delivery only
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


Restaurant - sit down formal
 
1 per 50 square feet of floor area.


Restaurant - sit down informal (full service)
 
1 per 50 square feet of floor area.


Restaurant - sit down buffet (limited service)
 
1 per 50 square feet of floor area.


Restaurant - fast food with sit down
 
1 per 55 square feet, plus a minimum of 10 stacking spaces for drive-through
window service with a minimum of 5 of these spaces designed for the ordering
station.


Taverns, nightclubs and cocktail lounges
 
1 per 100 square feet of floor area.


(F) Religious
 
Churches
 
1 per each four seats, or for each 80 inches of seating space in the main
auditorium or assembly hall. Adequate space shall also be provided for buses
used in connection with the activities of the institution, and all loading
and unloading shall take place upon the premises.


Rectories, seminaries, convents and monasteries
 
Based on demand and Zoning Board of Appeals Approval.


(G) Recreational/Civic/ Social
 
Amusement parks
 
Based on demand and Zoning board of Appeals Approval.


Archery ranges (indoor)
 
1 per 100 square feet of floor area.


Bowling alleys
 
1 per 150 square feet of floor area, plus additional spaces as may be
required herein for affiliated uses such as restaurants.


Clubs and lodges, private
 
1 per 100 square feet of floor area.


Electronic game rooms
 
1 per 150 square feet of floor area, and adequate area for bicycle storage.


Golf; courses
 
65 per 18 holes, 45 per 9 holes, and 1 per each employee, and additional
spaces for accessory uses as required by code.


Golf; driving ranges
 
1 per tee and one per employee.


Golf; miniature courses
 
1 per hole and one per employee.


Gymnasiums, stadiums, grandstands
 
1 per each three seats or for each 60 inches of seating space. When such
facilities for public assembly are accessory to a school, and when approved
by the Plan Commission, the required number of parking spaces may be reduced
by the number of spaces provided, as herein required for the applicable
school.


Indoor children’s recreational and party facility
 
1 for each 4 children and 1 for each 2 employees.


Libraries, museums and art galleries
 
1 per 350 square feet of floor area.


Meeting halls, convention halls, exhibition halls
 
1 per each three seats or for each 60 inches of seating space.


Physical fitness centers, health salons, swimming pools, skating rinks
 
1 per 100 square feet of floor area.


Pool halls/billiard rooms
 
1 per 100 square feet of floor area.


Recreational center and community centers
 
1 per every 2 employees, plus additional parking space for use by the public
as determined by the Plan Commission.


Theaters (indoor)
 
1 per every three seats.


Theaters (outdoor)
 
Reservoir parking space equal to 10% of the vehicle capacity of such theaters
shall be provided.


(H) Public
 
Fire stations and public utility uses
 
1 per every three employees, and spaces adequate in number to serve the
public, as determined by the Plan Commission.


Governmental office buildings
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area.


(I) Health/Medical
 
Hospital
 
1 per each 2 beds, and 1 per each 2 employees (other than staff doctors), and
1 parking space for each doctor assigned to the staff.


Medical or dental clinics and offices
 
1 per 150 square feet of floor area.


Rehabilitation facility
 
Based on demand and Zoning Board of Appeals Approval.


Rest homes, nursing homes, convalescent homes and hospices
 
1 per each four beds, and 1 per each 2 employees (other than staff doctors),
and 1 parking space for each doctor assigned to the staff.


(J) Manufacturing/ Transportation/ Warehousing
 
Cartage express facilities and motor freight terminals
 
1 per each 2 employees employed on the premises, and 1 per each vehicle
stored on the premises.


Industrial production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing or repairing
of materials, goods or products
 
1 per 600 square feet of floor area, or when the number of employees is
specifically indicated, 1 per employee, whichever is greater, as related to
the working period when the maximum number of persons are employed on the
premises.


Mini-warehouses
 
4 per 100 units, plus 1 per 250 square feet of office floor area, plus 2 if
there is an on-site manager.


Warehouse, storage, wholesale and mail order establishments
 
4, plus 1 per each 1,500 square feet of floor space over 1,200 square feet,
or when the number of employees is specifically indicated, 1 per employee
employed on the premises, whichever is greater, plus 1 per each vehicle
stored on the premise.


(K) Adult
 
All sexually oriented businesses as defined in § 16-19-3
 
1 per 250 square feet of floor area




 



   (L)   Other uses. Parking spaces for other permitted uses not listed
above shall be provided in accordance with the requirements designated by the
Plan Commission and, in the case of special uses, as recommended by the Plan
Commission and required by the Village Board.



   (M)   Mixed uses. When two or more uses are located on the same
zoning lot or within the same building and are not part of a shopping center,
as herein defined, parking spaces equal in number to the sums of the separate
requirements for each such use shall be provided. No parking space or portion
thereof shall serve as required space for more than one use unless otherwise
recommended by the Plan Commission and authorized by the Village Board.



(Ord. 91-12-82, passed 12-10-1991; Ord. 92-01-12, passed 1-28-1992; Ord.
2000-10-79, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2008-11-61, passed 11-17-2008; Ord.
2009-02-03, passed 2-2-2009; Ord. 2010-06-37, passed 6-21-2010; Ord.
2010-09-45, passed 9-7-2010; Ord. 2011-10-34, passed 10-3-2011; Ord.
2015-07-15, passed 7-20-2015)



§ 16-13-4  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS; OFF-STREET LOADING.



   (A)   Location. All required loading berths shall be located on the
same zoning lot as the use served. No loading berth for vehicles over two
tons capacity shall be located closer than 50 feet to any property in a
Residential District unless completely enclosed by building walls or a
uniformly painted solid fence or wall, or any combination thereof, not less
than six feet high. No permitted or required loading berth shall be located
within 25 feet of the nearest point of intersection of any two streets. All
loading and unloading docks where the public access road to such docks has a
right-of-way width of less than 80 feet shall be located at least 65 feet
behind the property line. No loading or unloading docks shall be located in
any front yard or side yard adjoining a street where that street has a
right-of-way width of 80 feet or greater.



   (B)   Access.



      (1)   Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed
with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or easement in a
manner which will least interfere with traffic movements.



      (2)   Every loading berth shall be provided with sufficient
maneuvering space to accommodate the potentially largest vehicle that may be
used on the lot where it is located.



      (3)   The loading berth access design for lots located on
major streets shall allow vehicles to access and exit the loading space
without having to make any backing movement on or onto the public street.



      (4)   For the purposes of this section of the Zoning Code,
major streets are as follows:



         Army Trail Road      Kuhn Road



         Country Farm Road      Lies Road



         Fair Oaks Road         Morton Road



         Fullerton Avenue      North Avenue



         Gary Avenue         Schmale Road



         Kehoe Boulevard      St. Charles Road



         Kimberly Drive



   (C)   Surfacing. All open off-street loading spaces shall be
improved with pavement and storm water drainage facilities in accordance with
specifications approved by the Village Engineer.



   (D)   Repair and service. No motor vehicle work or service of any
kind shall be permitted in conjunction with loading facilities provided in
the Business District.



   (E)   Utilization. Space allocated to any off-street loading berth
shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the requirements for any
off-street parking space.



(Ord. 2002-08-49, passed 8-19-2002; Ord. 2011-10-34, passed 10-3-2011)



§ 16-13-5  SCHEDULE OF LOADING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The minimum number of off-street loading spaces accessory to
non-residential uses in the Residential District shall be one loading berth
for buildings containing 10,000 to 100,000 square feet of gross floor area,
plus one additional loading berth for each additional 100,000 square feet or
fraction thereof.



   (B)   Off-street loading berths, exclusive of aisles and maneuvering
space, accessory to uses in the Business and Industrial Districts shall be as
follows:



 

Floor Area of Establishment
 
Required Number
 
Minimum Size
 
Minimum Vertical Clearance


0 - 5,000
 
1
 
10 feet x 35 feet each
 
14 feet


5,001 - 10,000
 
1
 
12 feet x 55 feet each
 
14 feet


10,001 - 25,000
 
2
 
12 feet x 55 feet each
 
14 feet


25,001 - 40,000
 
2
 
12 feet x 55 feet each
 
14 feet


40,001 - 100,000
 
3
 
12 feet x 55 feet each
 
14 feet


For each additional 100,000 square feet or fraction thereof of gross floor
area over 100,000 square feet of gross floor area, 1 additional loading space
shall be required. Such additional loading space shall be at least 12 feet in
width by 50 feet in length.



 



ARTICLE 14:  NONCONFORMING LOTS, BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES



Section



   16-14-1   Intent



   16-14-2   Authority of uses of nonconforming lots



   16-14-3   Authority to continue nonconforming buildings, structures
and uses



   16-14-4   Conformity of lots reduced in size by the exercise of
eminent domain



§ 16-14-1  INTENT.



   The intent of this article is to provide for the regulation of
nonconforming lots, buildings, structures and uses, and to specify those
circumstances and conditions under which nonconforming lots, buildings,
structures and uses shall be accepted or shall be gradually eliminated upon
reaching the end of their respective normal useful life, in accordance with
the authority granted by state law.



§ 16-14-2  AUTHORITY OF USES OF NONCONFORMING LOTS.



   (A)   Contiguous parcels. When two or more parcels of land, each of
which separately lacks adequate area and dimension to qualify for a permitted
use under the requirements of the use district in which it is located, are
contiguous and are held in one ownership, they shall be combined to form one
conforming zoning lot.



   (B)   Lots or parcels of land of record. Any single lot or parcel of
land, held in one ownership, which was of record at the time of adoption of
the chapter, that does not meet the requirements for minimum lot width and
area, and which did meet the requirements of the previous ordinance, may be
utilized for a permitted use; provided that, yards, courts or usable open
spaces are not less than 75% of the minimum required dimensions and areas.



§ 16-14-3  AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND
USES.



   Any building, structure or use which existed lawfully at the time of
the adoption of this chapter and which remains or becomes nonconforming upon
the adoption of this chapter, or of any subsequent amendment thereto, may be
continued only in accordance with the following regulations.



   (A)   Repairs and alterations.



      (1)   Ordinary repairs and alterations may be made to a
nonconforming building or structure, all or substantially all of which is
designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is
located or which does not conform to the yard, height, lot coverage, floor
area ratio or other dimensional or bulk provisions of this chapter; provided
that, no structural alterations shall be made in or to such building or
structure, except those required by law or except to make the building or
structure and use thereof conform to the regulations of the district in which
it is located.



      (2)   Ordinary repairs and alterations shall be determined by
the Community Development Director and shall include, among other things, the
replacement of storage tanks where the safety of operation of the
installation requires such replacement.



   (B)   Additions and enlargements. A nonconforming building or
structure, all or substantially all of which is designated or intended for a
use not permitted in the district in which it is located, or which does not
comply with other provisions of this chapter, shall not be added to or
enlarged in any manner unless such nonconforming building or structure and
use thereof, including all additions and enlargements thereto, is made to
conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located.
However, the Village Board may, after receiving the recommendations of the
Zoning Board of Appeals, pursuant to a public hearing, vary the provisions of
this section where it would be inequitable not to allow the addition and
where the public health or safety will not suffer thereby.



   (C)   Moving. No building or structure shall be moved in whole or in
part to any other location unless every portion of such building or structure
and the use thereof is made to conform to all regulations of the district
into which it is moved.



   (D)   Restoration of damaged nonconforming buildings or structures.
A building, structure or portion thereof, all or substantially all of which
is designated or intended for a use which is not permitted in the district in
which it is located, or which does not comply with other provisions of this
chapter, and which is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or act
of God to the extent that the cost of restoration to the condition in which
it was before the occurrence will exceed 50% of the total cost of
reconstructing the entire building or structure and the use thereof, shall
conform to all regulations of the district in which it is located. In the
event that such damage or destruction is less than 50% of the cost of
reconstructing the entire building or structure, no repairs or construction
shall be made unless such restoration is started within one year from the
date of the partial destruction and is diligently prosecuted to completion.
However, the Village Board may, after receiving the recommendations of the
Zoning Board of Appeals, pursuant to a public hearing, vary the provisions of
this section where it would be inequitable not to allow the addition or
extension and where the public health or safety will not suffer thereby.



   (E)   Discontinuance of use of nonconforming building or structure.
A building, structure, or portion thereof, all or substantially all of which
is designed or intended for a use or a special use which is not permitted in
the district in which it is located, and which is vacant on the effective
date of this chapter, or thereafter becomes vacant and remains unoccupied, or
is not used for at least two consecutive months, shall not thereafter be
occupied or used, except by a use which conforms to the use regulations of
the district in which it is located.



   (F)   Change of use in nonconforming building or structure. The
nonconforming use of a building or structure may be changed to a use
permitted in the district in which the building or structure is located, but
no change shall extend or otherwise modify any provision made in this chapter
for elimination of such nonconforming building or structure and the use
thereof.



   (G)   Amortization. Any building or structure which is located in
the Residence District and all or substantially all of such building or
structure is designed or intended for use permitted only in a Business or
Industrial District, shall be removed or shall be altered, remodeled or
converted for a permitted use within six months after the amortization period
of such building or structure, which is hereby established in accordance with
the respective amortization period set forth below. ASSESSED VALUATION
referred to in divisions (G)(1), (G)(2) and (G)(3) below means the
unequalized assessed valuation of improvements on a lot established for real
estate tax purposes for the latest year for which figures are available from
the DuPage County Assessor.



      (1)   Assessed valuation more than $5,000. In accordance with
the types of construction classification set forth in the Building Code of
the village.



         (a)   Fireproof construction and noncombustible
construction, 40 years from date of original building permit or 25 years from
effective date of this chapter, or any previous ordinance under which the
building or structure was also nonconforming, whichever last occurs.



         (b)   Exterior masonry wall construction, 30 years from
date of original building permit or 20 years from effective date of this
chapter, or any previous ordinance under which the building or structure was
also nonconforming, whichever last occurs.



         (c)   Frame construction, 20 years from date of original
building permit or ten years from effective date of this chapter, or any
previous ordinance under which the building or structure was also
nonconforming, whichever last occurs.



      (2)   Assessed valuation at least $2,000, but not more than
$5,000. Eight years from date of original building permit or four years from
effective date of this chapter, or any previous ordinance under which the
building or structure was also nonconforming, whichever last occurs.



      (3)   Assessed valuation under $2,000. Four years from date of
original building permit or two years from effective date of this chapter, or
any previous ordinance under which the building or structure was also
nonconforming, whichever last occurs.



   (H)   Nonconforming use of conforming buildings or structures. The
existing nonconforming use of a part or all of a conforming building or
structure may be continued subject to the following provisions.



      (1)   The nonconforming use of a part of such building or
structure shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of such
building or structure, nor changed to any other nonconforming use.



      (2)   If a nonconforming use of such a building or structure
is discontinued for a period of six months, it shall not be renewed, and any
subsequent use of such building or structure shall conform to the use
regulations of the district in which the premises are located.



      (3)   No nonconforming use shall be changed to another
nonconforming use.



   (I)   Nonconforming use of land. The nonconforming use of land not
involving a building or structure, or in connection with which any building
or structure thereon is incidental or accessory to the principal use of land
may be continued subject to the following provisions.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided by law, such nonconforming
use shall not be expanded or extended beyond the area it occupies.



      (2)   If such nonconforming use of land is not used for at
least two months within a period of six consecutive months, it shall not
thereafter be renewed, and subsequent use of land shall conform to the
regulations of the district in which the land is located.



      (3)   No nonconforming use shall be changed to another
nonconforming use.



   (J)   Elimination of nonconforming use of land. The nonconforming
use of land shall be discontinued in accordance with the following
provisions:  (Assessed valuations referred to in divisions (J)(2) and (J)(3)
below are the unequalized assessed valuations of improvements on a lot
established for real estate tax purposes for the latest year for which
figures are available from the DuPage County Assessor.)



      (1)   Where no buildings or structures are employed in
connection with such use of land, discontinued within one year after the
effective date of this chapter.



      (2)   Where the only buildings or structures or other physical
improvements employed are accessory or incidental to such use of land and
have an assessed valuation of not more than $2,000, discontinued within two
years after the effective date of this chapter.



      (3)   Where the improvements, underground or substantially at
ground level, which comprise all or substantially all of the improvements
employed in such use of land and which have an assessed valuation of more
than $2,000, discontinued within five years after the effective date of this
chapter.



      (4)   Where such use of land is accessory to the nonconforming
use of a building or structure, it shall be discontinued on the same date on
which the nonconforming use of the building or structure is discontinued.



   (K)   Certificate of occupancy for nonconforming uses. A certificate
of occupancy shall be required for the continuation of all nonconforming uses
of land, buildings, or structures created by the passage of this chapter.
Application for such certificate of occupancy for nonconforming uses shall be
filed with the Community Development Director by the owner or lessee of the
land or building occupied by such nonconforming use within one year from the
effective date of this Zoning Code. It shall be the duty of the Community
Development Director to issue a certificate of occupancy for a nonconforming
use.



(Ord. 92-06-70, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 2007-03-11, passed 3-19-2007)



§ 16-14-4  CONFORMITY OF LOTS REDUCED IN SIZE BY THE EXERCISE OF EMINENT
DOMAIN.



   Lots, parcels or land of record, or portions of planned unit
developments which do not meet the requirements of minimum lot width and area
or minimum size of required yards which conformed to the provisions of this
code, but were reduced in size as the result of the exercise of eminent
domain or the threat of the exercise of eminent domain by a governmental body
and which have not lost required off-street parking or loading facilities
shall not be found to be nonconforming with the provisions of this code as a
result of the loss of such territory.



(Ord. 94-04-30, passed 4-11-1994)



ARTICLE 15:  ADMINISTRATION



Section



   16-15-1   The office of the Community Development Director



   16-15-2   Certificates of occupancy



   16-15-3   Plan Commission



   16-15-4   Zoning Board of Appeals



   16-15-5   Appeals



   16-15-6   Variations



   16-15-7   Amendments



   16-15-8   Special uses



   16-15-9   Procedures



   16-15-10   Expiration of application



§ 16-15-1  THE OFFICE OF THE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The Community Development Director shall enforce this chapter,
and in addition thereto and in furtherance of such authority shall perform
the duties as enumerated herein:



      (1)   Determine conformance of applications with regulations
of this chapter;



      (2)   Serve as the village’s Zoning Administrator, and in
such capacity shall:



         (a)   Interpret the zoning regulations when questions
arise;



         (b)   Determine which uses, though not contained by name
in a zoning district list of permitted uses, are of the same general
character and permit their establishment, in accordance with § 16-5-2; and



         (c)   Forward to the Village Board applications for
temporary buildings, structures and uses of land, in accordance with §
16-5-5.



      (3)   Issue all certificates of occupancy, and make and
maintain records thereof;



      (4)   Conduct inspections of buildings, structures and use of
land to determine compliance with the terms of this chapter;



      (5)   Issue violation notices that require compliance and
advise suspected violators of the right of appeal;



      (6)   Maintain permanent and current records of the
administration and enforcement of this chapter, including, but not limited
to, applications, processing and decisions for all amendments, variations and
appeals, and designate on the Zoning District Map each amendment and special
use granted by the Village Board;



      (7)   Forward to the Village Manager all applications
initially filed with the Community Development Director for amendments,
appeals, variations, special uses and other matters under this chapter upon
which the Village Board, the Zoning Board of Appeals and/or the Plan
Commission are required to act; and



      (8)   Provide such clerical and technical assistance as may be
required by the Zoning Board of Appeals and Plan Commission in the exercise
of their duties.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the Community Development Director to
approve any plans or issue any permits or certificates of occupancy for any
excavation or construction until he or she has inspected such plans in detail
and found them to conform with this chapter and other applicable ordinances
of the village.



   (C)   The Community Development Director shall not refuse to issue a
permit when conditions imposed by this chapter are complied with by the
applicant despite violations of contracts, such as covenants or private
agreements which might occur upon the granting of such permit, but where such
covenants are known to him or her, he or she may, at his or her discretion,
refuse the issuance of a permit for a period not to exceed seven days, during
which time he or she may notify the parties known to him or her to be
interested in the enforcement of such covenants.



   (D)   For any case involving an application for variation, map
amendment, text amendment or Gary/North Avenue Corridor review, the Community
Development Director may require that the applicant deposit an amount
sufficient to pay the estimated cost of a certified court reporter to attend
and record the entire hearing (appearance fee). The Community Development
Director shall make arrangements for such recording.



   (E)   The Community Development Director may delegate any of the
above authority to a village officer or employee.



(Ord. 92-06-70, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 2003-12-82, passed 12-1-2003; Ord.
2008-10-57, passed 10-20-2008)



§ 16-15-2  CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   No land shall be occupied or used for a new use, and no
building hereafter erected or altered shall be occupied or used in whole or
in part for any purpose whatsoever until a certificate of occupancy shall
have been issued by the Building Official stating that the building complies
with all the applicable ordinances of the village. No change of use shall be
made in any building or part thereof now or hereafter erected or altered
without a certificate of occupancy having been issued by the Building
Official, and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued to make such change
unless it is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and amendments
thereto.



   (B)   The Building Official may issue a temporary certificate of
occupancy for the use of a portion of a building, structure or land
improvement that is completed in compliance with all applicable codes and
ordinances of the village and the remaining portion is in the process of
completion. Such temporary certificate of occupancy shall be for a period not
to exceed six months from the date of its issuance and, if required, for an
extension of not more than a total of three additional months.



   (C)   Certificates of occupancy and compliance shall be applied for
co-incident with the application for a building permit and shall be issued
within 21 days after the erection or alteration of such building has been
completed. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office
of the Building Official and copies shall be furnished on request to any
person having proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected. A fee
shall be charged as established by the Village Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 92-06-70, passed 6-23-1992)



§ 16-15-3  PLAN COMMISSION.



   (A)   Creation. The Plan Commission of the Village of Carol Stream,
Illinois, which has been duly established with functions as prescribed by
state law, is the Plan Commission referred to in this chapter. The members of
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall serve as members of and constitute the Plan
Commission.



   (B)   Jurisdiction. The Plan Commission shall have the following
duties under this chapter:



      (1)   To receive from the Community Development Director
copies of applications for proposed amendments and special uses and
thereafter shall review the applications and shall submit reports and
recommendations thereon to the Board of Trustees;



      (2)   To initiate, direct and review, from time to time
studies of the provisions of this chapter, and to make reports of its
recommendations relative to proposed amendments to the Board of Trustees;



      (3)   To initiate review and make recommendations to the Board
of Trustees regarding amendments to the Comprehensive Plan and the Official
Map;



      (4)   To review and make recom-mendations to the Board of
Trustees regarding proposed plats of subdivision within the territorial
jurisdiction of the village;



      (5)   To act on all other matters which are referred to it, as
required by the provisions of this chapter; and



      (6)   Whenever in this chapter a finding or recommendation of
the Plan Commission shall be required, such recommendation shall mean only a
consideration by the Commission after a hearing. Such recommendation,
however, is purely advisory and an unfavorable vote by the Plan Commission or
the failure to make a favorable finding shall not prevent the Board of
Trustees from granting the relief, zoning amendment, special use or other
request of an applicant or taking other action within the jurisdiction of the
Board of Trustees.



   (C)   Meetings and rules. All meetings of the Plan Commission under
this chapter shall be filed immediately in the time as the Plan Commission
may determine. All hearings conducted by the Plan Commission under this
chapter shall be in accordance with state law. In all proceedings of the Plan
Commission provided for in this chapter, the Chairperson and, in his or her
absence, the Acting Chairperson shall have the power to administer oaths. The
Plan Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote,
indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its hearings and other
official actions. A copy of every rule or regulation, every amendment and
special use, and every recommendation, order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Plan Commission under this chapter shall be filed
immediately in the office of the Community Development Director and shall be
a public record. The Plan Commission shall adopt its own rules and
procedures, not in conflict with this chapter or with applicable state law.
The members of the Plan Commission shall elect an Acting Chairperson who
shall serve in the absence of the Chairperson.



(Ord. 92-06-70, passed 6-23-1992)



Cross-reference:



   Plan Commission generally, see Ch. 3, Art. 6



§ 16-15-4  ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.



   (A)   Creation and procedure.



      (1)   The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of Carol
Stream, Illinois, as heretofore created and established under the provisions
of the Zoning Code of the village, as amended, is hereby reconstituted and
re-established as the Zoning Board of Appeals under the provisions of this
chapter and the present duly appointed members of the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall continue to serve in such capacity for the full term for which they
were appointed and qualify. The successor to each member so appointed to
serve for a term of five years. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of
seven members.



      (2)   All appointments to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
made by the President subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees. One
of the members so appointed shall be named by the President as Chairperson at
the time of this appointment. The President, subject to the approval of the
Board of Trustees, shall have the power to remove any member of the Zoning
Board of Appeals for cause and after a public hearing. Vacancies shall be
filled as soon as possible for the unexpired term of any member whose  place
has become vacant. In the event that the office of Chairperson is vacated for
any reason, the President, subject to approval of the Board of Trustees,
shall immediately appoint either one of the remaining members of the Zoning
Board of Appeals, or any member who is appointed to fill such vacancy on the
Zoning Board of Appeals as the new Chairperson. The members of the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall elect an Acting Chairperson, who shall serve in the
absence of the Chairperson.



      (3)   All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the Zoning
Board of Appeals may determine. The Chairperson, or in his or her absence the
Acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be open to the
public. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings
showing the vote of each member upon every question or, if absent or failing
to vote, indicating that fact, and shall also keep records of its
examinations and other official actions. Every rule, regulation or repeal
thereof, and every order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall immediately be filed in the office of the
Village Clerk and shall be of public record.



      (4)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall decide matters as
authorized by this chapter after a public hearing. A concurring vote of a
majority of members of the Zoning Board of Appeals then in office shall be
necessary on any matter upon which it is authorized to decide or to recommend
by this chapter.



      (5)   All decisions and findings of the Zoning Board of
Appeals on appeal or upon application for a variation after a hearing shall,
in all instances, be reported to the Board of Trustees for final decision.



   (B)   Jurisdiction and authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals is
hereby vested with the following jurisdiction and authority:



      (1)   To hear, decide and review appeals from any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Community Development
Director or other authorized officials of the village having jurisdiction
under this chapter;



      (2)   To hear and pass upon applications for variations from
the terms provided in this chapter in the manner prescribed by, and subject
to, the standards established herein; and



      (3)   To hear and to decide all matters referred to it or upon
which it is required to pass under this chapter or as prescribed by statute.



(Ord. 92-06-70, passed 6-23-1992)



Cross-reference:



   Zoning Board of Appeals, see Ch. 3, Art. 7



§ 16-15-5  APPEALS.



   (A)   Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide
appeals from an administrative order, requirement, decision or determination
made by the Community Development Director or other authorized official of
the village having jurisdiction under this chapter.



   (B)   Initiation.



      (1)   An appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals by
any person, firm or corporation, or by any office, department, board, bureau
or commission aggrieved by an administrative order, requirement, decision or
determination under this chapter by the Community Development Director or
other authorized official of the village having jurisdiction under this
chapter.



      (2)   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken
certified to the Zoning Board of Appeals, after the notice of appeal has been
filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his
or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In this event, the
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which
may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals from whom the appeal is taken,
and on due cause shown.



   (C)   Processing.



      (1)   An appeal shall be filed with the Village Manager. The
Village Manager shall forward the appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals for
processing in accordance with applicable state law. The officer from whom the
appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals all
the papers constituting the record upon which the appeal is taken.



      (2)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time
for the hearing of the appeal and shall give due notice thereof to parties,
and shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. The Zoning Board of
Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement or decision or determination as, in its opinion, ought to be made
on the premises and to that end has all the powers of the official from whom
the appeal is taken.



(Ord. 92-06-70, passed 6-23-1992)



§ 16-15-6  VARIATIONS.



   (A)   Authority. The President and Board of Trustees, by ordinance,
upon report of the Zoning Board of Appeals, and only after a public hearing
before the Zoning Board of Appeals, shall decide variations of the provisions
of this chapter in harmony with its general purpose and intent, and shall
vary them only in the specific instances hereinafter set forth where the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall have made a finding of fact based upon the
standards hereinafter prescribed that there are practical difficulties or
particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the
regulations of this chapter.



   (B)   Initiation. An application for a variation shall be filed in
writing with the Community Development Director and may be made by any
government office, department, board, bureau or commission, or by any person,
firm or corporation having a freehold interest, a possessory interest
entitled to exclusive possession, a contractual interest which may become a
freehold interest or any exclusive possessory interest applicable to the land
or land and improvements described in the application for a variation.



   (C)   Processing. An application for a variation shall be filed with
the Community Development Director who shall forward such application to the
Zoning Board of Appeals for processing in accordance with applicable state
law. No variation shall be made by the Board of Trustees, except after a
public hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals held on such notice as
shall be required by state law.



   (D)   Standards.



      (1)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not recommend a
variation unless it shall make findings based upon evidence presented to it
in the following cases:



         (a)   The property in question, other than a
single-family residential lot, cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted
to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations governing the
district in which it is located;



         (b)   The plight of the owner is due to unique
circumstances;



         (c)   The variation, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the locality; and



         (d)   The plight of the owner is due to the failure of a
previous owner of the property in question to follow then-applicable
ordinances or regulations, and where the benefit to health, safety or
appearance to be derived from correcting the non-conformity would not justify
the cost or difficulty of the correction. The evidence must show that the
current owner had no role in the creation of the non-conformity. Such
variation, if granted, will permit the legal non-conforming status of a
building or structure subject to the requirements of § 16-14-3 of this code.



      (2)   For the purpose of supplementing the above standards,
whenever there are practical difficulties or a particular hardship, in making
its decision, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall also take into consideration
the extent to which the following facts, favorable to the applicant, have
been established by the evidence:



         (a)   The particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved would bring a
particular hardship upon the owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience
if the strict letter of the regulation were to be carried out;



         (b)   The conditions upon which the petition for
variation is based would not be applicable generally to other property within
the same district; and



         (c)   The granting of the variation will not be
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or
improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located.



      (3)   The Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend and the Board
of Trustees may require such conditions and restrictions upon the premises
benefitted by a variation as may be necessary to comply with the standards
set forth in this section to reduce or minimize the injurious effect of such
variation upon other property in the neighborhood, and to implement the
general purpose and intent of this chapter.



   (E)   Types of variations. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear
and recommend and the Board of Trustees shall decide only such variations to
the regulations of this chapter as follows:



      (1)   To permit a yard or other required open areas to have
less width or depth than herein required by applicable zoning district
regulations;



      (2)   To permit the use of a lot of record on the effective
date of this chapter for a use otherwise prohibited solely because of the
insufficient area or width of the lot, but in no event, unless otherwise
permitted in this chapter, shall the area or width of the lot be less than
90% of the required area or width;



      (3)   To allow any permitted use to exceed by not more than
10% the floor area ratio or building height regulations of the district where
such use is to be located;



      (4)   To permit the same off-street parking spaces to qualify
as required spaces for two or more uses; provided that, the maximum use of
such facility by each user does not take place during the same time;



      (5)   To vary the off-street parking regulations for a change
of use in a conforming building when it is found that adequate off-street
parking facilities exist in the vicinity; or providing the required number of
parking spaces on the same lot or within the required distance from it would
impose an unreasonable hardship upon the use of such building as contrasted
with merely granting an advantage or convenience;



      (6)   To permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming
building, a structure which has been destroyed or damaged by fire, act of God
or the public enemy to an extent of more than 60% of the total cost of
reconstructing the entire building or structure, where the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall find a compelling necessity requiring a continuance of the
nonconforming use;



      (7)   To permit, as in the case of other variations, the full
or partial continuation of a non-conforming building or structure whose
non-conformity is the result of the failure of a previous owner of the
property in question to follow then-applicable ordinances or regulations.
Such continuation shall be in accordance with the requirements of § 16-14-3
of this code; and



      (8)   To permit any variation other than those allowable
above, where such variation would better carry out the intention of the
Zoning Code and where no harm would be caused by the granting of the
variation.



(Ord. 92-06-70, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 2007-07-28, passed 7-16-2007)



§ 16-15-7  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Authority. The regulations imposed and the districts created
under the authority of this chapter may be amended, from time to time, by
ordinance in accordance with applicable state law. An amendment shall be
granted or denied by the Board of Trustees only after a public hearing before
the Plan Commission and a report of its findings and recommendations has
thereafter been submitted to the Board of Trustees.



   (B)   Initiation of amendments. Textual amendments to the Zoning
Code may be proposed by the Board of Trustees, Plan Commission or Zoning
Board of Appeals, or by any resident or owner of property in the village.
Amendments to the Zoning Map may be proposed by the Board of Trustees, Plan
Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals or any person with a contractual
possessory interest in the property affected by the amendment.



   (C)   Processing. An application for an amendment shall be filed
with the Community Development Director, who shall arrange for the Plan
Commission to hold a public hearing and to submit to the Board of Trustees a
report of its findings and recommendations. Such public hearing shall be held
upon such notice that shall be required by state law.



   (D)   Decisions.



      (1)   The Board of Trustees, upon report of the Plan
Commission and without further public hearing, may grant or deny any proposed
amendment in accordance with applicable state law, or may refer it back to
the Plan Commission for further considerations.



      (2)   In case a written protest against any proposed amendment
is signed and acknowledged by owners of 20% of the frontage proposed to be
altered, or by the owners of 20% of the frontage directly opposite the
frontage to be altered, is filed with the Village Manager, the amendment
cannot be passed except on the favorable vote of two-thirds of all members of
the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 92-06-70, passed 6-23-1992)



§ 16-15-8  SPECIAL USES.



   (A)   Purpose. The development and execution of this Zoning Code is
based upon the division of the village into districts, within any one of
which the use of land and buildings, and the bulk and location of buildings
and structures as related to the land, are essentially uniform. It is
recognized, however, that there are special uses which, because of their
unique character, cannot be properly classified in any particular district or
districts without consideration in each case of the impact of those uses upon
neighboring land and upon the public need for the particular use at the
particular location, as well as upon the ability of the village to supply the
special uses with various community services, such as adequate treatment of
waste water, adequate supply of potable water, fire protection, police
protection, maintenance of street rights-of-way and proper traffic safety.
Such special uses fall into the following two categories:



      (1)   Uses operated by a public agency or publicly regulated
utilities, or uses traditionally affected with a public interest; or



      (2)   Uses entirely private in character but of such a nature
that the operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their
impact upon neighboring property and public facilities.



   (B)   Approval of special uses. Any person owning or having a
proprietary interest in the subject property may file an application for
approval to use such land for one or more of the special uses provided for in
this chapter in the zoning district in which the land is situated. Except as
provided herein, any modification to an approved special use, or any addition
to or expansion of an existing special use, shall require separate review and
approval under the provisions of this chapter. However, minor changes may be
approved by the Community Development Director without obtaining separate
approval by the Plan Commission or Village Board. A minor change is any
change in the site plan or design details of an approved special use, which
is consistent with the standards and conditions applying to the special use,
as provided in the approving ordinance and which does not alter the concept
or intent of the special use, increase the intensity of the special use or
increase the impact of the special use on the surrounding area. A minor
change shall not change the general character of the special use, cause a
substantial relocation of buildings, increase land coverage, increase the
height of buildings or the gross floor area of buildings, reduce open space,
amend any special use condition, provisions or covenants, or provide any
other change inconsistent with any standard or condition imposed by the
Village Board in approving the special use.



   (C)   Authorization. An application for a special use shall be acted
upon by the Board of Trustees only after a public hearing has been held by
the Plan Commission after due notice by publication, as provided by
applicable state law, and the findings and recommendations of the Plan
Commission have been reported to the Board of Trustees.



   (D)   Application.



      (1)   An application for a special use shall be filed and
processed in the manner prescribed for applications for amendments, except
for planned unit developments as controlled in Ch. 16, Art. 16, and shall be
of such form accompanied by such information as shall be established from
time to time by the Plan Commission.



      (2)   For any case involving an application for special use
permit, a certified court reporter will attend and record the entire hearing
at the expense of the applicant, as included in the special use fee and in
accordance with § 16-15-9(A).



   (E)   Conditions. No special use shall be recommended by the Plan
Commission, nor approved by the Board of Trustees, unless the special use:



      (1)   Is deemed necessary for the public convenience at the
location;



      (2)   Will not be unreasonably detrimental to or endanger the
public health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare;



      (3)   Will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other
property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted, nor
substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood;



      (4)   Will not impede the normal and orderly development and
improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in the district;



      (5)   Will provide adequate utilities, access roads, drainage
and other important and necessary community facilities; and



      (6)   Will conform to the applicable regulations of the
district in which it is located, except as such regulations may in each
instance be modified by the Board of Trustees.



   (F)   Conditions and guarantees. Prior to granting any special use,
the Plan Commission may recommend and the Board of Trustees may stipulate
certain conditions and restrictions, including, but not limited to, those
upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of
the special use as deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest
and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified
herein, or as may be from time to time required. In all cases in which
special uses are granted, the Board of Trustees shall require such evidence
and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions
stipulated in connection therewith are being, and will be complied with,
including, but not limited to, the acceptance in writing of the owner of the
property involved and other interested parties of the conditions and
guarantees set forth within the Zoning Code. A copy of the ordinance bearing
the acceptance may be recorded in the office of the County Recorder of DuPage
County. The acceptance shall be in approximately the following form:



      “The undersigned, being the (owner, tenant, contract purchaser,
etc.) of the property legally described in this ordinance do/does hereby
acknowledge that the fulfillment of such conditions and guarantees are
essential to the granting and continuation of the special use allowed herein,
and that but for the imposition of these requirements and guarantees the
special use would not have been granted. The undersigned do/does further
certify and agree that such conditions and guarantees shall equally bind and
be effective against any/all successor/ successors to the interest of the
undersigned. The commitment herein made shall run with the land and shall be
enforceable by the Village of Carol Stream in a court of law or equity in
addition to any and all other remedies available to the village to secure
compliance with the conditions and guarantees agreed to herein.”



   (G)   Effect of denial of a special use. After a public hearing, no
application for a special use which has been denied wholly or in part by the
Board of Trustees shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date
of the order of denial, except on the grounds of substantial new evidence or
proof of changed conditions found to be valid by the Board of Trustees, who
shall in such case refer the application to the Plan Commission for a new
hearing pursuant to proper legal notice.



   (H)   Termination of special use permit.



      (1)   A special use permit granted by the Board of Trustees
shall be subject to termination in the manner provided herein below under any
of the following circumstances:



         (a)   Failure to commence construction of the proposed
use within 18 months from and after the date of the granting of the permit.
Construction shall not be deemed to have commenced unless and until all
necessary permits have been obtained, the site has been properly graded, all
foundations and footings are in place and all utilities have been provided
for;



         (b)   Failure to carry the construction work forward
expeditiously with adequate forces for a period of 18 months out of any
24-month period;



         (c)   Following the issuance of occupancy permits,
abandonment or other failure to utilize the property for the purposes
permitted by the special use for a period of two months out of any
consecutive six-month period; and/or



         (d)   Upon written application, the Board of Trustees
may authorize extensions of any time period specified herein above, but each
such extension shall not exceed one year at a time.



      (2)   Upon written application by any person or any village
official following the expiration of any time period or authorized extension
thereof, as provided herein above, the Plan Commission shall hold a public
hearing with regard to whether any of the conditions described in division
(H)(1) above exist and whether on account of such conditions and other
circumstances the special use permit shall be terminated or whether the
property shall be rezoned to another use. Public notice of such hearing shall
be given by newspaper publication and the legal owner of record of the
subject property shall be notified by certified mail, return receipt
requested.  The hearing shall otherwise be conducted in accordance with the
procedures required by state law and by this chapter for an amendment to the
Zoning Code.



      (3)   Following such hearing, the Plan Commission shall
prepare written findings of fact and its recommendations regarding the
continuation or termination of the special use and regarding the rezoning of
the property to another classification. Such findings and recommendations
shall be transmitted forthwith to the Board of Trustees for final action. The
Board of Trustees, after receiving such findings and recommendations, may
grant a further extension of the special use permit, may allow the property
to be developed and utilized for the permitted uses of the underlying zoning
classification, or may rezone the property.



      (4)   In making their determination, the Plan Commission and
the Board of Trustees shall consider the effect of changed conditions, if
any, upon the property. Where the property in question was granted a change
in zoning category contemporaneously with its special use or achieved such a
use as part of an annexation agreement, the Plan Commission and Board of
Trustees shall consider whether the property would have been granted the
zoning classification underlying its special use if it were not for the
conditions which were imposed by the special use or by an annexation
agreement, as the case may be. It is the intent of this provision to prevent
the rezoning of land to a higher (less restrictive) category based upon the
promise of development of a well-planned special use subject to various
conditions; the abandonment of that use, and the attempted development of the
property without proper planning controls under a zoning category which would
not have been granted, but for the planning requirements imposed under the
special use.



      (5)   During the time that the Plan Commission and Board of
Trustees are considering the disposition of a special use which has prima
facie been abandoned in accordance with the time period set forth in this
division (H)(1), no permits for new construction shall be issued for the
property and no buildings for which permits have been previously issued shall
be constructed until the Board of Trustees has made a final decision
regarding the future zoning of the property.



   (I)   Standards. A special use permit for the special uses listed in
this Zoning Code may be granted and the applicable district regulations
modified only if evidence is presented to establish that:



      (1)   The proposed building or use at the particular location
requested is necessary or desirable to provide a service or a facility which
is in the interest of the public convenience and will contribute to the
general welfare of the neighborhood or community;



      (2)   The proposed building or use will not have a substantial
or undue adverse effect upon adjacent property, the character of the
neighborhood, traffic conditions, utility facilities and other matters
affecting the public health, safety and general welfare;



      (3)   The proposed building or use will be designed, arranged
and operated so as to permit the development and use of neighboring property
in accordance with the applicable district regulations;



      (4)   The proposed building or use complies with the more
specific standards and criteria established for the particular building or
use in question by Ch. 16, Art. 8; and



      (5)   There shall be reasonable assurance that the proposed
buildings or use will be completed and maintained in a timely manner, if
authorized.



(Ord. 90-09-86, passed 9-25-1990; Ord. 95-01-02, passed 1-3-1995; Ord.
2000-10-79, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2003-12-82, passed 12-1-2003; Ord.
2011-10-34, passed 10-3-2011)



§ 16-15-9  PROCEDURES.



   (A)   In the event of any judicial review of any zoning or planning
decision of the Plan Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals or Village Board,
pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-13-13 or any similar law, the applicant shall be
required to reimburse the village for the cost of preparing and certifying
the record of proceedings.



   (B)   The Village Board may determine by majority vote that any case
brought before it for final decision shall be remanded to the board or
commission from which it was received, for hearing de novo; or taking further
evidence on a specific issue or all issues; or clarification or elaboration
of findings or recommendations; or creation of an appropriate record of
proceedings; or reconsideration in light of any modification the Board may
deem appropriate; or other such proceedings as the Board may direct.



(Ord. 2003-12-82, passed 12-1-2003)



§ 16-15-10  EXPIRATION OF APPLICATION.



   Upon receipt of an application for any of the processes regulated by
this chapter, the village shall provide a written commentary to the applicant
or bring the case to the Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals for
action. Such application shall expire unless the applicant submits an
acceptable response to the village’s written commentary within a period of
180 days from issuance of the commentary, or if the applicant otherwise
demonstrates that the case is ready for review by the Plan Commission or
Zoning Board of Appeals within a period of 180 days from issuance of the
commentary. The Community Development Director is authorized to grant, in
writing, one extension, for a period not to exceed 180 days. The extension
shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. The
application fee shall not be refunded for applications that have been
determined to have expired.



(Ord. 2010-06-36, passed 6-21-2010)



ARTICLE 16:  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT



Section



   16-16-1   General purpose and intent



   16-16-2   Preapplication procedure



   16-16-3   Preliminary plan and outline Development Plan



   16-16-4   Final Development Plan



   16-16-5   Changes and modifications of the planned unit development
after approval of the final plan



   16-16-6   General standards



   16-16-7   Residential land use standards



   16-16-8   Business planned unit developments



   16-16-9   Industrial planned unit developments



§ 16-16-1  GENERAL PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The primary purpose of a planned unit development is to
stimulate the development of balanced neighborhoods containing physical,
economic and social assets difficult to achieve through the traditional
separation of use and density zones. This is accomplished by allowing the
developer the freedom necessary to protect natural resources and to protect
the investment of both the village and the project.



   (B)   Based upon the submission of an acceptable site plan of
exceptionally meritorious nature and other required documents, permission may
be granted for the construction of a planned unit development which may be
constructed such that more than one principal building may be constructed on
a single subdivided lot or unsubdivided parcel of land.



   (C)   The granting of such flexibility as provided for in the
special use permit for a planned unit development shall be dependent upon the
ability of the land as utilized by the developer to meet such general
objectives of this ordinance set forth below as shall apply to the proposed
special use:



      (1)   The protection of both the aesthetics and function of
the natural environment;



      (2)   The arrangement of buildings and other improvements
advantageous to the orderly function and aesthetics of both the natural and
human-made environment;



      (3)   The preservation of adequate, permanent open space for
the use of the residents in the development;



      (4)   The plan may contain either a single use type or a
mixture of uses;



      (5)   The provision of land area necessary to accommodate any
cultural, educational, recreational and other public and quasi-public
activities necessary to serve the needs of the neighborhood;



      (6)   The orderly and creative arrangement of all land uses
with respect to each other and to the entire village;



      (7)   The provision of developed recreational activity areas
necessary to serve the needs of the residential portion of the development;
and



      (8)   The provision of a pedestrian environment separate from
the vehicular environment.



   (D)   In order to accomplish these intents, in its establishment and
authorization as a special use, a planned unit development may be exempted
from certain of the provisions of the Subdivision Code and the Zoning Code of
the village to the extent specified in the final authorization of the planned
unit development.



§ 16-16-2  PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The preapplication procedure is an optional but recommended
means of beginning an application for a planned unit development. Prior to
filing of an application for approval of a planned unit development, the
applicant may submit to the Plan Commission plans and data as specified
below. This step does not require formal application, but does require the
filing of the plan with the Village Manager. The developer may request such a
meeting with the Plan Commission of the village in order to discuss his plans
and particular problems relative to compliance with the Comprehensive Plan,
official map, Zoning Code and other applicable village ordinances.



   (B)   Preapplication information to be presented by the developer is
suggested to be as follows:



      (1)   Sketch plan on a topographic survey, which shall show in
simple sketch form the proposed layout of streets, land uses and other
features in relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a
freehand pencil sketch made directly on a print of a topographic survey.
Topographic information from United States Geographical Survey maps may be
used. The sketch plan shall include the existing topographic data on contours
of not less than ten foot intervals; and



      (2)   General planned unit development information, which may
describe or outline the existing conditions of the site and the proposed
development as necessary to supplement the submitted plans. This information
may include data on existing covenants, land characteristics and available
community facilities and utilities. It may also describe the proposed land
uses, including industrial, commercial, residential, public and quasi-public
uses. Additional information for proposed residential land uses may include
the proposed number of dwelling units for each residential land use area and
the typical lot width and depth of any single-family residential portion of
it.



§ 16-16-3  PRELIMINARY PLAN AND OUTLINE DEVELOPMENT PLAN.



   (A)   Application. An applicant shall make application for approval
of a planned unit development to the Village Manager along with the required
filing fee. The applicant shall accompany his or her application with 25
copies of a preliminary plan and, where required, an outline Development
Plan, at least three weeks prior to the published public hearing date. With
any request for a special use planned unit development, the Plan Commission
encourages the most detailed and thoughtful type of planning presentation.



   (B)   Stage development of a preliminary plan. If the area of the
total development is 100 acres or more, the applicant may submit the detailed
information for the preliminary plan in stages to correspond to the rate of
development of the entire planned unit development. If the applicant elects
to do this, he or she shall submit an outline Development Plan at the same
time that he or she submits the detailed preliminary plan information for the
first phase of development. The first phase of development must encompass at
least 20% of the total residential area, plus all areas to be dedicated for
roads, parks and other public uses. With regard to the rest of the site, the
information provided on this plan shall conform to the requirements of
division (C) below.



   (C)   Outline Development Plan. The purpose of the outline
Development Plan is to aid the Plan Commission, Village Board and the
administrative staff of the village to accurately determine the ultimate
impact of the proposed development on the various agencies and departments
that must provide services to the future population expected to reside in the
area. Realizing that it is often impossible to determine precisely the
architectural character and other details of the Development Planned for
several years in the future, the outline Development Plan will provide enough
information to allow for adequate planning of schools, open space, sewers,
transportation networks and water systems. Elements of the outline
Development Plan shall be as follows:



      (1)   Background information to include boundary survey,
topography and site analysis. each as defined in division (D) below; and



      (2)   Land use concept plan. This concept plan will be the
main part of the outline Development Plan, and shall include the following
elements:



         (a)   Residential land uses. The location of all
residential land uses shall be shown on the map in diagram form;



         (b)   Residential densities. Requested residential
densities shall be listed with the proposed number of units per acre, as well
as a description of the type of dwelling unit anticipated to achieve this
density, i.e., townhouse, garden apartment, zero lot line and the like;



         (c)   Population calculations. Estimates of the total
population anticipated by the future development shall be prepared using the
latest multipliers derived by the Illinois School Consulting Service, or an
equally recognized authority;



         (d)   Transportation network. All major thoroughfares
and collector streets shall be shown on the plan. The relationship of this
road network and the existing street system must be demonstrated;



         (e)   Open space. Concentration of major public open
space areas must be shown, as well as other locations of recreation areas
with a description of their proposed uses. Greenbelt orientation and bicycle
path development is encouraged throughout the plan. Storm water retention
areas shall be considered adequate for recreation areas only when adjacent to
other active recreation areas;



         (f)   Commercial land uses. Commercial uses, if any,
should be located adjacent to major thoroughfares and adequately buffered
from residential uses or blended into residential areas by means of
landscaping or other architectural methods;



         (g)   Zoning. Each area of the Development Plan should
be designated with the zoning classification which best describes the
proposed use of the land;



         (h)   Phasing plan. A description of anticipated phasing
of the development should be provided showing timetables for the construction
of major community facilities and the extension of roadways and sewer and
water lines; and



         (i)   Other. All other information as may be deemed
necessary by the Plan Commission from time to time for the purpose of
determining long-range planning impact.



   (D)   Preliminary plan documentation. The preliminary plan shall
contain as much of the following information as is applicable to the proposed
special use and such other information as may be requested to accompany the
application. This shall include both a map or maps, drawings, a written
statement and other information as follows:



      (1)   The map or maps which shall be included as part of the
application shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, or if the
area of the site is more than 200 acres, one inch equals 200 feet. The
following information shall be shown:



         (a)   Boundary survey. A boundary line survey of the
subject site, which shall be prepared and certified by a registered land
surveyor;



         (b)   Topography. The existing topographic character of
the land with contours shown at intervals no greater than two feet.
Topographic data shall refer to the United States Geographical Survey. North
America Datum equals mean sea level elevation; and



         (c)   Site analysis. A detailed site analysis of the
property in question. which shall show the following information:



            1.   Physical factors information:



               a.   Existing land uses both on the site and
immediately adjacent to it;



               b.   Scenic views;



               c.   Wooded areas;



               d.   Soil problem areas based upon a soil
survey of the site to include a report from the Soil Conservation District.
Soil survey information as obtainable from the DuPage County Regional Plan
Commission may be used if available. Additional soil information may be
requested by the Plan Commission and/or the Village Engineer;



               e.   Portions of the site in any floodplain
and/or floodplain fringe areas;



               f.   Streams, drainage ditches, culverts and
standing water;



               g.   Isolated preservable trees six inches
or more in diameter at one foot above ground level; and



               h.   General directions of the storm water
runoff across the property.



            2.   Public utilities information, which shall
show the location and size of any existing sanitary sewer, storm sewers,
water lines, gas, electric and broadband telecommunications facilities, both
on the site and in easements and rights-of-way immediately adjacent to the
site. For each above-ground service facility depicted, the map shall
designate the owner of the proposed facility, its proximity to the nearest
above-ground service facility and the service entity that owns the existing
facility.



            3.   Other information:



               a.   Existing county and/or municipal zoning
on all parts of the site and adjacent property contiguous to the property;



               b.   Municipal corporate boundaries across
and adjacent to the subject site;



               c.   School district boundaries across and
adjacent to the subject site; and



               d.   Utility easements across and adjacent
to the subject site.



         (d)   Land use plan. A proposed land use plan which
shall be drawn upon a print of the topographic map for the site. The proposed
land use plan shall contain the following information:



            1.   Identification and description:



               a.   Name of the planned unit development;



               b.   Location of the subject site by
section, town, and range or by other approved legal description;



               c.   Name and address of the site planner
and/or engineer;



               d.   Name and address of the owner,
beneficiary and developer; and



               e.   Scale, north point and date.



            2.   Design features information, which shall show:



               a.   Right-of-way alignments, widths and
names for all streets. Street names within the planning jurisdiction of the
village shall be chosen so that they are of a simple phonetic spelling and so
that no conflict will be created with the names of existing village streets.
Such street names shall not duplicate the name of any street heretofore used
in the village or its environs unless such street is an extension of or is in
line with an already named street, in which event that name shall be used.
The street names shall be chosen to carry out a single theme to assist
visitors and emergency vehicles in determining that section of the village in
which the particular street is located. The developer, in coordination with
the administrative staff of the village, will propose area themes and street
names which will be reviewed by the Plan Commission as part of its review of
the developmental plan or plat of subdivision;



               b.   The general location of all
multi-family or single-family attached buildings and structures, and all
other types of uses including, where applicable, commercial uses;



               c.   Off-street parking and service areas;



               d.   All areas to be dedicated as common
open space and all sites to be conveyed, dedicated, or reserved for parks,
parkways, playgrounds, school sites, public buildings and similar public and
quasi-public uses;



               e.   The pedestrian circulation system, any
parkway belt system or bicycle circulation system; and



               f.   All other information necessary to
clearly show the proposed elements of the planned unit development.



         (e)   Utility plan. A proposed utility plan which shall
be drawn on a print of the proposed land use plan. The proposed utility plan
shall show the approximate location and dimensions of all utilities
(including sanitary sewer, storm sewer, waterlines, gas, electricity and
broadband telecommunications), in both public ways and private extensions
thereof, for all proposed land uses. The proposed utility plan shall also
show drainage ditches, culverts and water retention areas, as well as any
utility easements. Publicly franchised utilities shall be restricted to
primarily a rear yard and a side yard placement, where necessary.
Above-ground service facilities shall be located in accordance with § 16-5-7
.



      (2)   The drawings which shall be included as part of the
application for approval of the preliminary plan shall contain preliminary
elevations and/or perspective drawings of typical residential and commercial
structures and improvements. The drawings must indicate substantially the
architectural intent, but need not show final decisions or details.



      (3)   The written statement which shall be included as part of
the application for approval of the preliminary plan shall contain the
following information:



         (a)   A statistical tabulation of the acreage amounts of
all of the land uses proposed in the preliminary plan;



         (b)   The type and number of dwelling units for any
proposed residential land uses;



         (c)   The stages in which the project will be built and
the approximate dates when construction of each stage can be expected to
begin and to end; and



         (d)   Any agreements, provisions or covenants which
shall govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the planned
unit development and any of the common and usable open space areas.



      (4)   Other information may be requested if the Plan
Commission finds that the planned unit development may create special
problems for traffic, parking, landscaping and/or economic feasibility. Such
information may include, but not be limited to, any of the following:



         (a)   An off-street parking and loading plan;



         (b)   A traffic study indicating the volume of traffic
to be generated by the planned unit development or this phase of it and
proposing any special engineering design features and/or traffic regulation
devices needed to ensure the proper safety of traffic circulation to, through
and around the planned unit development or this phase of it;



         (c)   Taxing. A tax impact study detailing the impact
which the planned unit development or this phase of it will have upon all
taxing bodies. In addition, the expected number of students to be generated
by any residential portion of it shall also be quantified; and



         (d)   A landscaping planting plan, indicating the
height, size, location, quantities and variety of stock to be planted.



   (E)   Procedure for plan approval. The procedure for approval of the
preliminary plan, and where required, the outline Development Plan, shall be
as follows. All reference to the preliminary plan shall apply equally to the
outline Development Plan, where required.



      (1)   The Community Development Director shall refer the
preliminary plan to the Carol Stream Plan Commission. The Community
Development Director shall instruct the appropriate village departments and
consultants to collaborate with the Plan Commission in reviewing the
preliminary plan for the planned unit development for its compliance with
these regulations and other ordinances of the village. Such collaboration may
include meetings and conferences at which the developer shall meet the
village officials and consultants in order that the Plan Commission may have,
prior to its public hearing, the informal recommendations of its experts.



      (2)   The Community Development Director shall notify the
applicant as to the time and place of the public hearing at which the
applicant shall present the preliminary plan. The Community Development
Director shall cause notice of such public hearing to be published in a
manner approved by the Plan Commission for all special use permits and as
required by statute.



      (3)   The Plan Commission and the Village Board may utilize
the services of the professional village consultants in arriving at
recommendations or decisions. The applicant shall pay the village the
reasonable cost incurred for the services rendered by its consultants within
ten days after the submission of the bill from the village to him or her. The
consultants shall bill for their services at the same hourly rate which they
normally charge municipal clients. The village consultants shall include, but
not be limited to, the persons who provide the village with advice in the
fields of engineering, law, planning, traffic, design and finance.



      (4)   The Plan Commission shall proceed as quickly as possible
in its review of the preliminary plan. Within no more than 30 days after the
close of the public hearing, the Plan Commission shall:



         (a)   Approve or disapprove the preliminary plan and
shall submit its written recommendations, which may include the
recommendations of the Village Engineer, Village Planner and/or Village
Attorney to the Board of Trustees, with a copy being sent to the applicant; or



         (b)   Advise the applicant in writing if the Plan
Commission finds that changes, additions or corrections are required in the
preliminary plan. The applicant may if he or she wishes, resubmit ten copies
of the revised preliminary plan for consideration of the Plan Commission at a
continuation of or at a new public hearing. The applicant shall do so without
paying an additional filing fee. The Plan Commission shall, within 30 days
after the submission of the resubmitted plan, approve or disapprove the
revised preliminary plan and shall submit its recommendations in writing to
the Village Engineer, Village Planner and/or Village Attorney, with a copy
also being sent to the applicant. The applicant and the Plan Commission may
mutually agree to extend any stated time period for Plan Commission action.



      (5)   The Village Board shall accept or reject the preliminary
plan within 45 days after its next regular meeting following the receipt of
the written recommendations of the Plan Commission. The applicant and the
Village Board of Trustees may mutually agree to extend the 45-day period.



         (a)   If the preliminary plan is disapproved, the
Village Board may state in writing the reasons for the disapproval, and such
writing, if prepared, shall be filed with the Village Clerk, and a copy shall
be sent to the applicant.



         (b)   If the preliminary plan is approved, the Village
Board shall grant the special use permit for the planned unit development by
specific ordinance, which shall contain or to which shall be appended all
terms and conditions of the grant, including covenants, agreements,
guarantees, performance bonds, site plans and variances in the applicable
subdivision and zoning ordinances of the village. However, no building permit
shall be issued until a final Development Plan has been submitted and
approved.



(Ord. 92-06-70, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 2008-10-49, passed 10-6-2008)



§ 16-16-4  FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.



   (A)   Within one year following the approval of the preliminary
Development Plan, the applicant shall file with the Plan Commission a final
Development Plan for the first stage of development, containing in final form
the information required in the preliminary plan. The Village Board may, at
its sole discretion, agree by motion to grant extensions of this one year
period. The final Development Plan shall also include the following:



      (1)   A final land use plan, suitable for recording with the
County Recorder of Deeds. The purpose of the final Development Plan is to
designate the land subdivided into lots, as well as the division of other
lands not so treated, into common open areas and building areas, and to
designate and limit the specific internal uses of each building or structure,
as well as of the land in general;



      (2)   An accurate legal description of the entire area under
immediate development within the planned development;



      (3)   If subdivided lands are included in the planned
development, a subdivision plat of all subdivided lands in the same form and
meeting all the requirements of a normal subdivision plat, to the extent that
compliance with the subdivision regulations of the village shall be required;



      (4)   An accurate legal description of each separate
unsubdivided use area, including common open space;



      (5)   Designation of the location of all buildings to be
constructed, and a designation of the uses for which each building is
designed;



      (6)   Certificates, seals and signatures required for the
dedication of land, and recording the document;



      (7)   Tabulations of each separate unsubdivided use area,
including land area and number of dwelling units per gross acre;



      (8)   Landscaping plan;



      (9)   Utilities and drainage plan;



      (10)   Condominium declaration, final agreements, bylaws,
provisions or covenants which govern the use, maintenance and continued
protection of the planned development and any of its common open areas or
other common facilities;



      (11)   Final development and construction schedule;



      (12)   Final architectural plans; and



      (13)   Final engineering drawings.



   (B)   The final Development Plan shall be approved as follows.



      (1)   (a)   The Plan Commission shall review the final
Development Plan within 35 days of its submission and shall recommend
approval if it is in substantial compliance with the preliminary Development
Plan. The Plan Commission shall certify to the Village Board that the final
Development Plan is in conformity with the previously filed preliminary
Development Plan.



         (b)   If the final plan is substantially changed from
the approved preliminary plan, the Plan Commission shall recommend to the
Village Board that a new public hearing be held in conformance with the
procedures for approval of preliminary plan.



      (2)   The Village Board, after receipt of the recommendation
of the Plan Commission, shall itself review the final Development Plan and
shall, if it is in conformity with the preliminary Development Plan,
authorize issuance of building permits. If the final Development Plan is held
not to be in substantial conformity with the preliminary Development Plan,
the Village Board shall inform the applicant with regard to the specific
areas found to be not in compliance, and shall order a public hearing before
the Plan Commission, after which a recommendation shall be made as to whether
such modifications shall be approved, rejected or approved as further changed
by the board. The village may record any approved final plan.



§ 16-16-5  CHANGES AND MODIFICATIONS OF THE PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT AFTER
APPROVAL OF THE FINAL PLAN.



   (A)   After the approval of the final plan, the use of land and the
construction, modification or alteration of any buildings or structures
within the planned unit development will be governed by the approved final
plan.



   (B)   No changes may be made in the approved final plan, except upon
application for village approval according to the following procedure:



      (1)   Prior to or during the construction of the planned unit
development, the procedure shall be as follows:



         (a)   Minor changes. Minor changes in the location,
siting and height of buildings and structures, and in the location of streets
and ways of public access and in the size and location of open space, may be
authorized by the Community Development Director as required by engineering
or other circumstances not foreseen at the time that the final plan was
approved. Whether an alteration constitutes a minor change to an approved
planned Development Plan shall be determined by the Community Development
Director in accordance with all of the following criteria:



            1.   Does not alter the concept or intent of the
planned unit development;



            2.   Does not violate an adopted development
agreement;



            3.   Does not increase the density of the
development;



            4.   Does  not  result  in  any  deviations 
from village standards for the underlying zoning district;



            5.   Does not result in a significant change in
the size or location of any building;



            6.   Does not change the use of the site;



            7.   Does not result in a significant increase in
building height;



            8.   Does not reduce open space by more than 10%
from the original planned unit Development Plan;



            9.   Does not change the proportion of housing
types by more than 15%; and



            10.   Does not result in a significant change in
road standards or locations.



         (b)   Major changes. All changes in land uses, any
rearrangement of lots, blocks and building tracts, any major changes in the
provision for common open space and all other changes in approved final plans
not classified by division (B)(1)(a) above as minor changes shall be
considered to be major changes to the approved Planned Unit Development Plan,
and must be approved by the Village Board under the procedures authorized by
the zoning ordinance for an amendment to the zoning map.



         (c)   New site plan. If major changes are allowed in a
final site plan, a new site plan reflecting such changes shall be filed with
the village. Any major changes which are approved for the final plan may be
recorded.



      (2)   After the completion of the construction of the planned
unit development, the procedure shall be as follows.



         (a)   Minor changes. Minor changes to an approved
Planned Unit Development Plan, as defined by division (B)(1)(a) above and
including any minor extensions, alterations or modifications of existing
buildings or structures, may be authorized by the Community Development
Director, if they are consistent with the purpose and intent of the final
plan.



         (b)   Reconstruction. Any building or structure that is
totally or substantially destroyed may be reconstructed only in compliance
with the final plan unless an amendment to the final plan is approved
following the procedures for an amendment to the zoning map.



         (c)   Major changes. All changes in the final plan other
than those classified as minor changes must be approved by the Village Board
under the procedure authorized by the zoning ordinance for an amendment of
the zoning map.



(Ord. 2011-12-43, passed 12-19-2011)



§ 16-16-6  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   No planned unit development shall be authorized unless the Village
Board shall find that the following general standards will be met.



   (A)   Unless unusual conditions are present which allow effective
planning upon a smaller site, all planned unit developments shall be required
to contain a minimum of five acres.



   (B)   The uses permitted by such exceptions as may be requested or
recommended are necessary or desirable and appropriate to the development.



   (C)   The uses permitted in such development are not of such a
nature or so located as to exercise an undue detrimental influence or effect
upon the surrounding neighborhood.



   (D)   The site plan effectively treats the developmental
possibilities of the subject property, making appropriate provisions for the
preservation of streams, wooded areas, scenic views, floodplain areas and
similar physical features.



   (E)   All minimum requirements pertaining to commercial,
residential, institutional or other uses established in the planned unit
development conform to the requirements for each individual classification as
established elsewhere in the zoning ordinance of the village, except as may
be specifically varied for the proper planning of the planned unit
development.



   (F)   Commercial land uses may be allowed within residential planned
unit developments; provided that, they do not comprise more than 5% of the
total gross site area of the planned development and the area conforms to the
standards outlined in the section of the Zoning Code dealing with business
planned unit developments.



   (G)   The Plan Commission shall determine that the area and width of
the lot shall be sufficient for the proposed use, and that the development of
the property in the proposed manner creates no outlots which will be
difficult to develop in an approved manner.



§ 16-16-7  RESIDENTIAL LAND USE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Residential density.



      (1)   Densities within the planned unit development shall
remain substantially the same as provided for elsewhere in this article for
the various zoning district in which the design would be classified.



      (2)   However, in the case of site plans of extraordinary
excellence, the village may consider up to 15% variance of these densities;
provided, however, that, the minimum lot size for a single family detached
residence may not be less than 8,625 square feet; and, provided further that,
the standards within this section are adhered to and that the following
additional requirements are met.



         (a)   The total area remaining in open space shall not
be less than 50% of the total net site area.



         (b)   At least 25% of the above open space shall be
concentrated into common usable open space for such uses as tot lots, ball
fields, parks or other recreational amenities.



         (c)   For the purpose of this article, open space shall
be calculated as net site area exclusive of public rights-of-way, pavement
and buildings. Seventy-five percent of the area of dry water retention areas
and 50% of wet water retention areas may be used in calculating common usable
open space.



   (B)   Bulk regulations. Exceptions in the bulk regulations of the
prevailing zoning district shall be solely for the purpose of promoting an
integrated site  plan, no less beneficial to the residents or occupants of
such development, as well as the neighboring property, than the bulk
regulations of this article for structures developed on separate lots.



      (1)   Lot size. No minimum lot area is required; except that,
individual lots for single-family detached dwellings shall be not less than
8,625 square feet in area. A range and mixture of lot sizes is desirable to
provide diversity of house style and to avoid monotony.



      (2)   (a)   Principal structure coverage. In no case shall
the principal structural coverage including the area needed for a two car
garage, exceed 25% of the total lot area at the time of initial construction
of the principal structure.



         (b)   Total structural coverage. In no case shall total
structural lot coverage exceed 30% of an individual single-family zoning lot,
except when structural coverage includes lot area covered by a swimming pool
or by a deck which allows water to penetrate into the ground underneath the
deck and where the area underneath the deck is covered with agricultural
paper, cloth or other pervious sheeting in which case only the area of the
swimming pool or deck shall be permitted to exceed 30% of the lot area up to
a maximum of 35% of the lot area.



      (3)   Yards. No building, regardless of use, may be placed
closer than 30 feet to the exterior boundaries of the planned development.



      (4)   Spacing between buildings. When there are two or more
buildings which contain single-family attached and semi-detached dwellings,
or two or more multi-family dwelling buildings, or a combination thereof, on
a lot or on contiguous lots, initially under single ownership or control, the
distance between the building walls shall be as follows.



         (a)   When the front wall of a building faces the front
wall or rear wall of the nearest building, the distance between the two
building walls shall be not less than 50 feet.



         (b)   When the rear wall of a building faces the rear
wall of the other building, the distance between the two building walls shall
be not less than 40 feet.



         (c)   When the side wall of a building faces the front
or rear wall of the nearest building, the distance between the two building
walls shall be not less than 30 feet; except when the facing side wall
contains three or more windows on a floor, in addition to windows from
bathrooms or storage rooms, such distance between buildings shall be not less
than 40 feet, or not less than 50 feet if a main entrance doorway is also in
such side wall.



         (d)   When the side wall containing not more than four
windows, two of which are from bathrooms or storage rooms, faces such side
wall of the nearer building, the distance between the two building walls
shall be not less than 20 feet. When the facing side wall of either or both
of such buildings contains more than three window openings in addition to
windows from bathrooms or storage rooms, the distance between walls shall be
not less than 40 feet, or not less than 50 feet if either or both such side
walls also contain a main entrance doorway.



         (e)   A wall of a detached building forming the end of a
court shall be not less than 20 feet from the nearest wall or part of the
wall containing no windows or doors of a building forming the sides of the
court, and a building forming the end of the court may be attached to one or
both of the buildings forming the sides of the court; provided, the distance
between facing walls of the buildings forming the sides of the court is not
less than the applicable requirements as set forth above.



         (f)   When a wall containing no window or doorway, or
when the end of a wall contains no window or doorway, faces such a wall or
end of wall of the nearest building, the distance between such two building
walls may be not less than 15 feet.



      (5)   Building height. The maximum building height within a
planned unit development shall be seven residential stories; providing that,
structural coverage and open space requirements as noted elsewhere in this
article are maintained.



   (C)   Non-public open areas. The private recreational areas provided
in the residential land use areas shall be preserved over the life of the
planned unit development for the use primarily by the residents of the
planned unit development. A plan shall be contained within every application
for a planned unit development to assure that recreational facilities,
advertised as being available for the use of residents, remain available for
such use.



   (D)   Pedestrian and vehicular access. The Plan Commission may
recommend and the Village Board may approve access to a dwelling unit by a
driveway or a pedestrian walkway easement, and spacing between buildings of
less widths or depths than required by district regulation for the district
in which the planned unit development is located, provided:



      (1)   Adequate provisions are made, which perpetuate during
the period of the special use, for access easements and for off-street
parking spaces for use by the residents of the dwelling units served;



      (2)   The spacing between buildings shall be upon the
recommendation of the Plan Commission and shall be consistent with the
application of recognized site planning principles for securing a unified
development; and



      (3)   The yards for principal buildings along the periphery of
the development shall be not less in depth than those required for permitted
uses in the district regulations applicable to the district in which the
planned unit development is located, with the plan developed to afford
adequate protection to neighboring properties upon the recommendation of the
Plan Commission and approval of the Village Board.



   (E)   Greenbelt circulation. The Plan Commission shall consider
whether the pedestrian ways are designed to provide for safe and convenient
circulation within and beyond the development, with special attention being
given to the connections between parking areas, dwelling units and all
project facilities.



   (F)   Public and private open space requirements. The Plan
Commission shall consider whether the open areas on the lot are consolidated
generally into large usable open areas, but also provide corridors of space
around a building or buildings. If shall also make a finding regarding
whether such open areas are located to take advantage of, hold and preserve
existing natural amenities such as trees, topographic features, floodplain
areas, waterways and scenic views.



   (G)   Variances. In order to accomplish the objects of the planned
unit development, the Plan Commission members, sitting in their capacities as
members of the Zoning Board of Appeals, may recommend and the Village Board
may vary the applicable minimum requirements of the subdivision ordinance of
the village and the zoning ordinance of the village.



(Ord. 93-11-103, passed 11-9-1993)



§ 16-16-8  BUSINESS PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.



   (A)   Purpose. To encourage the most orderly development of
commercial properties through advance planning, and to assure adequate
standards for the development of business; provide regulations to encourage a
variety of building types; assure adequate open space and parking; protect
residential areas from undue traffic congestion; and to allow for the
placement of more than one commercial building on a single zoning lot.



   (B)   General provisions.



      (1)   This section applies to all commercial business and
office uses which are composed of more than one principal detached building
or any single building containing a usable internal area of more than 30,000
square feet.



      (2)   A business planned unit development may be granted in a
B-1, B-2, B-3 or B-4 zone. The uses allowed within such a planned unit
development shall be those allowed within the underlying zoning district,
with the exception of B-4 District Planned Unit Developments, in which the
uses allowed in the B-2 District shall also be permitted.



   (C)   Procedure. The procedure for pre-application, preliminary plan
submission and final plan review shall be as previously outlined in §§
16-16-2 through 16-16-5, with the following exception: § 16-16-3(C),
“Outline Development Plan”, shall be replaced with the following plan
documentation:



      Since it is often difficult for commercial developers to obtain
lease commitments prior to achieving zoning approval, the normal outline
Development Plan process shall be modified to allow for a more flexible plan
presentation. However, since it is the desire of the Plan Commission and the
Village Board to discourage simple land speculation, the following
documentation is required for consideration of business and commercial
planned developments:



      Commercial outline Development Plan. The purpose of the plan is
to demonstrate to the community the developer’s sincere intention of
building the proposed development in the village and illustrate in broad
terms the resulting impact of the development on the existing community, so
that adequate planning can take place.



      The outline plan shall consist of both maps and a written
statement, and must show enough of the area surrounding the proposed planned
development to demonstrate its relationship to adjoining uses, both existing
and proposed. It must also clearly show how it conforms to the elements of
the Comprehensive Plan.



      (1)   The maps which are part of the outline Development Plan
shall be as follows:



         (a)   Background information, as per §
16-16-3(D)(1)(a), (b), and (c), “boundary survey”, “topography” and
“site analysis”;



         (b)   Outline Development Plan, showing the basic
shopping center arrangement consisting of the following information:



            1.   General store locations and intended sizes;
particularly showing the area where the largest store or stores will be
placed;



            2.   Areas designated for parking;



            3.   Internal site traffic circulation, both
pedestrian and vehicular;



            4.   External site traffic circulation;



            5.   Designated landscape and screening areas;



            6.   Location of truck docks and parcel receiving
areas;



            7.   Preliminary site engineering; and (This may
be a written report analyzing proposed methods of adequately serving the site
with public improvements.)



            8.   Additional information as deemed necessary to
clearly illustrate the intent of the proposed development.



      (2)   The written statement to accompany the outline
Development Plan must contain the following information:



         (a)   An explanation of the character of the planned
development;



         (b)   A statement of proposed financing and financial
responsibility of developer;



         (c)   A statement of present ownership;



         (d)   A general indication of the expected schedule of
development; and



         (e)   Engineering reports as required.



      (3)   (a)   A market analysis containing the following
formation may be requested.



            1.   Trade area determination;



            2.   Population of the trade area, present and
projected;



            3.   Effective buying power in the trade area,
present and projected;



            4.   Inventory of existing and proposed competing
facilities;



            5.   Net supportable commercial floor area; and



            6.   Tax impact study.



         (b)   The processing of the outline Development Plan
shall be the same as for a preliminary plan as per § 16-16-3(E).



   (D)   Preliminary and final site plans. Since the outline
Development Plan is generally schematic in nature, a condition of approval
shall be that detailed plans of each phase of the development will be
reviewed by the Plan Commission and Village Board prior to the issuance of a
building permit. The procedure and documentation required for this, and
approval of preliminary and final plans shall be the same as found in §
16-16-3(D) and (E) and § 16-16-4.



   (E)   Standards. In addition to the standards set forth in §
16-16-6, the following additional standards must be complied with.



      (1)   Residential uses. No building shall be used as a
residence; except that, facilities for employees of human or animal health
care facilities, caretaker, or watchman for the premises may be provided.



      (2)   Enclosed building. Unless specifically approved, all
business shall be displayed and stored within a completely enclosed building.



      (3)   Parking. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with
Ch. 16, Art. 13.



      (4)   Signs and lighting. All signs and lighting in the
planned development shall comply with the village’s sign and lighting
ordinances.



         (a)   Glare, whether direct or reflected, as
differentiated from general illumination, shall not be visible beyond the
limits of the site from which it originates.



         (b)   No light which is flashing, revolving or otherwise
resembling a traffic control signal shall be allowed in any area where it
could create a hazard for passing vehicular traffic.



      (5)   Landscaping and screening.



         (a)   Landscaping of setbacks.



            1.   All areas not designated for buildings,
circulation, parking and storage shall be landscaped.



            2.   LANDSCAPINGshall mean, at a minimum, the use
of trees and a ground cover defined as grass, shrubs or other material
allowing water to seep through the ground. Berming can also be used
effectively. Berm profile shall not exceed a slope of one foot of elevation
in two horizontal feet unless approved methods of slope stabilization are
utilized. However, whenever berms are created for aesthetic or screening
purposes they should be created with lesser slopes, such as one foot of
elevation in four horizontal feet.



            3.   Landscaping may include:



               a.   Tree planting at the rate of at least
one tree per 30 linear feet;



               b.   Combination of berming and tree
planting;



               c.   Combination of berming and shrub
planting; and



               d.   Berming with low ground cover.



            4.   The trees in all landscaped areas shall be at
least two and one-half-inch caliper; conifers shall be at least six feet in
height. Exterior storage, where permitted, shall be subject to proper
screening. Screening must be provided whenever parking, storage or loading is
allowed on the site within the front yard, rear yard or side yard adjacent to
residential land use or to parcels zoned for residential use. Screening for
privacy must also be provided whenever the proposed commercial or industrial
use will allow for direct view into a residential unit or its adjacent area
of privacy.



         (b)   Landscaping of parking lot. For lots with a paved
area greater than 20,000 square feet, a minimum of 4% of the paved area must
be landscaped to create visual relief. This provision is in addition to the
landscaping of minimum required setbacks and must be used in a fashion that
will break the expanse of paving.



      (6)   Performance standards. All planned commercial and office
developments shall comply with the performance standards specified by Ch. 16,
Art. 10.



      (7)   Accessibility. The site will be accessible from public
roads which are adequate to carry the traffic that will be imposed upon them
by the proposed development. The streets and driveways on the site of the
proposed development shall be adequate to serve the enterprises located in
the proposed development. Traffic control signals will be provided without
expense to the village when the Village Board determines that such signals
are required to prevent traffic hazards or congestion on adjacent streets.



      (8)   Utilities. All of the planned unit development shall
provide for underground installation of utilities (including gas, electricity
and broadband telecommunications) in both public ways and private extensions
thereof. Above-ground service facilities shall be located in accordance with
§ 16-5-7 . Provisions shall be made for acceptable design and construction
of storm water facilities including grading, gutter, piping and treatment of
turf to handle storm waters.



      (9)   Bulk regulations.



         (a)   Lot size. The minimum lot size for a commercial
planned unit development shall be one acre.



         (b)   Structural coverage. Not more than 30% of any lot
in the commercial land use area shall be covered by buildings or structures.



         (c)   Open space. At least 15% of the net site area of
the lot shall be provided for landscape and open space purposes.



         (d)   Perimeter setback requirements. No building or
other structure that exceeds 50 feet in height shall be located within 200
feet of the lot line of such development, and no building or other structure
that exceeds 35 feet in height shall be located within 100 feet of the lot
line. All other setback and yard requirements for the prevailing underlying
zoning district shall apply to commercial planned developments.



         (e)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, OPEN
SPACE shall be defined as that area of the total site exclusive of public
rights-of-way, buildings, pavement for parking and roadways, and
non-residential land uses, but including park and recreation areas.



(Ord. 2008-10-49, passed 10-6-2008; Ord. 2014-04-20, passed 4-21-2014)



§ 16-16-9  INDUSTRIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.



   (A)   Purpose. To provide flexibility in the large scale development
of industrial property; provide regulations to encourage a variety of
building types, assure adequate open space and parking, protect residential
areas from the noise, traffic and activities of industrial operations, and to
allow for the placement of more than one principal building on a single
zoning lot.



   (B)   General provisions.



      (1)   The minimum size of an industrial planned unit
development shall be 20 acres.



      (2)   The uses allowed within a planned industrial development
shall be as specified in Ch. 16, Art. 10. In addition to industrial uses, the
permitted uses within the B-3 Service District shall also be permitted within
an industrial planned development.



   (C)   Procedure. The procedure for pre-application, preliminary plan
submission and final plan review shall be as previously outlined in §§
16-16-2 through 16-16-5, with the exception of the requirements for the
outline Development Plan.



   (D)   Outline Development Plan. An outline Development Plan may be
submitted for the entire industrial planned development. This plan shall
consist of the following information:



      (1)   Background information. As per § 16-16-3(D)(1)(a), (b),
and (c), “boundary survey”, “topography” and “site analysis”;



      (2)   Map or maps. Showing enough of the area surrounding the
proposed planned development to demonstrate its relationship to adjoining
uses, both existing and proposed, and its relationship to the elements of the
Comprehensive Plan. The following additional information shall also be
provided:



         (a)   The location of all major streets and roadways;



         (b)   The general classification of proposed uses;



         (c)   The location and arrangement of known buildings
and structures;



         (d)   The approximate size and location of parking areas;



         (e)   Preliminary engineering studies; and



         (f)   Anticipated areas for landscaping and screening.



   (E)   Preliminary and final site plans. Since the outline
Development Plan is generally schematic in nature, a condition of approval
shall be that detailed plans of each phase of the development will be
reviewed by the Plan Commission and the Village Board prior to the issuance
of a building permit. The procedure and documentation for this is found in §
16-16-3(D) and (E) and § 16-16-4.



   (F)   Standards. In addition to the standards set forth in §
16-16-6 the following standards must be complied with.



      (1)   Residential uses. No building shall be used as a
residence, except that facilities for custodian, caretaker or watchman for
the premises may be provided.



      (2)   Parking. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with
Ch. 16, Art. 13.



      (3)   Signs. All signs in the planned development shall comply
with the village Sign Code.



      (4)   Performance standards. All planned industrial
developments shall comply with the performance standards as set forth in §
16-12-3.



      (5)   Utilities. All of the industrial planned unit
developments shall provide for underground installation of utilities
(including gas, electricity and broadband telecommunications) in both public
rights-of-way and private extensions thereof. Above-ground service facilities
shall be located in accordance with § 16-5-7 .



      (6)   Landscaping. At least 10% of the net land area of an
industrial planned unit development shall be reserved for landscaping. All
outdoor storage areas shall be adequately screened and landscaped and
transitional yards between non-compatible land uses shall be screened with
evergreen plant material, or suitable alternative material as approved by the
Plan Commission.



   (G)   Bulk requirements. The bulk requirements as set forth in §
16-10-2(C) through (K) shall be complied with. Building separation shall be
equal to the distance normally determined by conventional yard requirements
in the absence of normal lot arrangement; provided, however, that, where the
presentation of a site plan indicates that the development of industrial lots
averaging not less than 20,000 square feet with no lot being less than 15,000
square feet would be consistent with the intent of this chapter to provide
locations for various types of industries within the village, such industrial
planned unit developments utilizing smaller lots may be approved. Where a
site plan containing such smaller lots is approved, the development of that
property shall take place in accordance with the provisions of § 16-10-2(C),
(H), (I), (J) and (K). Where a planned unit development is proposed which
utilizes in whole or in part lots between 15,000 square feet and one acre,
the site plan for those lots shall set forth the proposed front yard, side
yards and rear yards. Such yard requirements must comply with good planning
standards and must be consistent with the concept of substantial setback
yards around industrial structures.



(Ord. 2008-10-49, passed 10-6-2008)



ARTICLE 17:  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS



Section



   16-17-1   Fees



   16-17-2   Repeal of conflicting ordinances



   16-17-3   Vested right



   16-17-4   Separability



   16-17-5   Rights and remedies are cumulative



   16-17-6   Public nuisance per se



   16-17-7   Violation, penalty, enforcement



   16-17-8   Effective date



§ 16-17-1  FEES.



   Fees for application for zoning approvals under the provisions of this
chapter shall be as prescribed in § 6-13-12.



(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2010-06-36, passed 6-21-2010)



§ 16-17-2  REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions
of this chapter are hereby repealed insofar as they conflict herewith.



§ 16-17-3  VESTED RIGHT.



   Nothing in this chapter should be interpreted or construed to give rise
to any permanent vested rights in the continuation of any particular use,
district, zoning classification or any permissible activities therein; and
they are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendment, change or
modification as may be necessary to the preservation or protection of public
health, safety and welfare.



§ 16-17-4  SEPARABILITY.



   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the President and Board of
Trustees that the several pro-visions of this chapter are separable, in
accordance with the following.



   (A)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any
provision or a part thereof of this chapter to be invalid, such judgment
shall not affect any other provisions or part thereof of this chapter,
including other parts of the provision declared invalid which are not
specifically declared to be invalid in such judgment.



   (B)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid
the application of any provision or part thereof of this chapter to a
particular property, building or structure, such judgment shall not affect
the application of such provision or part thereof to any other property,
building or structure not specifically included in such judgment.



§ 16-17-5  RIGHTS AND REMEDIES ARE CUMULATIVE.



   The rights and remedies provided herein are cumulative in addition to
any other remedies provided by law.



§ 16-17-6  PUBLIC NUISANCE PER SE.



   Any building or structure which is erected, altered or converted, or
any use of premises or land which is begun or changed subsequent to the time
of passage of this chapter in violation of any of the provisions thereof is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of
any court of competent jurisdiction.



§ 16-17-7  VIOLATION, PENALTY, ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, refuses to comply with or who resists enforcement of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $75, nor more than
$750, for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   (1)   In the event any building or structure constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building,
structure or land use is in violation of this chapter, the Community
Development Director or any owner or tenant of real property in the same
contiguous zoning district as the building or structure in question, in
addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceeding to:



         (a)   Prevent the unlawful construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use;



         (b)   Prevent the occupancy of the building, structure
or land;



         (c)   Prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use
in or about the premises; and



         (d)   Restrain, correct or abate the violation.



      (2)   When any such action is instituted by an owner or
tenant, notice of such action shall be served upon the village at the time
suit is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the President of the
Board of Trustees; no such action may be maintained until such notice has
been given.



   (C)   Any person violating § 16-13-2(F)(3) shall be deemed guilty
of an offense and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $10 for the
first offense within any calendar year, $25 for the second offense within any
calendar year, $50 for the third offense within any calendar year, $100 for
the fourth offense within any calendar year and $100 for any offense
thereafter occurring within one calendar year. Each day that a person is in
violation of the provisions of § 16-13-2(F)(3) shall constitute a separate
offense.



(Ord. 92-06-70, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 96-01-03, passed 1-15-1996)



§ 16-17-8  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   (A)   This chapter shall be in full force and effect upon its
passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.



   (B)   However, where a building permit for a building or structure
has been issued, in accordance with state law, prior to the effective date of
this chapter, and where construction has been begun within six months of such
effective date and is being diligently prosecuted to completion, such
building or structure may be completed in accordance with approved plans on
the basis of which the building permit was issued; and further, may upon
completion, be occupied under a certificate of occupancy by the use
originally designated, subject to the provisions set forth in § 16-15-2.



ARTICLE 18:  DEFINITIONS



Section



   16-18-1   Definitions



§ 16-18-1  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABUT. To have a common property line or district line.



   ABANDONMENT. An action to give up one’s right or interest in property.



   ABOVE-GROUND SERVICE FACILITY (SERVICE FACILITY or SERVICE FACILITIES).
An above-ground structure, used by a service entity to provide service to the
public, which has a volume above the ground surface of 24 cubic feet or
greater, a linear size of four feet or greater in any one dimension, or a
footprint of 5% or greater of the maximum lot coverage for the lot.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE.



      (1)   An ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE or USE is one which:



         (a)   Is subordinate to and serves a principal building
or principal use;



         (b)   Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the
principal building or principal use served;



         (c)   Contributes to the comfort, convenience or
necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal use served; and



         (d)   Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal
building or principal use served, with the single exception of such accessory
off-street parking facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on
the same zoning lot with the building or use served.



      (2)   An ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE or USE includes, but is
not limited to, the following:



         (a)   A children’s playhouse, garden house and private
greenhouse;



         (b)   A shed, garage or building for domestic storage;



         (c)   Incinerators incidental to residential use;



         (d)   Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock
on the same lot with any retail service or business use, unless such storage
is excluded by the district regulations;



         (e)   Storage of goods used in or produced by
manufacturing activities on the same lot or parcel of ground with such
activities unless such storage is excluded by the district regulations;



         (f)   A non-paying guest house or rooms for guests
within an accessory building; provided, such facilities are used for the
occasional housing of guests of the occupants of the principal building and
not for permanent occupancy by others as housekeeping units;



         (g)   Servant’s quarters comprising part of an
accessory garage and solely for occupancy by a servant or household employee
(and his or her family) of the occupants of the principal dwelling;



         (h)   Swimming pool, tennis court or other athletic
facilities for private use by the occupant and his or her guests;



         (i)   Off-street motor car parking areas, and loading
and unloading facilities;



         (j)   Signs (other than advertising signs) as permitted
and regulated in each district incorporated herein;



         (k)   Carports:



         (l)   Public utility facilities, including telephone,
electric, gas, water and sewer lines, their supports and incidental equipment;



         (m)   A residential unit for  one person and his or her
family where such occupancy is accessory to a business which requires a
full-time watchman, attendant or residential professional; and



         (n)   Driveways.



   ADDITION. An extension or increase in floor area or height of a
building or structure.



   ADJACENT. To lie near or close to; in the neighborhood or vicinity
thereof.



   ADJOINING. Touching or contiguous, as distinguished from lying near or
adjacent.



   AIRPORT. Any area of land which is used or intended for use for the
landing and taking off of aircraft, and any appurtenant areas which are used
or intended for use for airport buildings or other airport facilities located
thereon.



   ALLEY. Any right-of-way which is used primarily for vehicular traffic
along the side or in the rear of properties and which affords only a
secondary means of access to abutting properties.



   ALTERATION. Any change in size, shape, occupancy or use of a building
or structure.



   AMUSEMENT DEVICE. An amusement device shall mean any machine, game,
table or device which is designed, intended, displayed or kept as an



amusement game, test of skill or entertainment, and may be operated by the
public upon the insertion of coin, slug, token, plate, disc or the use of
which is made available for any valuable consideration; it is operated by the
manipulation of buttons, dials, balls, wheels, trigger devices or electrical
impulses, whether or not registering a score, offering a prize or offering
free replays. AMUSEMENT DEVICE shall include, but not be limited to, devices
commonly known as pinball machines, marble machines, video games, electronic
games, skill ball and all games, operations or transactions similar thereto
under whatever name they may be indicated. Not included within the definition
of AMUSEMENT DEVICE are regulation bowling alleys and children’s rides.



   ANIMAL HOSPITAL. A building or portion thereof designed or used for the
care, observation or treatment of domestic animals.



   ANTENNA STRUCTURE. The rigid portion of the assembly which receives or
transmits radio frequency energy, together with the mast or tower upon which
such assembly is mounted, excluding non-rigid items such as wire, cable
transmission lines, guy wires or guy wire anchors.



   APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure
which is arranged, designed, used or intended to be used as a single
housekeeping unit. Complete kitchen facilities (sink, stove, refrigerator and
storage facilities) permanently installed must always be included for each
APARTMENT.



   AUTOMOBILE AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLE FUELING PLAZA.  A retail facility
that sells gasoline and diesel fuel to the public for the fueling of
automobiles and commercial vehicles up to and including semi-trucks,
including but not limited to one or more of the following accessory uses:
convenience store, restaurant, and short-term truck parking of not more than
two hours in accordance with § 16-13-3 of the Zoning Code. The facility
shall not include shower facilities, laundry facilities, sleeping quarters or
overnight parking or storage of commercial vehicles.



   AUTOMOBILE AND TRAILER SALES AREA. An open area, other than a street,
used for the display, sale or rental of new or used automobiles or trailers,
and where no repair work is done except for minor incidental repair of
automobiles or trailers to be displayed, sold or rented on the premises.



   AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY. A building or portion thereof containing facilities
for washing more than two automobiles, using production line or self service
methods.



   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR. Engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of
worn or damaged motor vehicles or trailers; collision service, including
body, frame or fender straightening or repairing and painting of vehicles.



   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MINOR. Incidental repair, replacement of parts and
motor service to automobiles, but not including any operation specified under
the definition of AUTOMOBILE REPAIR, MAJOR.



   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. A place where gasoline, stored only in
underground tanks, kerosene, lubricating oil or grease for operation of
automobiles are offered for sale directly to the public on the premises, and
including minor accessories and the servicing of automobiles, but not
including major automobile repairing; and including the washing of
automobiles where no chain conveyor, blower or steam-cleaning device is
employed. When the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels or
oils is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises shall be
classified as a public garage. AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS shall not include
sale or storage of automobiles or trailers, new or used.



   AWNING. A roof-like cover, temporary in nature, which projects from the
wall of a building or overhangs the public way.



   BASEMENT. A story partly underground. Where more than one-half of its
height is above the established curb level or above the average level of the
adjoining ground where the curb level has not been established, a BASEMENT
shall be counted as a story for the purposes of height measurement.



   BILLBOARD. Any structure or portion thereof upon which are signs or
advertisements used as an outdoor display, but not including bulletin boards
used to announce church services or to display court or other public office
notices, or signs for offering the sale or lease of the premises on which the
sign is located.



   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, or a combination of streets
and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead lines or shore
lines of waterways or corporate boundary lines of the village.



   BOARD OF TRUSTEES. The President and Village Board of Trustees of the
Village of Carol Stream, Illinois.



   BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATIONS. The provision of the ability to transmit
voice, data, text, sound or video programming. A BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
UTILITY is any entity engaged in operating, maintaining and/or providing a
broadband telecommunications network to subscribers for a fee, and may be
operated via an open and/or closed transmission path. A TELECOMMUNICATIONS
UTILITY may be based on a single technology or a combination of technologies.



   BUILDING. Any structure with roof and substantial walls securely
affixed to the land and entirely separated on all sides from any other
structure by space or by walls in which there are no communicating doors,
windows or openings; and which is designed or intended for the shelter,
enclosure or protection of persons, animals or chattel. Any structure with
interior areas not normally accessible for human use, such as gas holders,
oil tanks, water tanks, grain elevators, coal bunkers, oil cracking towers
and other similar structures, are not considered as BUILDINGS.



   BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED. A building separated on all sides from
the adjacent open space or from other buildings or other structures by a
permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows
and normal entrance or exit doors.



   BUILDING, DETACHED. A building surrounded by open space on the same
zoning lot.



   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the sidewalk level
or its equivalent established grade opposite the middle of the front of the
building to the highest elevation of the roof in the case of a slant or flat
roof; to the deck line of a mansard roof; and to the mean height level
between eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof; provided that, where
buildings are set back from the street line, the HEIGHT OF THE BUILDING may
be measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front
of the building.



   BUILDING, NON-CONFORMING. Any building which does not conform to the
regulations herein prescribing the required yards, coverage, height and
setbacks, minimum required spacing between buildings on a single lot, and
minimum required usable open space for the district in which the building is
located.



   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A non-accessory building in which the principal
use of the zoning lot on which it is located is conducted.



   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line marking the minimum horizontal distance
between the front line of the building or structure and the front property
line.



   BUS LOTS. Any lot or land area used for the storage or layover of
passenger buses or motor coaches.



   CANOPY. Any structure, movable or stationary, attached to and deriving
its support from framework or posts or other means independent of a connected
structure for the purpose of shielding a platform, stoop or sidewalk from the
elements.



   CELLAR. A story having more than one-half of its floor to clear ceiling
height below grade. A CELLAR is not included in computing the number of
stories for the purpose of height measurement.



   CLINIC, MEDICAL OR DENTAL. A building or portion thereof, the principal
use of which is for offices of an organization or group practice of
specializing physicians or dentists or both, and contains facilities for
examination and treatment of patients, but without facilities for overnight
lodging.



   CLOSED CUP FLASHPOINT. The lowest temperature at which a combustible
liquid under the most favorable conditions will give off a flammable vapor
which will burn momentarily.



   CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE. A non-profit association of persons who are
bona fide members paying annual dues, which owns, hires or leases a building
or portion thereof, the use of such premises being restricted to members and
their guests.



   COMMISSION. The Plan Commission of the Village of Carol Stream,
Illinois.



   COMMON AREA. An area or areas of reasonable contiguous open space
available to residents of a planned unit development for common use. Required
setback, parking spaces and driveways are not to be included.



   COMMUNITY RESIDENCE. A single dwelling unit occupied on a relatively
permanent basis in a family-like environment by a group of unrelated persons
with disabilities, plus paid professional support staff provided by a
sponsoring agency, either living with the residents on a 24-hour basis, or
present whenever residents with disabilities are present at the dwelling; and
complies with the zoning regulations for the district in which the site is
located.



   CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT. Any equipment which is used in connection with
the construction, alteration, excavation, or repair of a building or of real
property, including, but not limited to, equipment such as front loaders,
trailers, cranes, bulldozers and other similar equipment.



   CONTIGUOUS. In actual contact.



   DAY NURSERY. A building or portion thereof used for the daytime care of
preschool children.



   DECIBEL. A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound.
Sound level meters, which are employed or measure the intensity of sound, are
calibrated in DECIBELS.



   DEPTH OF LOT. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines.



   DISTRICT. A portion of the village within which on a uniform basis
certain other uses of land and building are permitted and certain other uses
of land and building are prohibited as set forth in this chapter, or within
which certain yards and other open spaces are required or within which
certain lot areas, dwelling sizes and density requirements are established or
within which a combination of such aforesaid regulations are applied.



   DOMESTIC PET SERVICE. An establishment where clipping, bathing and
other services, except that of a veterinary nature, are rendered to dogs,
cats and domestic pets. No boarding shall be permitted.



   DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENTS. An establishment or part thereof in which are
provided facilities where serving or consuming commodities, or both, are
intended to occur primarily in patrons’ automobiles parked on the premises,
or where commodities are purchased by customers waiting in automobiles for
consumption off the premises.



   DRIVEWAY. A private roadway providing motor vehicle access to a
structure or an off-street parking or loading area.



   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively
for residential purposes, including single-family, two-family and
multiple-family dwellings, but not including mobile homes, or other trailers
or lodging rooms in hotels, motels or lodging houses.



   DWELLING, ATTACHED. A dwelling joined to one or more other dwellings by
party walls, or vertical cavity walls, and above ground physically unifying
horizontal structural elements.



   DWELLING, DETACHED. A dwelling which is surrounded on all sides by open
space on the same lot.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A dwelling containing three or more dwelling
units.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A dwelling containing one dwelling unit only.



   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms which are arranged, designed or used
as living quarters for one family only. Individual bathrooms and complete
single kitchen facilities, permanently installed to serve the entire family,
shall always be included within each DWELLING UNIT.



   EFFICIENCY UNIT. A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room for
living, sleeping and eating, plus facilities for cooking and a complete bath
and toilet facilities.



   ESTABLISHMENT, BUSINESS. A place of business carrying an operation, the
ownership or management of which is separate and distinct from those of any
other place of business located on the same or other lot.



   FAMILY.



      (1)   Either:



         (a)   Two or more persons, each related to the other by
blood, marriage, legal adoption or through legal custody, together with usual
domestic servants and not more than two bona fide guests, all living together
as a single house-keeping unit and using common kitchen facilities (that is,
a related FAMILY); or



         (b)   Four or fewer persons, all of whom are not
necessarily related to each of the others by blood, marriage or legal
adoption or through legal custody, all living together as a single
housekeeping unit and using common kitchen facilities (that is, an unrelated
FAMILY).



      (2)   For purposes of this Zoning Code, however, an unrelated
FAMILY shall not include persons living together in a community residence or
nursing home.



   FAMILY COMMUNITY RESIDENCE. A single dwelling unit occupied on a
relatively permanent basis in a family-like environment by a group of no more
than eight unrelated persons with disabilities, plus paid professional
support staff provided by a sponsoring agency, either living with residents
on a 24-hour basis, or present whenever residents with disabilities are
present at the dwelling; and complies with the zoning regulations for the
district in which the site is located.



   FLOOD CREST ELEVATION. The elevation of the highest flood level as
designated by the Village Engineer.



   FLOODPLAIN. The relatively flat lowlands adjoining a watercourse or
other body of water subject to overflow therefrom during flood periods.



   FLOODWAY. The channel of the stream or body of water and that portion
of the floodplain that is inundated by a flood and used to carry the flow of
the flood.



   FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of the building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or
from the centerline of walls separating two buildings, computed as follows:



      (1)   For determining FLOOR AREA ratio, the sum of the
following areas:



         (a)   The basement floor area when more than one-half of
the basement height is above the finished lot grade level where curb level
has not been established;



         (b)   Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor;



         (c)   Floor space used for mechanical equipment (except
equipment, open or enclosed, located on the roof);



         (d)   Penthouses;



         (e)   Attic space having headroom of seven feet ten
inches or more;



         (f)   Interior balconies and mezzanines;



         (g)   Enclosed porches; and



         (h)   Floor area devoted to accessory uses.



      (2)   Space devoted to off-street parking or loading shall not
be included in the FLOOR AREA.



      (3)   The FLOOR AREA of structures devoted to bulk storage of
materials shall be computed by counting each ten feet of height, or fraction
thereof, as being equal to one floor.



      (4)   For determining off-street parking and loading
requirements, the sum of the following areas:



         (a)   Floor space devoted to the principal use of the
premises, including accessory storage areas located within selling or working
space such as counters, racks or closets;



         (b)   Any basement floor area devoted to retailing
activities; and



         (c)   Floor area devoted to the production or processing
of goods or to business or professional offices.



      (5)   For determining off-street parking and loading
requirements, FLOOR AREA shall not include space devoted primarily to storage
purposes (except as otherwise noted herein,) off-street parking or loading
facilities, including aisles, ramps and maneuvering space, or basement floor
area other than area devoted to retailing activities, the production or
processing of goods or business or professional offices.



   FLOOR AREA RATIO (F.A.R.). The floor area ratio of the building or
other structure on any lot is determined by dividing the floor area of such
building or structure by the area of the lot on which the building or
structure is located. When more than one building or structure is located on
a lot, then the FLOOR AREA RATIO is determined by dividing the total floor
area of all buildings or structures by the area of the lot, or, in the case
of planned development, by the net site area. The FLOOR AREA RATIO
requirements, as set forth under each zoning district, shall determine the
maximum floor area allowable for a building or other structure (including
both principal accessory buildings) in direct ratio to the gross area of the
lot.



   FOOD SERVICE. Any full service and fast food operation, with or without
seats and tables, as well as stores such as, but not limited to, doughnut
shops, ice cream shops, delis, meat markets, take out pizza operations.



   FREE BURNING. The rate of combustion described by a material which
burns actively and easily supports combustion.



   FREQUENCY. Signifies the number of oscillations per second in a sound
wave and is an index of the pitch of the resulting sound.



   GAME ROOM. Any business establishment having two or more amusement
devices, whether or not operated as a principal use.



   GARAGE, BUS. Any building used or intended to be used for the storage
of three or more passenger motor buses or motor coaches used in public
transportation, including school buses.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE. Any accessory building or an accessory portion of the
principal building which is intended for and used to store the private
passenger vehicles of the family or families resident on the premises, and
which no business, service or industry connected directly or indirectly with
the automobile vehicles is carried on; provided that, not more than one-half
of the space may be rented for the private vehicles of persons not resident
on the premises, except that all the space in a garage of one or two car
capacity may be so rented. Such a garage shall not be used for more than two
commercial vehicles and the load capacity of such vehicles shall not exceed
two and one-half tons.



   GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building other than a private garage used for the
care, incidental servicing and sale of automobile supplies or where motor
vehicles are parked or stored for remuneration, hire or sale within the
structure, but not including trucks, tractors, truck trailers and commercial
vehicles exceeding one and one-half tons capacity.



   GARAGE, STORAGE OR OFF-STREET PARKING. A building or portion thereof,
designed or used, or land used exclusively for storage of motor vehicles, at
which motor fuels and oils are not sold, and motor vehicles are not equipped,
repaired, hired or sold.



   GOLF COURSE. Public, semi-public or private grounds over which the game
of golf is played, including accessory buildings and land uses incidental
thereto.



   GRADE. The established grade of the street roadway or street sidewalk
adjoining the front lot line, at a point opposite the middle of the building
wall facing such front lot line. Where no such GRADE has been established,
the GRADE shall be the elevation of the street sidewalk at such point; and,
where no sidewalks exist, the GRADE shall be the average elevation of the
street roadway adjacent to the front lot line. Except in cases of unusual
topographic conditions, as determined by the Community Development Director,
GRADE shall be the average elevation of the finished surface of the ground
adjoining the exterior walls of a building at the base of a structure.



   GREENHOUSE.  A detached structure constructed primarily of glass or
other translucent material in which temperature and humidity can be
controlled for the cultivation or protection of plants.



   GROUND FLOOR AREA. The lot area covered by a principal building,
measured at grade, from the exterior face of the exterior walls, but
excluding open porches or terraces, garages or carports; except the floor
area of a garage may be included in the ground floor area when it is a part
of the ground floor of a building over one story in height, and the floor
above the garage is used or intended for use as a part of the principal use.



   GROUP COMMUNITY RESIDENCE. A single dwelling unit occupied on a
relatively permanent basis in a family-like environment by a group of nine to
15 unrelated persons with disabilities, plus paid professional support staff
provided by a sponsoring agency, either living with residents on a 24-hour
basis, or present whenever residents with disabilities are present at the
dwelling; and complies with the zoning regulations for the district in which
the site is located.



   GUEST HOUSE. Living quarters within a detached accessory building,
located on the same premises with the principal building for use by temporary
guests of the occupants of the premises. Such quarters shall have no kitchen
facilities nor be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.



   GUEST, PERMANENT. A person who occupies or has the right to occupy a
lodging house, rooming house, boardinghouse, hotel, apartment hotel or motel
accommodation as his or her domicile and place of permanent residence.



   HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation or activity resulting in financial gain
and in which the occupation or activity is conducted entirely within the
structural confines of the residential dwelling, including attached garages.
The use as a HOME OCCUPATION must be clearly incidental and secondary to the
use of the dwelling as a residential home.



   HOTEL or MOTEL. An establishment containing lodging rooms, for
occupancy by transient guests in contradistinction to a lodging house,
boardinghouse or a rooming house, and is commonly known as a HOTEL in the
village, and which provides customary hotel services such as maid, telephone
and secretarial, bellboy and desk services, the use and upkeep of furniture,
and furnishings and laundry of linens. A HOTEL may include a restaurant or
cocktail lounge, public banquet halls, ballroom or meeting rooms.



   HOUSEHOLDER. The occupant of a dwelling unit who is either the owner or
lessee thereof.



   INDOOR KENNEL AND BOARDING FACILITY. A building or portion thereof used
for the indoor kenneling or boarding of dogs, including ancillary services
such as dog bathing, grooming and training. No outdoor activities other than
transporting the dog between the building and the owner’s vehicle are
permitted.



   INTENSE BURNING. The rate of combustion described by a material that
burns with a high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly.



   INTERIOR PLAN VIEWS. Preliminary plans showing the size and square foot
area of each unit, the room design within each unit, the halls and
stairwells, indicating fire doors where necessary. All floors of the building
can be typical; however, any variations between floor designs are to be shown
separately.



   JUNKYARD. An open area where waste, scrap metal, paper, rags or similar
materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or
handled, including auto and building wrecking yards, but excluding similar
uses taking place entirely within a completely enclosed building.



   KENNEL, COMMERCIAL. Any lot or premises or portion thereof on which
more than two dogs are kept over four months of age, or where more than four
cats or other domestic animals are kept, or where any dog or other domestic
animals are boarded for compensation or kept for sale.



   LABORATORY, COMMERCIAL. A place devoted to experimental study, such as
testing and analyzing. Manufacturing, assembly or packaging of products is
not included within this definition.



   LAUNDERETTE. A business that provides coin-operated self-service type
washing, drying and ironing facilities; provided that:



      (1)   Not more than four persons, including owners, are
employed on the premises; and



      (2)   No pickup or delivery service is maintained.



   LODGING HOUSE. A building originally designed for and used as a single-
or two-family dwelling, all or a portion of which contains lodging rooms
which accommodate persons who are not members of the keeper’s family, for
compensation pursuant to previous arrangement, but not open on a daily,
overnight or per meal basis to transient guests.



   LODGING ROOM. A room or suite of rooms rented as sleeping and living
quarters, but without cooking facilities and with or without an individual
bathroom. In a suite of rooms, each room which provides sleeping
accommodations shall be counted as one LODGING ROOM for the purpose of this
chapter.



   LOT. A parcel or tract of land under single unit control.



   LOT AREA. A measure, in square feet, of the land area enclosed within
the lot lines of a single lot.



   LOT, CORNER. A lot of which at least two adjacent sides abut for their
full lengths upon streets; provided that, the interior angle at the
intersection of such two sides is less than 135 degrees. A lot abutting upon
a curved street or streets shall be considered a CORNER LOT if the tangents
to the curve at its points of beginning within the lot or at the points of
intersection of the side lot lines with the street line intersect at an
interior angle of less than 135 degrees. The point of intersection of the
street lot lines is the corner. In the case of a CORNER LOT with a curved
street line, the CORNER is the point on the street lot line nearest to the
point of intersection of the tangents above described.



   LOT COVERAGE. The part or percent of the lot occupied by a combination
of building and accessory uses covering the lot area.



   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot that is not a corner lot.



   LOT LINE. A property boundary line of any lot held in single or
separate ownership; except that, where any portion of the lot extends to the
abutting street or alley, the LOT LINE shall be deemed to be the street or
alley line.



   LOT LINE, FRONT. That boundary of a lot which is along an existing or
dedicated street. The owner of a corner lot may select either street lot line
as the FRONT LOT LINE.



   LOT LINE, INTERIOR. A lot line which does not abut a street.



   LOT LINE, REAR. The boundary of a lot which is most distant from and
is, or is most nearly parallel to the front lot line, and in the case of an
irregular triangular or gore-shaped lot, a line ten feet in length within the
lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.



   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or
a rear lot line.



   LOT OF RECORD. A single lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of
which has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of DuPage
County, Illinois; or a single parcel of land, the deed of which has been
recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of DuPage County, Illinois.



   LOT, REVERSED CORNER. A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the
side of another lot, whether across an alley or not.



   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a THROUGH LOT, both
street lines shall be deemed front lot lines.



   LOT WIDTH. The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured within the boundaries, or the minimum distance between the side lot
lines within the buildable area.



   LOT, ZONING.



      (1)   A single tract of land, located within a single block,
which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its
owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit,
under single ownership or control, except as otherwise provided by law.



      (2)   A zoning lot shall satisfy this chapter with respect to
area, size, dimensions and frontage as required in the district in which the
zoning lot is located.



   MARQUEE or CANOPY. A roof-like structure of a permanent nature which
projects from the wall of a building and may overhang the public way, and is
designed and intended to protect pedestrians from adverse weather conditions.



   MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER.   A facility operated by an
organization or business that is registered by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to perform necessary activities, including but not limited to
cultivation, packaging and distribution of medical cannabis, to provide only
medical cannabis dispensing organizations registered by the Illinois
Department of Financial and Professional Regulation with usable medical
cannabis.



   MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION.   A facility operated by an
organization or business that is registered by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a
medical cannabis cultivation center registered by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture for the purpose of dispensing cannabis to qualifying patients or
caregivers registered by the Illinois Department of Public Health.



   MEDICAL OR REHABILITATION FACILITY. A building or part thereof designed
or used for the diagnosis, treatment and rehabilitation of persons with
sports related injuries or diseases. Such a facility shall also contain
medical offices of some or all of the doctors who treat patients at the
facility. A MEDICAL OR REHABILITATION FACILITY may also offer to non-patients
a program to encourage physical fitness and disease prevention through the
use of exercise and recreational techniques.



   MICRON. A unit of length, equal to 0.001 millimeter.



   MOBILE HOMES. Any trailer, as defined herein, used for residential
purposes, but not including sports or camping trailers.



   MODERATE BURNING. Implies a rate of combustion described by material
which supports combustion and is consumed slowly as it burns.



   MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL. A building or area in which freight brought by
motor truck is assembled or stored for routing in intrastate or interstate
shipment by motor truck.



   NAMEPLATE. A sign indicating the name and address of a building, or the
name of an occupant thereof and the practice of the permitted occupation
therein.



   NET SITE AREA. The area of a zoning lot, parcel or tract, excluding
boundary rights-of-way.



   NON-CONFORMING USE. Any building, structure or land occupied by a use
established at the time of the adoption of the ordinance or amendments
thereto, which does not conform after the passage of the ordinance or
amendments thereto with the use regulations of the ordinance.



   NOXIOUS MATTER. Material which is capable of causing injury to living
organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effects
on the psychological, social or economic well-being of human beings.



   NURSERY, PLANT MATERIAL. A space, building or structure, or combination
thereof, for the growing of live trees, shrubs, evergreens or plants offered
for retail sale on the premises, including products used for gardening or
landscaping. The definition of NURSERY, within the meaning of this chapter,
does not include any space, building or structure used for the sale of
fruits, vegetables or Christmas trees.



   NURSING HOME. A licensed public or private home or institute which
provides maintenance, personal care and nursing for three or more persons who
by reason of physical illness or infirmity are incapable of maintaining a
private, independent residence.



   OCTAVE BAND FILTER. An electrical frequency analyzer designed according
to standards formulated by the American Standards Association and used in
conjunction with a sound level meter to take measurements in specific octave
intervals.



   ODOR THRESHOLD. The minimum concentration of odorous matter in the air
that can be detected as an odor.



   OFFICIAL MAP. The map showing the streets, highways and parks
theretofore laid out, adopted, and established by law and any amendments or
additions thereto.



   OFF-STREET PARKING AREA OR LOT. Land which is improved and used or a
structure which is designated and used exclusively for the storage of
passenger motor vehicles, either for accessory off-street parking spaces when
permitted herein by district regulations.



   OPEN SALES LOT. Land used or occupied for the purpose of buying,
selling or renting merchandise stored or displayed out of doors prior to
sale. Such merchandise includes, but is not limited to, automobiles, trucks,
motor scooters, motorcycles, boats or similar commodities.



   PARKING AREA, PRIVATE. An open, hard-surfaced area, other than a street
or public way, designed, arranged and made available for the storage of
private passenger automobiles only, of occupants of the building or buildings
for which the parking area is developed and is accessory.



   PARKING AREA, PUBLIC. An open, hard-surfaced area, other than a street
or public way, intended to be used for the storage of passenger automobiles
and commercial vehicles under one and one-half tons capacity, and available
to the public, whether for compensation, free or as an accommodation to
clients or customers.



   PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE. Space within a public or private parking
area, exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps, columns or office and work
areas.



   PARTICULATE MATTER. Finely divided solid or liquid matter, other than
water, which is released in the atmosphere.



   PARTY WALL. A common wall which extends from its footing below grade to
the underside of the roof and divides buildings.



   PATIO DOOR. A means of egress incorporating either a fixed panel and a
sliding panel, two hinged panels or any combination thereof, but including at
least one sliding or swinging panel that creates a clear width of two feet
four inches when measured in its open position.



   PERFORMANCE STANDARD. A criteria established to control smoke and
particulate matter, noise, odor, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and
explosion hazards, glare or heat, or radiation hazards generated by or
inherent in uses of land or buildings.



   PERSON WITH A DISABILITY. Any individual whose disability:



      (1)   Is attributable to mental, intellectual or physical
impairments or a combination of mental, intellectual or physical impairments;



      (2)   Is likely to continue for a significant amount of time
or indefinitely;



      (3)   Results in functional limitations in three or more of
the following areas of major life activities:



         (a)   Self care;



         (b)   Receptive or expressive language;



         (c)   Learning;



         (d)   Mobility;



         (e)   Self direction;



         (f)   Capacity for independent living; and



         (g)   Economic self-sufficiency.



      (4)   Reflects the person’s need for a combination and
sequence of special interdisciplinary or generic care, treatment or other
services which are of a life-long or extended duration.



   PHOTOGRAPHY STUDIO. A building or portion thereof used for photography
sendees, such as wedding or portrait photography, offered at retail to the
general public.



   PHOTOGRAPHY STUDIO, COMMERCIAL. A building or portion thereof used for
commercial photography services, such as advertising photography, fashion
photography or food photography, offered to advertising agencies, publishers
and other business and industrial users.



   PLAN COMMISSION. The Plan Commission of the Village of Carol Stream,
Illinois.



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A parcel or tract of land, initially under
single ownership or control, which contains two or more principal buildings
and one or more principal uses, planned and constructed as a unified
development where specific regulations of a given zoning district are
modified through the issuance of a special use permit.



   PLAYHOUSE.  A detached accessory structure used for children's play,
socialization, and learning.



   PORCH. A roofed-over structure, projecting out from the wall or walls
of a main structure and commonly open to the weather in part.



   PRINCIPAL USE. The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from
a subordinate or accessory use.



   PYROPHORIC DUST. A dust in a finely divided state that is spontaneously
combustible in air.



   RADIATION HAZARDS. The deleterious and harmful effects of all ionizing
radiation, which shall include all radiation capable of producing ions in
their passage through matter. Such radiations shall include but are not
limited to the electromagnetic radiations such as x-rays and gamma rays and
particulate radiation such as electrons, beta particles, protons, neutrons
and alpha particles.



   RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT, MAJOR. Major recreational equipment shall be
defined as including the following.



      (1)   BOATCRAFT. Any unit that is used for water travel or
pleasure.



      (2)   CAMPER TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on
a chassis or metal welded unit body with the superstructure made in part or
in whole of canvas and metal frame, not to exceed 18 feet in length.



      (3)   MOTORIZED HOME. A portable dwelling designed and
constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.



      (4)   PICKUP COACH. A structure designed primarily to be
mounted on a pickup or truck chassis and with sufficient equipment to render
it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational or
vacation uses.



      (5)   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on
a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel,
recreational or vacation uses, permanently identified TRAVEL TRAILER; it
shall have a body width not exceeding eight feet and a body length not
exceeding 32 feet.



   REGIONAL RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. A place of worship with one or more of
the following accessory uses:  convents, rectories, residences for
individuals and their families employed by the religious institution as their
principal occupation and whose duties are either pastorial, educational or
custodial; day care; pre-school; non-residential rehabilitative services;
counseling; recreational facilities; book stores; media production
facilities; and temporary over-night shelters for the homeless and victims of
natural emergencies. A REGIONAL RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION shall be located on a
parcel of land that is at least ten acres in size and shall be improved with
a principal structure of at least 50,000 square feet in gross floor area.



   RESEARCH LABORATORY. A building or group of buildings in which are
located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or
experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products,
except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.



   RESERVOIR STANDING SPACES. Those off-street parking spaces allocated
for temporary standing of automobiles awaiting entrance to a particular
establishment.



   RESTAURANT. A business establishment in which meals or refreshments may
be purchased by the public, and in which greater than 50% of gross sales are
unrelated to alcoholic beverages.



   RINGELMANN CHART. The chart described in the United States Bureau of
Mines Information Circular 6888, on which are illustrated graduated shades of
gray for use in estimating the light obscuring capacity of smoke, smoke
density.



   RINGELMANN NUMBER. The number of the area on the Ringelmann Chart that
coincides most nearly with the visual density of emission of the
light-obscuring capacity of smoke.



   RIGHTS-OF-WAY. The path or thoroughfare on which such passage is made.
The strip of land over which facilities such as highways, railroad or power
lines are built.



   ROADWAY. The portion of a street which is used or intended to be used
for the travel of motor vehicles.



   ROOM. For the purpose of determining lot area requirements and density
in a multiple-family district, a living room and bedroom, equal to at least
100 square feet in area. A ROOM shall not include the area in kitchen, open
dining area, sanitary facilities, utility provisions, corridors, hallways and
storage. Plans presented showing one-, two- or three-bedroom units, and
including a den, library or other extra room shall count such extra room as a
bedroom for the purpose of computing density.



   ROOMING HOUSE. A building in which sleeping quarters (but not meals or
cooking facilities) are provided by pre-arrangement for compensation on a
weekly or longer basis for three or more persons who are not members of the
keeper’s family. For the purpose of this Zoning Code, the term ROOMING
HOUSE shall also mean lodging house, and shall not include a community
residence or nursing home.



   SERVICE ENTITY. Any individual or entity, either foreign or domestic,
providing any utility or video service for a fee subject to either a
franchise, state-issued authorization or regulation by the Illinois Commerce
Commission.



   SHED.  A detached accessory structure used primarily for storage
purposes whose use is incidental and subordinate to that of the principal
building or structure.



   SHOPPING CENTER. A commercial development in excess of ten acres of
land improved with a structure of at least 50,000 square feet and containing
five or more distinct and separate retail businesses.



   SHOPPING PLAZA. A commercial development in excess of one acre of land,
improved with a structure containing three or more distinct and separate
retail business, also sharing common parking areas and access drives.



   SMOKE. The visible discharge from a chimney, stack, vent, exhaust or
combustion process which is made up of particulate matter.



   SMOKE UNIT. The number obtained when the smoke density in the
Ringelmann Number is multiplied by the time of emission in minutes. For the
purpose of this calculation:



      (1)   A Ringelmann density reading shall be made at least once
a minute during the period of observation;



      (2)   Each reading is then multiplied by the time in minutes
during which it is observed; and



      (3)   The various products are then added together to give the
total number of smoke units observed during the entire observation period.



   SMOKING SHELTER. Any shelter in which smoking is permitted by a
business or property owner and is not an “enclosed area”, as defined by
the Smoke-Free Illinois Act.



   SOUND LEVEL. The intensity of sound of an operation or use as measured
in decibels.



   SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument standardized by the American Standards
Association for measurement of the intensity of sound.



   STABLE, PRIVATE. Any building which is located on a lot on which a
dwelling is located, and which is designed, arranged, used or intended to be
used for housing horses for the private use of occupants of the dwelling.



   STABLE, PUBLIC. A building where horses are kept for remuneration, hire
or sale.



   STORY. The portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between
the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if
there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling
next above it. The floor of a STORY may have split levels; provided that,
there are not more than four feet difference in elevation between the
different levels of the floor. A basement shall be counted as a STORY and a
mezzanine floor shall be counted as a STORY when it covers one-third the area
of the floor next below it, or if the vertical distance from the floor next
below it to the floor next above it is 24 feet or more.



   STORY, HALF. A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the
wall plates on which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more
than three feet above the floor of such story; except that, any partial story
used for residence purposes, other then for a janitor or caretaker or his or
her family, or by a family occupying the floor immediately below it, shall be
deemed a full story.



   STREET, FRONTAGE. All of the property fronting on one side of a street
between two intersecting streets, or in the case of a dead-end street, all of
the property along one side of the street between an intersecting street and
the end of such dead-end street.



   STREET LINE. The street right-of-way line abutting a property line of a
lot.



   STRUCTURE. Any improvement upon land, the use of which requires a
permanent or temporary location on the ground or attachment to something
having a permanent or temporary location on the ground. This includes, but is
not limited to, signs, fences, driveways, pools, decks, sheds, buildings and
tennis courts.



   STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY. A structure that serves an accessory use.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting members of a
building such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial
change in the roof or in the exterior walls, excepting such repair or
replacement as may be required for the safety of the building.



   STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL. A non-accessory structure that houses or serves
as the principal use of the zoning lot on which it is located.



   SWIMMING POOL. Any temporary or permanent artificial pool or receptacle
for water installed, constructed or maintained in, on, or above the ground
(not including those enclosed and located entirely within a dwelling,) having
a perimeter of more than 25 feet and/or a depth of more than two feet at any
point. A SWIMMING POOL shall be considered to be a main building and use;
provided, however, that, a SWIMMING POOL may be considered to be an accessory
building or use customarily incident to a dwelling when located on the same
lot therewith and designed and used for swimming or bathing in connection
with such dwelling solely by the persons living therein or their private
guests. No SWIMMING POOL designed or used for any commercial or other
non-residential purpose shall be considered to be an accessory building or
use customarily incident to a dwelling.



   THREE-COMPONENT MEASURING SYSTEM. Instruments which measure
simultaneously earthborne vibrations in horizontal and vertical planes.



   TOTAL SENIOR LIFE CARE FACILITY.



      (1)   A housing development designated for retirement for
individuals having a minimum age of 55 years or couples wherein one spouse is
55 years or older, containing one or more connected buildings with not less
than 200 dwelling units and a common area containing dining, kitchen, meeting
and recreational facilities which may be located upon a single zoning lot.
The aforementioned development will provide a nursing home which will be
located on the site. The overall size of the development will not be less
than 25 acres and overall floor area ratio will not exceed 0.15. The density
shall not be greater than ten dwelling units per acre and for purposes of
computing the density, every four nursing beds shall constitute the
equivalent of one dwelling unit.



      (2)   Minimum floor area shall be as follows:



 

One-bedroom apartments
 
610 square feet


Studio apartments
 
435 square feet


Three-bedroom apartments
 
1,450 square feet


Two-bedroom apartments
 
860 square feet



 



      (3)   The use may include ancillary retail shops, the use of
which is limited to the residents and their guests.



   TOXIC MATTER OR MATERIAL. Those materials which are capable of causing
injury to living organisms by chemical means.



   TRAILER.



      (1)   A vehicle with or without motive power used or adaptable
for living, sleeping, business or storage purposes, having no foundation
other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses or skirting, which does not
meet the Building Code requirements and has been or reasonably may be
equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting the structure from
place to place.



      (2)   A permanent foundation shall not change its character
nor shall the erecting of additions to such TRAILER, unless the TRAILER
itself and any additions thereto conform to all village laws.



   TRAILER SALES AREA. An open area, other than a street, used for the
display or sale of new or used trailers, and where no repair work is done,
except for minor incidental repair of trailers to be displayed and sold on
the premises.



   TRAILER, SPORTS OR CAMPING. A trailer designed for camping or other
recreational purposes.



   TRANSFER FACILITY, LANDSCAPE WASTE.   A facility at which landscape
waste is deposited and loaded onto transfer trailers, to be transported
off-site for disposal or processing.



   TRUCK, PARKING AREA OR YARD. Any land used or intended to be used for
the storage, parking of trucks, trailers, tractors and including commercial
vehicles, while not loading or unloading, which exceeds one and one-half tons
in capacity.



   USE, PRINCIPAL. The dominant use of land or buildings as distinguished
from a subordinate or accessory use.



   USED CAR LOT. A zoning lot on which used or new cars, trailers or
trucks are displayed in the open, for sale or trade.



   VIBRATION. The periodic displacement, measured in inches, of earth at
designated frequency-cycles per second.



   YARD, ACTUAL. The actual yard is bounded by the applicable lot line(s)
and the actual building setback as established by the principal building or
use of land.



   YARD, COURT. A yard formed by the enclosure of space on more than two
sides by a building or buildings.



   YARD, FRONT. A yard which is bounded by the side lot lines, front lot
line and the front yard line, or the established setback line when 40% or
more of the lots fronting on one side of a street within a block are improved
with principal buildings or uses of land.



   YARD, INTERIOR SIDE. A side yard which adjoins another lot or an alley
separating such side yard from another lot, and which is bounded by the rear
yard line, front yard line, side yard line and interior side lot line.



   YARD LINE. A line in a lot that is parallel to the lot line along which
the applicable yard extends and which is not nearer to such lot line at any
point than the required depth or width of the applicable yard otherwise
contained within this Zoning Code. YARD LINES shall be created for each type
of yard for which a required depth or width is established within the Zoning
Code. A principal or accessory building, structure or other obstruction shall
not encroach into the area between any YARD LINE and an adjacent lot line
except for such permitted obstructions in yards as are set forth in this
chapter.



   YARD, REAR. A yard which is bounded by the interior side lot line(s),
required yard line adjoining a street (if applicable), rear lot line and the
rear yard line.



   YARD, REQUIRED. The required yard is bounded by the applicable lot
line(s) and required yard line(s). Unless noted otherwise, references to YARD
in the Zoning Code refer to the REQUIRED YARD.



   YARD, SIDE, ADJOINING A STREET (CORNER SIDE YARD). A yard which is
bounded by the front yard line, side yard line, side lot line adjoining a
street and rear lot line. A SIDE YARD ADJOINING A STREET shall extend across
the entire length of a lot from the front yard line to the rear lot line.



   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The Zoning Administrator appointed by the Village
Manager and approved by the President and Board of Trustees.



   ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS. The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of
Carol Stream, Illinois.



(Ord. 90-09-86, passed 9-25-1990; Ord. 91-12-82, passed 12-10-1991; Ord.
93-07-60, passed 7-13-1993; Ord. 95-01-02, passed 1-3-1995; Ord. 99-02-07,
passed 2-1-1999; Ord. 2000-10-70, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-08-49, passed
8-19-2002; Ord. 2007-03-11, passed 3-19-2007; Ord. 2007-04-14, passed
4-16-2007; Ord. 2008-10-49, passed 10-6-2008; Ord. 2008-11-63, passed
11-17-2008; Ord. 2010-06-37, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 2010-09-45, passed
9-7-2010; Ord. 2011-10-34, passed 10-3-2011; Ord. 2014-08-42, passed
8-18-2014; Ord. 2014-09-45, passed 9-2-2014; Ord. 2015-07-15, passed
7-20-2015; Ord. 2017-11-65, passed 11-6-2017)



ARTICLE 19:  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS ZONING REGULATIONS



Section



   16-19-1   Purpose



   16-19-2   Findings



   16-19-3   Definitions



   16-19-4   Permitted use



   16-19-5   Setback requirements



   16-19-6   Restrictions on use



   16-19-7   Signage



   16-19-8   Other regulations



   16-19-9   Amortization



Cross-reference



   Sexually oriented businesses, see Ch. 10, Art. 10



§ 16-19-1  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to regarding the location of sexually oriented businesses in the
municipality in order to minimize and control negative secondary effects
associated with sexually oriented businesses within the municipality thereby
promoting the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the municipality.
The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor the effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials or communication, including sexually oriented entertainment.
Similarly, it is not the purpose, nor effect of this article to restrict or
deny access by adults to sexually oriented entertainment protected by the
First Amendment, or to deny access by distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market. Furthermore, it is not the
intent or effect of this article condone or legitimize the distribution or
exhibition of entertainment that is obscene.



(Ord. 2000-10-79, passed 10-2-2000)



§ 16-19-2  FINDINGS.



   Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of sexually
oriented businesses presented to the municipality from findings incorporated
in the cases City of Erie v. Pap’s A.M., 529 U.S. 277, 120 S.Ct. 1382
(2000), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), City of Renton v.
Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theaters,
426 U.S. 50 (1976), Berg v. Health and Hospital Corporation of Marion County,
Indiana, 865 F.2d. 797 (7th Cir. 1989), Ellwest Stereo Theaters, Inc. v.
Wenner, 681 F.2d. 1243 (9th Cir. 1982), Bamon Corp. v. City of Dayton, 730
F.Supp. 80 (S.D. Ohio 1990), and EWAP, Inc. v. City of Los Angeles, 97
Ca1.App.3d 179, 158 Cal. Rptr. 579 (1979), and on studies in other cities and
states including the Report of the Attorney General’s Working Group on the
Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses (Minnesota 1989), Memorandum re:
Adult Entertainment Ordinance of the Assistant Chief of Police of Tucson,
Arizona (May 1, 1990), Hecht, Peter R., Ph.D., Report To: The American Center
For Law And Justice On The Secondary Impacts Of Sex Oriented Businesses
(March 31, 1996), Adult Entertainment Businesses In Indianapolis, An Analysis
(1984), and McCleary, Richard, Ph.D. and Meeker, James W., Ph.D., Final
Report to the City of Garden Grove: The Relationship Between Crime and Adult
Business Operations on Garden Grove Boulevard (Garden Grove, CA October 23,
1991), this legislative body finds the following.



   (A)   Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary
unlawful and unhealthy activities.



   (B)   Sexual acts, including masturbation, oral sex and anal sex,
occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private
or semi-private booths or rooms for viewing films, videos or live sexually
oriented entertainment. Such activities may result in spreading communicable
diseases such as syphilis, gonorrhea and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).



   (C)   Studies conducted in other cities have demonstrated a
correlation between sexually oriented business and a decrease in the
residential and commercial property values that surround them, especially
those properties within 1,000 feet of such businesses.



   (D)   Studies conducted in other cities have demonstrated a
correlation between sexually oriented businesses and increased crime in the
neighborhood, including sex-related crimes like prostitution, obscenity and
sexual assault. This correlation is especially acute when more than one
sexually oriented business is located in a neighborhood, and when a sexually
oriented business is located near a public open space such as a park,
cemetery or school.



   (E)   Studies conducted in other cities have demonstrated a
correlation between sexually oriented businesses and increased harassment and
propositioning of women, children and the elderly in the neighborhood.



   (F)   Studies conducted in other cities have demonstrated a
correlation between sexually oriented businesses and offensive material such
as pornographic magazines and used condoms being discarded in the surrounding
neighborhood, making them available to children.



   (G)   Location of sexually oriented businesses in a neighborhood can
create a “sex for sale” reputation in a neighborhood.



   (H)   The foregoing findings raise substantial governmental
interests and concerns.



   (I)   The municipality cannot entirely prohibit sexually oriented
businesses which are not obscene from locating within the municipality.



   (J)   The municipality can effect reasonable locational regulations
to which it believes will ameliorate these deleterious secondary effects
associated with sexually oriented businesses.



   (K)   Locating sexually oriented businesses in the  Industrial Zone
will ameliorate these deleterious secondary effects associated with sexually
oriented business.



   (L)   Requiring sexually oriented businesses to be located 1,000
feet from any other sexually oriented businesses will ameliorate these
deleterious secondary effects associated with sexually oriented businesses.



   (M)   Requiring sexually oriented businesses to be located 1,000
feet from any school, day care center, cemetery, public park including any
lineal recreational area like a bike path, forest preserve, public housing,
place of religious worship, lot zoned for residential purposes and lot used
for residential purposes, complies with the requirements of state law 65 ILCS
5/11-5-1.5, and will ameliorate these deleterious secondary effects
associated with sexually oriented businesses.



   (N)   North Avenue is the main thoroughfare in the municipality, and
more than any other location in the municipality reflects on the economic
status of the municipality.



   (O)   Accordingly, a decrease in the property values and an increase
in visible crime along North Avenue will effect the property values of the
municipality as a whole in a way that other locations would not.



   (P)   Preventing sexually oriented businesses from locating directly
on, or within 500 of North Avenue will help to conserve property values in
the municipality as a whole, while still providing an adequate number of
sites and acreage available for the location of sexually oriented businesses.



   (Q)   At the time this article was approved, the regulations set
forth herein permitted approximately 429.489 acres and approximately 82 sites
available for sexually oriented businesses in the municipality.



(Ord. 2000-10-79, passed 10-2-2000)



§ 16-19-3  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this article:



   EMPLOYEE. A natural person who performs any service or work on the
premises of a sexually oriented business, including, but not limited to,
providing entertainment, performing work of a management or supervisory
nature, or performing support functions, on a full-time, part-time or
contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee,
independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not the person is
paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of the business.
EMPLOYEE does not include a person on the premises exclusively for repair or
maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery
of goods to the premises.



   EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS. Urination, defecation, lactation, ejaculation and
menstruation. It shall not mean urination and defecation performed in a
public or employee-only restroom in the manner in which those facilities are
intended to be used, and when not performed or presented for a commercial
purpose. It shall not mean lactation as part of breast-feeding an infant,
unless performed or displayed for a commercial purpose other than education
and training in the art, science or technique of breast-feeding an infant.



   MUNICIPALITY. The Village of Carol Stream, an Illinois body politic and
corporate.



   NUDITY or NUDE. Exposing to view specified anatomical areas or any
device, costume or covering that gives the appearance of or simulates any
specified anatomical areas.



   PATRON. Any natural person who is not an employee.



   SEMI-NUDITY or SEMI-NUDE. Exposing to view, with less than a fully
opaque covering, any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola
or any portion of the buttocks. This definition shall include the entire
lower portion of the female breast, but shall not include any portion of the
cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard,
bathing suit or other clothing; provided that, the areola is not exposed in
whole or in part.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any machine or device which is
designed, intended, displayed or kept as an amusement or entertainment, and
may be operated upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc,
electronic key, credit card, debit card or any similar item, or the use of
which is made available for any valuable consideration, and which displays a
natural person, people or characters as in cartoons and animation, live or by
any medium, including without limitation film, motion picture machine,
projector, filmstrip, videotape, digital video disc (DVD), laser disc,
compact disc (CD), floppy disc, photograph, slide, television, book, magazine
and computer software, engaged in specified sexual activity or displaying
specified anatomical areas.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Any of the following when done in a place
where the public is invited or permitted, or on the premises of any club or
organization where only members and their guests are invited or permitted, or
when done for any commercial purpose including sale and rental, regardless of
who pays or receives the consideration therefor, and regardless of the form
of consideration:



      (1)   The live exhibition or display of a natural person or
people in the state of nudity or semi-nudity, or engaged in specified sexual
activities or excretory functions;



      (2)   Any premises with a sexually oriented amusement device;



      (3)   The rental or leasing of a hotel room, motel room or
similar room for a period not exceeding ten hours, but not including dining
rooms, banquet rooms, ball rooms, conference rooms and similar facilities
unless they are used or to be used for specified sexual activities or
excretory functions;



      (4)   The offering of physical contact in the form of
wrestling or tumbling between natural persons of the opposite sex, and also
the offering of physical contact which constitutes specified sexual
activities regardless of the sex of the person performing or receiving the
contact;



      (5)   The offering of products, services or activities to
males, females or both, with a natural person or people of the same or
opposite sex, or both, when one or more of the people, whether a patron,
agent, employee or otherwise, is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;



      (6)   The display or offering to others, of any description or
depiction, of a natural person, people or characters as in cartoons and
animation, by any medium, including without limitation film, motion picture
machine, projector, filmstrip, videotape, digital video disc (DVD), laser
disc, compact disc (CD), floppy disc, photograph, slide, television, book,
magazine and computer software, which is:



         (a)   Characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on
the depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory
functions or specified anatomical areas; or



         (b)   Advertised or otherwise held out to the public as
being characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions or specified
anatomical areas, including without limitation, the use of the term
“adult” and the use of the designation of one or more “X” such as,
but not limited to, “XXX”.



      (7)   The display and offering to others of novelties,
instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in
connection with specified sexual activities or that give the appearance of or
simulate any of the specified anatomical areas.



      (8)   The term SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS shall exclude the
following:



         (a)   The display and offering to others of condoms,
spermicides or other non-prescription contraceptives, in and of themselves,
unless displayed and offered to others on the premises of a business which
would otherwise be considered a sexually oriented business;



         (b)   The display and offering to others of drugs,
instruments or devices which require a prescription, that are designed
primarily for use in connection with specified sexual activities, and which
are in fact dispensed by or under the supervision of a pharmacist licensed by
the state;



         (c)   The display and offering to others of instruments,
devices or paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in connection
with specified sexual activities if they are displayed and offered to others
on the premises where a pharmacist licensed by the state is employed to
dispense prescription drugs, instruments or devices;



         (d)   Breast-feeding an infant, unless performed or
displayed for a commercial purpose other than education and training in the
art, science or technique of breast-feeding an infant;



         (e)   The display and offering to others of motion
pictures, by any format, which have received a rating from the Motion Picture
Association of America of G, PG, PG-13, R or NC-17, when offered or displayed
substantially in their entirety;



         (f)   Libraries and museums funded in whole or in part
by federal, state or local governmental funds; and



         (g)   The display and offering to others of items which
would otherwise qualify as a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS pursuant to this
section, if and only if the display and offering are done for a commercial
purpose, and all of the following apply to the business displaying and
offering such items to others:



            1.   Less than 25% of its gross income comes from
the sale, rental or exhibition of the following types of items:



               a.   Items which are characterized or
distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities, excretory functions or specified anatomical areas or  any
combination thereof; and



               b.   Items which are advertised or otherwise
held out to the public as being characterized or distinguished by an emphasis
on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory
functions or specified anatomical areas or any combination thereof, including
without limitation, the use of the term “adult” and the use of the
designation of one or more “X” such as, but not limited to, “XXX”.



            2.   Less than 25% of its display space is used
for the sale, rental or exhibition of the following types of items:



               a.   Items which are characterized or
distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities, excretory functions or specified anatomical areas or any
combination thereof; and



               b.   Items which are advertised or otherwise
held out to the public as being characterized or distinguished by an emphasis
on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory
functions or specified anatomical areas or any combination thereof, including
without limitation, the use of the term “adult” and the use of the
designation of one or more “X” such as, but not limited to, “XXX”.



            3.   Less than 25% of the items it offers to
others are the following types of items:



               a.   Items which are characterized or
distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities, excretory functions or specified anatomical areas or any
combination thereof; and



               b.   Items which are advertised or otherwise
held out to the public as being characterized or distinguished by an emphasis
on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities, excretory
functions or specified anatomical areas or any combination thereof, including
without limitation, the use of the term “adult” and the use of the
designation of one or more “X” such as, but not limited to, “XXX”.



      (9)   Certain uses which fall within the strict definition of
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS may also constitute uses which are illegal under
local, state or federal law, such as obscenity or child pornography. Even if
such illegal uses constitute a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS under the
definition set forth in this article, they shall not be permitted uses in any
district.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. The human genitals, pubic area, perineum,
anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, any portion of the areola of the
female breast if less than a fully and opaquely covered; and the male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if entirely covered by an opaque
covering. In determining whether any of the foregoing portions of the anatomy
are fully and opaquely covered, coverage by make-up, paint or similar matter
applied directly to the skin, shall not be considered to be fully and
opaquely covered.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following, whether actual or
simulated:



      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic area, perineum, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, buttocks or
female  breasts, regardless of whether the performer or recipient is
clothed, in a state of nudity or in a state of semi-nudity;



      (2)   The manipulation of the human body of another, including
massage, by the use of any portion of manipulator’s body, whether covered
or uncovered, or by any device, if the person performing the manipulation or
the person receiving the manipulation is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;



      (3)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, heterosexual, homosexual
or bisexual, including without limitation intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus,
analingus, masturbation, bestiality, sodomy, bondage and discipline, sadism
and masochism, and any other act intended to cause sexual arousal; and



      (4)   Sex acts between animals when offered or displayed for
the purpose or with the intent of causing the sexual arousal of a human
viewer.



(Ord. 2000-10-79, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-25, passed 5-20-2002)



§ 16-19-4  PERMITTED USE.



   Any other ordinance or section of any ordinance notwithstanding, and
subject to the setback requirements of § 16-19-5, sexually oriented
businesses shall be a permitted use only in the I Industrial District.
Sexually oriented businesses shall not be a special use in any district.



(Ord. 2000-10-79, passed 10-2-2000)



§ 16-19-5  SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.



   No sexually oriented business shall be located:



   (A)   Within 1,000 feet of the proper boundary of any other sexually
oriented business, and any school, day care center, cemetery, public park
including any lineal recreational area like a bike path, forest preserve,
public housing, place of religious worship, lot zoned for residential
purposes and lot used for residential purposes;



   (B)   Within 500 feet of the centerline of North Avenue, which 500
feet shall be measured from the nearest point of the building, or portion of
the building in which the sexually oriented business is located to the
nearest point of the centerline of North Avenue; and



   (C)   On a lot which physically touches North Avenue.



(Ord. 2000-10-79, passed 10-2-2000)



§ 16-19-6  RESTRICTIONS ON USE.



   All sexually oriented businesses shall be conducted entirely within a
fully enclosed business. No sexually oriented business shall be operated in
any manner that permits the observation from outside the building of any
image, material or entertainment depicting or describing excretory functions,
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or any person in a
state of nudity or semi-nudity, whether by means of display, decoration,
sign, window or any other means.



(Ord. 2000-10-79, passed 10-2-2000)



§ 16-19-7  SIGNAGE.



   No sexually oriented business shall advertise by way of billboard, sign
boards or sign, within 1,000 feet of any school, day care center, cemetery,
public park including any lineal recreational area like a bike path, forest
preserve, public housing and place of religious worship.



(Ord. 2000-10-79, passed 10-2-2000)



§ 16-19-8  OTHER REGULATIONS.



   The restrictions set forth in this article shall supersede any other
restrictions found in other ordinances or other sections of any ordinance as
applied to sexually oriented businesses, if the terms of the restrictions are
in conflict.



(Ord. 2000-10-79, passed 10-2-2000)



§ 16-19-9  AMORTIZATION.



   If at the time this article becomes effective, any sexually oriented
business exists in a location not permitted by this article or is otherwise
not compliance with this article, then the sexually oriented business shall
constitute a legal nonconforming use. However, notwithstanding any other
ordinance or section of any ordinance to the contrary, the legal
nonconforming sexually oriented business shall come into compliance with the
requirements of this article within one year of the effective date of this
article. No sexually oriented business shall constitute a legal nonconforming
use after one year after the effective date of this article.



(Ord. 2000-10-79, passed 10-2-2000)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 17: TELECOMMUNICATIONS



      Article



         1.   GENERAL



         2.   REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS AND
PROVIDERS



         3.   (RESERVED)



         4.   (RESERVED)



         5.   CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEES



         6.   (RESERVED)



         7.   (RESERVED)



         8.   RESERVED



         9.   CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW



ARTICLE 1:  GENERAL



Section



   17-1-1   (Reserved)



   17-1-2   Definitions



   17-1-3   (Reserved)



   17-1-4   (Reserved)



   17-1-5   (Reserved)



   17-1-6   Cable television franchise



   17-1-7   Application to existing franchise ordinances and agreements



   17-1-8   Penalties



   17-1-9   Other remedies



Cross-reference:



   Municipal Telecommunications Tax, see Ch. 5, Art. 4.1



§ 17-1-1  (RESERVED)



§ 17-1-2  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, and the interpretation and enforcement
thereof, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings,
unless the context of the sentence in which they are used shall indicate
otherwise:



   AFFILIATE. A person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is
owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another
person.



   ANNUAL GROSS REVENUE. [Reserved.]



   CABLE ACT. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. §§
532 et seq., as now and hereafter amended.



   CABLE OPERATOR. A telecommunications carrier providing or offering to
provide “cable service” within the village as that term is defined in the
Cable Act.



   CABLE SERVICE. Has the same meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).



   COMMISSION. The Illinois Commerce Commission or ICC.



   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The Village President and Village Board.



   EXCESS CAPACITY. The volume or capacity in any existing or future duct,
conduit, manhole, handhole or other utility facility within the public way
that is or will be available for use for additional telecommunications
facilities.



   FCC or FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION. The federal administrative
agency, or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee
telecommunications carriers, services and providers on a national level.



   GROSS REVENUES. All consideration of any kind or nature, including,
without limitation, cash, credits, property and in-kind contributions
received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to
provide cable service or video service within the holder’s cable service or
video service area within the village.



      (1)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:



         (a)   Recurring charges for cable or video service;



         (b)   Event-based charges for cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand
charges;



         (c)   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or
video service equipment;



         (d)   Service charges related to the provision of cable
service or video service, including, but not limited to, activation,
installation and repair charges;



         (e)   Administrative charges related to the provision of
cable service or video service, including, but not limited to, service order
and service termination charges;



         (f)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds
check charges and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting
delinquent payments;



         (g)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the
holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for
advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services
derived from the operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service
or video service within the village. The allocation shall be based on the
number of subscribers in the village divided by the total number of
subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national compensation
arrangement;



         (h)   Compensation received by the holder that is
derived from the operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service
or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the holder
as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on
the holder’s network, such as a “home shopping” or similar channel,
subject to division (1)(i) of this definition;



         (i)   In the case of a cable service or video service
that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities
or applications, the portion of the holder’s revenue attributable to the
other services, capabilities or applications shall be included in the gross
revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion
of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course
of business; and



         (j)   The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS
5/21-801(b).



      (2)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:



         (a)   Revenues not actually received, even if billed,
such as bad debt, subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi);



         (b)   Refunds, discounts or other price adjustments that
reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the
state-issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit or
discount is attributable to cable service or video service;



         (c)   Regardless of whether the services are bundled,
packaged or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any
revenues received from services not classified as cable service or video
service, including, without limitation, revenue received from
telecommunication services, information services or the provision of
directory or Internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages,
banner advertisement and electronic publishing or any other revenues
attributed by the holder to non-cable service or non-video service in
accordance with the holder’s books and records and records kept in the
regular course of business and any applicable laws, rules, regulations,
standards or orders;



         (d)   The sale of cable services or video services for
resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee
from the purchaser’s subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in
writing that it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee
permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b), with respect to the service;



         (e)   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed
upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal or any
other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including
sales and use taxes;



         (f)   Security deposits collected from subscribers; and



         (g)   Amounts paid by subscribers to “home shopping”
or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel
offered as part of the cable service or video service.



      (3)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in
the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue
as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading
the payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b), which would
otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.



   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS
5/21-401.



   ICC or ILLINOIS COMMERCE COMMISSION. The state administrative agency,
or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications
carriers, services and providers in the State of Illinois.



   INCUMBENT CABLE OPERATOR. A person or entity that provided cable
services or video services in the village under a franchise agreement with
the village pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-42-11, 1-1-2007.



   OTHER WAYS. The highways, streets, alleys, utility easements or other
rights-of-way within the village, but under the jurisdiction and control of a
governmental entity other than the village.



   OVERHEAD FACILITIES. Utility poles, utility facilities and
telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground,
including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.



   PEG. Public, education and governmental.



   PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE. The amount paid under this chapter and 220 ILCS
5/21-801(d), by the holder to the village for the service areas within its
territorial jurisdiction.



   PERSONS. Includes corporations, companies, associations, joint stock
companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies
and individuals and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers.



   PUBLIC STREET. Any highway, street, alley or other public right-of-way
for motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction and control of the village
which has been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to highway
purposes not inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.



   PUBLIC WAY. Includes all public streets and utility easements, as those
terms are defined herein, now or hereafter owned by the village, but only to
the extent of the village’s right, chapter, interest or authority to grant
a license or franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements for
telecommunications facilities.



   SERVICE. The provision of cable service or video service to subscribers
and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has
received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the
Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.



   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE. The amount paid under this chapter and 220 ILCS
5/21-801, by the holder to a village for the service areas within its
territorial jurisdiction.



   STATE. The State of Illinois.



   SURPLUS SPACE. The portion of the usable space on a utility pole which
has the necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by the orders
and regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission, to allow its use by a
telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER. Includes every person that directly or
indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages plant, equipment or property
within the village, used or to be used for the purpose of offering
telecommunications service.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. The plant, equipment and property,
including, but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals,
antennas, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit,
receive, distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Includes every person who provides
tele-communications service over telecommunications facilities without any
ownership or management control of the facilities.



   TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE. The providing or offering for rent, sale or
lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice,
data, image, graphic and video programming information between or among
points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or
similar facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM. See TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.



   UNDERGROUND FACILITIES. Utility and telecommunications facilities
located under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground
foundations or supports for overhead facilities.



   USABLE SPACE. The total distance between the top of a utility pole and
the lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable
vertical clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the Illinois
Commerce Commission.



   UTILITY EASEMENT. Any easement owned by the village and acquired,
established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes not
inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.



   UTILITY FACILITIES. The plant, equipment and property, including, but
not limited to, the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires,
plant and equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground
within the public ways of the village and used or to be used for the purpose
of providing utility or telecommunications services.



   VIDEO SERVICE. Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any,
that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services,
and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in
the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including
Internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video
programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47
U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video programming provided solely as part of, and
via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic
mail or other services offered over the public Internet.



   VILLAGE. The Village of Carol Stream.



   VILLAGE PROPERTY. Includes all real property owned by the village,
other than public streets and utility easements as those terms are defined
herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the village, which
are not subject to right-of-way licensing and franchising as provided in this
chapter.



(Ord. passed - - ; Ord. 2007-10-39, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 17-1-3  (RESERVED)



§ 17-1-4  (RESERVED)



§ 17-1-5  (RESERVED)



§ 17-1-6  CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE.



   A person or entity, including a telecommunications carrier, seeking to
provide cable service or video service pursuant to this chapter shall not use
the public rights-of-way for the installation or construction of facilities
for the provision of cable service or video service or offer cable service or
video service until it has obtained either: a state-issued authorization to
offer or provide cable or video service under § 401 of the Cable and Video
Competition Law of 2007 (220 ILCS 5/21-100 et seq.); or a cable franchise
from the village under 65 ILCS 5/11-42-11.



(Ord. passed - - ; Ord. 2007-10-39, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 17-1-7  APPLICATION TO EXISTING FRANCHISE ORDINANCES AND AGREEMENTS.



   This chapter shall have no effect on any existing franchise ordinance
or franchise agreement until:



   (A)   The expiration of said franchise ordinance or agreement; and



   (B)   An amendment to an unexpired franchise ordinance or franchise
agreement, unless both parties agree to defer full compliance to a specific
date not later than the present expiration date.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 17-1-8  PENALTIES.



   Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting
or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
fined not less than $100, nor more than $750, for each offense. A separate
and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation
occurs or continues.



(Ord. passed - - ; Ord. 96-04-28, passed 4-15-1996)



§ 17-1-9  OTHER REMEDIES.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial
remedies that the village may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of
this chapter.



(Ord. passed - -)



ARTICLE 2:  REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS AND PROVIDERS



Section



   17-2-1   Registration required



   17-2-2   Registration fee



   17-2-3   Purpose of registration



§ 17-2-1  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   All telecommunications carriers and providers that offer or provide any
telecommunications service for a fee directly to the public, either within
the village, or outside the corporate limits from tele-communications
facilities within the village, shall register with the village pursuant to
this article on forms to be provided by the Village Clerk, which shall
include the following:



   (A)   The identity and legal status of the registrants including any
affiliates;



   (B)   The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent
or employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement;



   (C)   A description of registrant’s existing or proposed
telecommunications facilities within the village;



   (D)   A description of the telecommunications service that the
registrant intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or
providing, to persons, firms, businesses or institutions within the village;



   (E)   Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is
subject to public way licensing or franchising under this chapter;



   (F)   Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission,
origination or receipt of the tele-communications services provided or to be
provided by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to
any municipal telecommunications tax, utility message tax or other occupation
tax imposed by the village;



   (G)   Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has
applied for and received any certificate of authority required by the
Illinois Commerce Commission to provide telecommunications services or
facilities within the village;



   (H)   Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has
applied for and received any construction permit, operating license or other
approvals required by the Federal Communications Commission to provide
telecommunications services or facilities within the village; and



   (I)   Such other information as the Village Clerk may reasonably
require.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 17-2-2  REGISTRATION FEE.



   Each application for registration as a tele-communications carrier or
provider shall be accompanied by a fee of $25.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 17-2-3  PURPOSE OF REGISTRATION.



   The purpose of registration under this article is to:



   (A)   Provide the village with accurate and current information
concerning the telecommunications carriers and providers who offer or provide
telecommunications services within the village, or that own or operate
telecommunication facilities within the village;



   (B)   Assist the village in enforcement of this chapter;



   (C)   Assist the village in the collection and enforcement of any
municipal taxes, franchise fees, license fees or charges that may be due the
village; and



   (D)   Assist the village in monitoring compliance with local, state
and federal laws.



(Ord. passed - -)



ARTICLE 3:  (RESERVED)



ARTICLE 4:  (RESERVED)



ARTICLE 5:  CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEES



Section



   17-5-1   Cable/video service provider fee imposed



   17-5-2   PEG access carriage requirements; PEG access support fee
imposed



   17-5-3   Applicable principles



   17-5-4   No impact on other taxes due from holder



   17-5-5   Audits of cable/video service provider



   17-5-6   Late fees/payments



§ 17-5-1  CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED.



   (A)   Fee imposed. A service provider fee is hereby imposed on any
holder providing cable service or video service in the village.



   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the service provider fee imposed
hereby shall be 5% of the holder’s gross revenues.



   (C)   Notice to the village. Unless the holder has earlier sent
notice to the village pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(a), the holder shall
notify the village at least ten days prior to the date on which the holder
begins to offer cable service or video service in the village.



   (D)   Holder’s liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay
the service provider fee to the village. The holder’s liability for the fee
shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after
receipt of the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance
adopting this chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address
listed on the holder’s application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS
5/21-401(b)(6), to the village. Together with this chapter, the village shall
send the holder instructions for remitting the payment and statement required
hereby.



   (E)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be
due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment
shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.



   (F)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the village, under 65 ILCS 5/11-42-11, in which a fee is paid.



   (G)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that
elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c),
with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the
amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under division (B) of
this section.



(Ord. 2007-10-39, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 17-5-2  PEG ACCESS CARRIAGE REQUIREMENTS; PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED.



   (A)   PEG channels; number; carriage. On the date set forth in this
chapter, but not earlier than 90 days after the holder sends notice to the
village under 220 ILCS 5/21-801(a), the holder shall designate the same
amount of capacity on its network to provide for public, education and
government access use, as the incumbent cable operator is required to
designate under its franchise terms in effect on 1-1-2007; and retransmit to
its subscribers the same number of public, education, and government access
channels as the incumbent cable operator was retransmitting to subscribers on
1-1-2007.



   (B)   PEG fee imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on
any holder providing cable service or video service in the village in
addition to the fee imposed pursuant to § 17-5-1(B).



   (C)   Amount of fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee
imposed hereby shall be $0.35 per customer per month.



   (D)   Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to
the village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access.
The holder’s liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the
date set forth in § 17-5-1(D).



   (E)   Payment due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall
be due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter.
If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each
payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of
the fee.



   (F)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that
elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c),
shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for
PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of the
agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments
made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be
credited against the fees that that operator owes under division (C) of this
section.



(Ord. 2007-10-39, passed 10-15-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-03-10, passed 3-20-2017)



§ 17-5-3  APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES.



   All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.



(Ord. 2007-10-39, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 17-5-4  NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER.



   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder
from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any
tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with
respect to cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization shall
not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
village’s simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as
it applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A state-issued
authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to
payment of the village’s 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.



(Ord. 2007-10-39, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 17-5-5  AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER.



   (A)   Audit requirement. The village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder’s books and records and
to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of
the village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS
45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an
accord that the amounts are correct.



   (B)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit
shall be paid within 30 days after the village’s submission of an invoice
for the sum.



(Ord. 2007-10-39, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 17-5-6  LATE FEES/PAYMENTS.



   All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by
ordinances adopted by this village pursuant to the Local Government
Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.



(Ord. 2007-10-39, passed 10-15-2007)



ARTICLE 6:  (RESERVED)



ARTICLE 7:  (RESERVED)



ARTICLE 8:  RESERVED



ARTICLE 9:  CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW



Section



   17-9-1   Adoption and amendments



   17-9-2   Enforcement



   17-9-3   Penalties



   17-9-4   Customer credits



§ 17-9-1  ADOPTION AND AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Adoption. The regulations of 220 ILCS 5/22-501 et seq., are
hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video
providers offering services within the village’s boundaries.



   (B)   Amendments. Any mandatory amendment to the Cable and Video
Customer Protection Law that becomes effective after the effective date of
this chapter shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall
be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within  the
municipality’s boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions
optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this
chapter by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of
the village.



(Ord. 2007-10-38, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 17-9-2  ENFORCEMENT.



   The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce
all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and
Video Protection Law.



(Ord. 2007-10-38, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 17-9-3  PENALTIES.



   (A)   The village, pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/22-501 et seq., does
hereby declare that for any material breach of the standards and requirements
of the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law, as incorporated by reference
in this article, a cable or video provider shall be subject to monetary
penalties which shall not exceed $750 for each day of the material breach,
and shall not exceed $25,000 for each occurrence of a material breach per
customer. Such penalties shall be in addition to the penalties provided in
the law and shall not represent the village’s exclusive remedy for any
material breach. All monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively
neutral basis.



   (B)   MATERIAL BREACH means any substantial failure of a cable or
video provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified
in any provision of the law.



   (C)   The village shall give the cable or video provider written
notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at
least 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material
breach.



   (D)   A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties,
shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been
remedied by the cable or video service provider after the notice in division
(C) above.



   (E)   The Board of Trustees hereby delegates authority to levy
penalties to the Village Administrator.



   (F)   The decision of the Village Administrator to levy penalties
may be appealed to the Board of Trustees, which shall conduct a hearing on
the alleged material breach and penalties levied therefore within 21 days
following receipt of the cable or video providers request for an appeal.



(Ord. 2007-10-38, passed 10-15-2007)



§ 17-9-4  CUSTOMER CREDITS.



   The village hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the schedule of
customer credits for violations of the law provided for in the provisions of
220 ILCS 22-501 et seq. Those credits shall be applied on the statement
issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or
following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is
responsible for proactively providing the credits and the customer is under
no obligation to request the credit.



(Ord. 2007-10-38, passed 10-15-2007)



PARALLEL REFERENCES



References to Illinois Compiled Statutes



References to Ordinances



REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES



 

ILCS Cites
 
Code Section




5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
 
16-5-7


5 ILCS 275/1-1 et seq.
 
2-7-18


5 ILCS 420/4A-101
 
1-8-6


5 ILCS 430/5-65
 
1-9-8


10 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
 
1-4-5


10 ILCS 5/1-3
 
1-8-3


10 ILCS 5/9-1.4
 
1-8-3


10 ILCS 5/9-3
 
1-8-3


20 ILCS 1605/1 et seq.
 
14-2-8


20 ILCS 1605/17.12
 
14-2-8


20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.
 
3-5-4; 3-5-7


30 ILCS 405/1 et seq.
 
13-4-1


35 ILCS 105/1 et seq.
 
10-1-3


35 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
 
10-1-3


35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
 
10-1-3


35 ILCS 120/3
 
5-5-1; 5-5-2


35 ILCS 630/1 et seq.
 
5-4.1-3


35 ILCS 654/5-1 et seq.
 
12-5-4


50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
 
17-5-5; 17-5-6


50 ILCS 220/1 et seq.
 
16-4-6


50 ILCS 220/2
 
6-1-1; 6-2-1; 6-3-1; 6-4-1; 6-5-1; 6-6-1; 6-7-1; 6-10-1 ; 6-16-1; 6-17-1


55 ILCS 5/5-1062
 
13-5-4


65 ILCS 5/
 
2-1-8


65 ILCS 5/1-2-1
 
13-5-1


65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1
 
14-1-16


65 ILCS 5/1-3-1 et seq.
 
16-4-6


65 ILCS 5/1-3-2
 
6-1-1; 6-2-1; 6-3-1; 6-4-1; 6-5-1; 6-6-1; 6-7-1; 6-10-1 ; 6-16-1; 6-17-1


65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50
 
1-4-5


65 ILCS 5/3.1-55-10
 
1-8-4


65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1—8-2-9.11
 
1-2-7


65 ILCS 5/8-11-1
 
5-4-3


65 ILCS 5/8-11-2
 
5-4-1; 5-4-2


65 ILCS 5/8-11-7
 
5-5-1


65 ILCS 5/8-11-8
 
5-5-2


65 ILCS 5/11-5-1.5
 
16-19-2


65 ILCS 5/11-12-12
 
13-5-1


65 ILCS 5/11-13-13
 
16-15-9


65 ILCS 5/11-20-13
 
9-1-13


65 ILCS 5/11-30-2
 
13-5-1


65 ILCS 5/11-30-8
 
13-5-1


65 ILCS 5/11-31-2
 
13-5-1


65 ILCS 5/11-42-11
 
17-1-2; 7-1-6; 17-5-1


65 ILCS 5/11-139-1 et seq.
 
13-1-8


65 ILCS 5/11-150-1
 
13-2-11


70 ILCS 5/11-1 et seq.
 
10-13-4


220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.
 
5-12-2; 7-3-16


220 ILCS 5/3-105
 
5-12-2; 12-7-3


220 ILCS 5/9-222
 
5-4.1-3


220 ILCS 5/9-222.1
 
5-4.1-3


220 ILCS 5/16-102
 
12-7-21


220 ILCS 5/16-108.5(i)
 
12-7-21


220 ILCS 5/21-100 et seq.
 
16-5-7; 17-1-6


220 ILCS 5/21-201(v)
 
12-5-2


220 ILCS 5/21-301(c)
 
17-5-1; 17-5-2


220 ILCS 5/21-401
 
12-5-2; 17-1-2


220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6))
 
17-5-1


220 ILCS 5/21-801
 
17-1-2


220 ILCS 5/21-801(a)
 
17-5-1; 17-5-2


220 ILCS 5/21-801(b)
 
17-1-2


220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi)
 
17-1-2


220 ILCS 5/21-801(d)
 
17-1-2


220 ILCS 5/22-501 et seq.
 
17-9-1; 17-9-3; 17-9-4


220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.
 
12-5-16


220 ILCS 65/4
 
12-5-5


225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.
 
10-13-1—10-13-3; 10-13-9; 10-13-15


225 ILCS 60/1 et seq.
 
10-13-18


225 ILCS 63/1 et seq.
 
10-13-18


225 ILCS 75/1 et seq.
 
10-13-18


225 ILCS 225/1
 
13-4-3


225 ILCS 460/1
 
10-4-7


230 ILCS 10/1 et seq.
 
14-2-8; 14-2-9


230 ILCS 15/1 et seq.
 
14-2-8


230 ILCS 20/1 et seq.
 
14-2-8


230 ILCS 25/1 et seq.
 
14-2-8


230 ILCS 25/7.12
 
14-2-8


230 ILCS 30/1 et seq.
 
14-2-8


230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.
 
11-2-7; 11-2-27; 14-2-8; 14-2-9


235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
 
11-2-23


235 ILCS 5/1-3.01
 
14-2-35


235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
 
11-1-1


325 ILCS 2/1 et seq.
 
14-2-34


405 ILCS 35/1 et seq.
 
10-12-4


415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
 
15-9-01


415 ILCS 5/3.220
 
15-9-00


415 ILCS 5/39.2(e)
 
15-9-03


430 ILCS 65/1.1
 
14-3-15


605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.
 
12-5-2


620 ILCS 5/36-1
 
8-8-2


625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
 
8-3-1; 8-9-1


625 ILCS 5/1-148.3
 
8-7-3


625 ILCS 5/1-159.1
 
8-2-19


625 ILCS 5/3-801 et seq.
 
16-13-2


625 ILCS 5/6-306.5
 
8-9-1; 8-9-4; 8-9-11


625 ILCS 5/6-306.5(c)
 
8-9-4


625 ILCS 5/11-208.3
 
8-9-1; 8-9-4; 8-9-5; 8-9-9; 8-9-11


625 ILCS 5/11-208.6
 
8-9-1; 8-9-5; 8-9-6


625 ILCS 5/11-306
 
8-9-1


625 ILCS 5/11-501(a)
 
8-8-2


625 ILCS 5/11-1006
 
10-4-16


625 ILCS 5/11-1301.3
 
8-2-20


625 ILCS 5/11-1306
 
8-9-9


625 ILCS 5/12-712
 
8-2-5


625 ILCS 5/12-713
 
8-2-5


625 ILCS 5/15-102
 
8-2-5


625 ILCS 5/15-103
 
8-2-5


625 ILCS 5/15-107
 
8-2-5


625 ILCS 5/15-111
 
8-2-5 ; 8-2-6


625 ILCS 5/15-111(a)
 
8-2-6


625 ILCS 5/15-111(a)(12)
 
8-2-6


625 ILCS 5/15-316
 
8-2-5; 8-2-7; Ch. 8, Art. 5, Sch. VIII


625 ILCS 5/15-317
 
8-2-5


625 ILCS 5/18c-7201
 
12-7-21


625 ILCS 5/100 et seq.
 
8-1-1


705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.
 
11-2-1; 14-1-1


720 ILCS 5/6-102
 
8-8-2


720 ILCS 5/9-1(a)(1)
 
10-10-3


720 ILCS 5/11-0.1
 
14-2-18; 14-2-21; 14-2-22


720 ILCS 5/11-1.2-5
 
8-8-2


720 ILCS 5/11-14
 
10-13-17


720 ILCS 5/11-14.1
 
10-13-17


720 ILCS 5/11-14.3
 
10-13-17


720 ILCS 5/11-14.4
 
10-13-17


720 ILCS 5/11-20
 
14-2-26—14-2-29


720 ILCS 5/11-21
 
14-2-30


720 ILCS 5/12-5.1
 
10-12-5


720 ILCS 5/16-1 et seq.
 
14-1-7


720 ILCS 5/16-25 et seq.
 
14-1-8


720 ILCS 5/17-55
 
14-2-7


720 ILCS 5/24-1
 
8-8-2


720 ILCS 5/24-1 et seq.
 
10-13-4


720 ILCS 5/24-1.1
 
8-8-2


720 ILCS 5/24-1.2
 
8-8-2


720 ILCS 5/24-1.5
 
8-8-2


720 ILCS 5/24-1.6
 
8-8-2


720 ILCS 5/24-2
 
14-3-16


720 ILCS 5/24-3.1
 
8-8-2


720 ILCS 5/28-1
 
14-2-8


720 ILCS 5/28-1(a)(4)
 
14-2-8


720 ILCS 5/28-2
 
14-2-7


720 ILCS 5/28-2(a)(1)—(a)(4)
 
14-2-7


720 ILCS 5/28-3
 
14-2-9


720 ILCS 5/28-5(a)
 
14-2-10


720 ILCS 5/28-5(b)
 
14-2-10


720 ILCS 5/36-1
 
8-8-2; 8-8-3


720 ILCS 5/36-1 et seq.
 
8-8-8


720 ILCS 5/36.5
 
8-8-8


720 ILCS 5/52.5
 
14-2-7


720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.
 
14-2-32


720 ILCS 550/3
 
14-2-1; 14-2-32


720 ILCS 550/11
 
14-2-4


720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.
 
14-2-32; 15-8-2


720 ILCS 570/102
 
14-2-32


720 ILCS 635/0.01 et seq.
 
14-2-32


720 ILCS 646/1 et seq.
 
14-2-32


735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
 
8-8-6


740 ILCS 174/15(a)
 
1-9-6


775 ILCS 5/6-101
 
1-9-6


805 ILCS 5/1.05 et seq.
 
10-2-4; 11-2-5


820 ILCS 305/1 et seq.
 
12-5-8


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




-
 
- -
 
17-1-2, 17-1-6—17-1-9; 17-2-1—17-2-3


93-11-97
 
- -
 
16-9-4


90-03-25
 
3-27-1990
 
11-2-3


90-04-26
 
4-10-1990
 
7-6-1


90-05-20
 
5-4-1990
 
7-7-17


90-07-55
 
7-10-1990
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I; Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II; Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III;
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV; Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. V; Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. VI; Ch.
8, Art. 6, Schd. I; Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. II; Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III; 8-2-2;
8-2-3; 8-2-17; 8-2-18; 15-4-2


90-09-73
 
9-11-1990
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III; Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


90-09-83
 
9-25-1990
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I


90-09-86
 
9-25-1990
 
16-8-2; 16-8-5; 16-15-8; 16-18-1


90-10-88
 
10-9-1990
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


90-10-91
 
10-23-1990
 
7-7-2


90-10-92
 
10-23-1990
 
14-4-4


90-11-93
 
11-13-1990
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II; Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III; Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. VI


90-11-94
 
11-13-1990
 
16-8-2


90-11-95
 
11-13-1990
 
16-9-3


90-11-99
 
11-27-1990
 
10-6-2


90-12-101
 
12-11-1990
 
16-10-2


91-02-12
 
2-26-1991
 
16-10-2


91-02-14
 
2-26-1991
 
13-2-14; 13-2-15


91-02-15
 
2-26-1991
 
9-3-8


91-03-20
 
3-12-1991
 
13-3-27


91-03-22
 
3-26-1991
 
16-10-2


91-03-23
 
3-26-1991
 
9-1-1; 9-1-4


91-05-38
 
5-14-1991
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II


91-06-42
 
6-11-1991
 
16-10-2


91-06-48
 
6-25-1991
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


91-07-51
 
7-23-1991
 
10-6-2


91-09-65
 
9-10-1991
 
5-8-3


91-10-71
 
10-8-1991
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II; Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III


91-10-76
 
10-22-1991
 
13-3-13


91-11-77
 
11-12-1991
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II


91-11-81
 
11-26-1991
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


91-12-82
 
12-10-1991
 
16-13-2; 16-13-3; 16-18-1


92-01-02
 
1-14-1992
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


92-01-03
 
1-14-1992
 
6-14-1


92-01-04
 
1-14-1992
 
13-3-27; 13-3-29—13-3-32


92-01-10
 
1-28-1992
 
10-6-2


92-01-11
 
1-28-1992
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV


92-01-12
 
1-28-1992
 
16-13-2; 16-13-3


92-02-20
 
2-11-1992
 
7-2-5; 7-5-5; 7-5-6


92-02-25
 
2-25-1992
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV; Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


92-03-26
 
3-10-1992
 
6-14-1


92-03-29
 
3-24-1992
 
16-9-2


92-04-33
 
4-14-1992
 
16-9-3


92-04-36
 
4-14-1992
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. VII


92-04-37
 
4-14-1992
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I; Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


92-04-38
 
4-14-1992
 
13-4-1—13-4-8; 13-4-12—13-4-49


92-04-39
 
4-14-1992
 
5-7-1—5-7-11


92-04-41
 
4-14-1992
 
5-10-1—5-10-16; 5-11-1


92-04-42
 
4-28-1992
 
16-12-1


92-05-51
 
5-12-1992
 
9-3-13; 9-3-14


92-05-60
 
5-26-1992
 
15-3-1—15-3-9


92-05-63
 
5-26-1992
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


92-06-64
 
6-9-1992
 
15-2-5


92-06-65
 
6-9-1992
 
10-5-6


92-06-70
 
6-23-1992
 
16-13-2; 16-14-3; 16-15-1—16-15-7; 16-16-3; 16-17-7


92-06-71
 
6-23-1992
 
12-3-16; 12-3-17


92-06-72
 
6-23-1992
 
7-3-14


92-06-75
 
6-23-1992
 
6-11-1—6-11-24; 6-11-26


92-06-76
 
6-23-1992
 
11-2-4


92-07-79
 
7-14-1992
 
15-5-1; 15-5-2; 15-5-5


92-07-80
 
7-14-1992
 
10-6-2


92-07-83
 
7-14-1992
 
5-7-7


92-08-91
 
8-11-1992
 
16-8-2


92-08-96
 
8-25-1992
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I


92-08-98
 
8-25-1992
 
15-5-1


92-08-99
 
8-25-1992
 
7-4-18


92-09-104
 
9-8-1992
 
7-8-16; 7-8-17; 7-8-20; 7-8-22


92-10-111
 
10-13-1992
 
13-3-16


92-10-116
 
10-27-1992
 
10-9-1—10-9-4, 10-9-6—10-9-9


92-11-117
 
11-10-1992
 
10-4-1—10-4-16


92-11-119
 
11-10-1992
 
10-9-10


92-12-123
 
12-8-1992
 
16-9-3


93-01-05
 
1-12-1993
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


93-01-07
 
1-26-1993
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


93-01-12
 
1-26-1993
 
6-11-8; 6-11-9; 6-11-13; 6-11-15; 6-11-16; 6-11-25; 6-11-26


93-03-36
 
2-9-1993
 
13-3-27


93-02-18
 
2-23-1993
 
5-10-5; 5-10-6; 5-10-15; 5-10-17


93-02-20
 
2-23-1993
 
10-9-3


93-04-40
 
4-13-1993
 
8-2-5—8-2-7


93-04-42
 
4-13-1993
 
6-11-12; 6-11-15—6-11-19; 6-11-26


93-05-47
 
5-25-1993
 
11-2-7


93-05-49
 
5-25-1993
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II


93-07-60
 
7-13-1993
 
16-9-2; 16-9-3; 16-18-1


93-07-61
 
7-13-1993
 
16-12-2


93-07-62
 
7-13-1993
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


93-08-77
 
8-24-1993
 
15-4-2; 15-4-5


93-09-83
 
9-28-1993
 
16-12-1—16-13-2


93-09-85
 
9-28-1993
 
10-4-16


93-10-90
 
10-12-1993
 
5-4.1-1—5-4.1-7


93-10-91
 
10-12-1993
 
14-1-3; 14-1-4


93-11-103
 
11-9-1993
 
16-16-7


93-11-110
 
11-23-1993
 
16-9-2


93-12-113
 
12-14-1993
 
5-4-1—5-4-3


93-12-116
 
12-14-1993
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV


94-01-03
 
1-11-1994
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


94-01-07
 
1-11-1994
 
16-9-3


94-02-17
 
2-8-1994
 
7-4-23


94-02-18
 
2-22-1994
 
4-2-8; 4-2-9


94-02-19
 
2-22-1994
 
13-3-27; 13-3-29


94-03-23
 
3-8-1994
 
5-7-5


94-03-25
 
3-8-1994
 
14-4-6; 14-4-7


94-04-30
 
4-11-1994
 
16-14-4


94-05-44
 
5-24-1994
 
6-11-15


94-05-46
 
5-24-1994
 
16-8-2; 16-10-2


94-06-49
 
6-14-1994
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I


94-06-50
 
6-14-1994
 
13-3-13


94-06-52
 
6-14-1994
 
16-10-2


94-07-57
 
7-18-1994
 
7-2-8


94-08-71
 
8-15-1994
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II


94-10-87
 
10-17-1994
 
6-12-9; 6-12-12


94-11-89
 
11-7-1994
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


94-11-98
 
11-21-1994
 
16-10-2


95-01-01
 
1-3-1995
 
6-11-10; 6-11-17—6-11-19


95-01-02
 
1-3-1995
 
16-10-2; 16-15-8; 16-18-1


95-01-03
 
1-16-1995
 
1-3-5; 1-4-4; 1-6-5


95-04-16
 
4-3-1995
 
16-9-3


95-04-19
 
4-4-1995
 
14-2-1; 14-2-31


95-05-25
 
5-15-1995
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I


95-06-27
 
5-15-1995
 
4-1-2


95-06-26
 
6-5-1995
 
15-4-5


95-06-31
 
6-19-1995
 
6-11-20


95-07-35
 
7-10-1995
 
16-5-6


95-08-44
 
8-21-1995
 
12-3-4; 14-4-5


96-01-01
 
1-15-1996
 
8-2-20


96-01-03
 
1-15-1996
 
16-17-7


96-03-18
 
3-18-1996
 
16-12-5


96-03-20
 
3-18-1996
 
3-8-4


96-04-28
 
4-15-1996
 
17-1-8


96-05-33
 
5-6-1996
 
9-1.1-1—9-1.1-4


96-07-45
 
7-1-1996
 
11-2-7


96-07-46
 
7-1-1996
 
11-2-7


96-08-58
 
8-19-1996
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III; Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


96-08-60
 
8-19-1996
 
11-2-7


96-09-62
 
9-3-1996
 
6-12-9


96-10-69
 
10-7-1996
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


96-10-70
 
10-7-1996
 
11-2-7


97-04-26
 
4-21-1997
 
11-2-7


97-04-27
 
4-21-1997
 
11-2-7


97-05-34
 
5-19-1997
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


97-07-44
 
7-7-1997
 
2-3-5


97-07-45
 
7-7-1997
 
2-7-18


97-09-57
 
9-2-1997
 
15-7-1


97-09-59
 
9-2-1997
 
11-2-7


97-10-69
 
10-6-1997
 
13-3-13


97-10-74
 
10-20-1997
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II


97-11-80
 
11-3-1997
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I; Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II; Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


97-11-79
 
11-3-1997
 
5-10-14


97-11-81A
 
11-17-1997
 
11-2-7


97-12-82
 
11-17-1997
 
8-2-18


97-12-85
 
12-15-1997
 
10-4-2; 10-4-7


98-03-18
 
3-2-1998
 
13-3-27; 13-3-29


98-03-21
 
3-16-1998
 
9-2-3


98-03-22
 
3-16-1998
 
10-1-19


98-06-39
 
6-1-1998
 
5-10-6


98-06-41
 
6-1-1998
 
11-2-7


98-06-40
 
6-1-1998
 
11-2-7


98-06-48
 
6-15-1998
 
15-8-1—15-8-3


98-07-50
 
7-6-1998
 
6-12-8


98-07-54
 
7-20-1998
 
5-4-1; 5-4-2; 5-4-5; 5-4-8—5-4-10


98-10-67
 
10-5-1998
 
3-8-1; 3-8-4


98-10-72
 
10-22-1998
 
11-2-7


98-11-74
 
11-2-1998
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


98-11-76
 
11-2-1998
 
11-2-7


98-11-80
 
11-16-1998
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III


99-01-04
 
1-18-1999
 
8-2-18


99-02-07
 
2-1-1999
 
16-18-1


99-02-08
 
2-1-1999
 
16-9-5


99-02-14
 
2-16-1999
 
9-3-18


99-03-21
 
3-15-1999
 
2-3-6


99-04-27
 
4-19-1999
 
10-2-1; 10-2-13


99-05-28
 
5-3-1999
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


99-05-30
 
5-17-1999
 
16-10-2


99-05-33
 
5-17-1999
 
11-2-7


99-06-38
 
6-21-1999
 
7-8-6


99-09-52
 
9-20-1999
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


99-10-55
 
10-4-1999
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III


99-12-64
 
12-6-1999
 
16-8-2—16-8-5


99-12-65
 
12-6-1999
 
11-2-7


99-12-66
 
12-6-1999
 
11-2-7


99-12-67
 
12-6-1999
 
11-2-7


99-12-68
 
12-6-1999
 
13-2-14; 13-2-15


99-12-69
 
12-6-1999
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. V; Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. VI


99-12-70
 
12-6-1999
 
4-1-5


2000-01-05
 
1-17-2000
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


2000-01-06
 
1-17-2000
 
9-1-10


2000-01-07
 
1-17-2000
 
16-10-3


2000-02-09
 
2-7-2000
 
11-2-7


2000-02-10
 
2-7-2000
 
10-6-1; 10-6-3


2000-03-17
 
3-20-2000
 
7-8-17; 7-8-19; 7-8-20


2000-03-18
 
3-20-2000
 
12-1-1


2000-04-27
 
4-3-2000
 
10-5-5; 10-5-6; 10-5-9; 10-5-12


-
 
4-16-2000
 
11-2-7


2000-04-29
 
4-17-2000
 
16-5-6


2000-04-30
 
4-17-2000
 
11-2-7; 11-2-24


2000-04-31
 
4-17-2000
 
10-9-6


2000-05-35
 
5-1-2000
 
11-2-7


2000-05-39
 
5-15-2000
 
11-2-7


2000-06-55
 
6-5-2000
 
11-2-7


2000-06-56
 
6-5-2000
 
11-2-7


2000-06-57
 
6-5-2000
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II


2000-07-60
 
7-17-2000
 
11-2-7


2000-08-63
 
8-7-2000
 
13-3-1—13-3-15; 13-3-17—13-3-32


2000-08-64
 
8-7-2000
 
13-4-1; 13-4-4; 13-4-7; 13-4-9—13-4-11


2000-08-65
 
8-7-2000
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV


2000-08-66
 
8-7-2000
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III; Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I; Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


2000-08-72
 
8-21-2000
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II; Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III


2000-10-79
 
10-2-2000
 
16-10-2; 16-13-3; 16-15-8; 16-18-1; 16-19-1—16-19-9


2000-10-80
 
10-2-2000
 
10-10-1—10-10-19


2000-10-81
 
10-16-2000
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


2000-11-96
 
11-6-2000
 
11-2-7; 11-2-26


2001-02-10
 
2-20-2001
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV; Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


2001-03-12
 
3-5-2001
 
5-7-1—5-7-11


2001-04-16
 
4-2-2001
 
13-3-16—13-3-18


2001-04-17
 
4-2-2001
 
1-7-1—1-7-3


2001-04-21
 
4-16-2001
 
11-2-7


2001-05-22
 
5-7-2001
 
11-2-7


2001-05-23
 
5-7-2001
 
11-2-7


2001-05-25
 
5-7-2001
 
11-2-7


2001-05-26
 
5-21-2001
 
11-2-7


2001-05-27
 
5-21-2001
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV; Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I; Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


2001-08-42
 
8-6-2001
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV; Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I; Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


2001-08-45
 
8-20-2001
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


2001-09-48
 
9-17-2001
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV; Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


2001-10-51
 
10-1-2001
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


2001-10-52
 
10-1-2001
 
11-2-7


2001-11-54
 
11-5-2001
 
13-3-13


2001-11-55
 
11-5-2001
 
3-2-4


2001-12-59
 
12-3-2001
 
3-2-4


2002-03-07
 
3-4-2002
 
11-2-36


2002-05-19
 
5-6-2002
 
11-2-7


2002-05-25
 
5-20-2002
 
16-19-3


2002-05-26
 
5-20-2002
 
10-10-1—10-10-19


2002-06-32
 
6-17-2002
 
6-11-16


2002-06-33
 
6-17-2002
 
14-3-15; 14-3-16


2002-06-34
 
6-17-2002
 
10-4-1


2002-06-35
 
6-17-2002
 
10-2-5—10-2-10


2002-06-36
 
6-17-2002
 
11-2-7


2002-06-37
 
6-17-2002
 
11-2-7


2002-06-38
 
6-17-2002
 
11-2-7


2002-06-39
 
6-17-2002
 
11-2-7


2002-06-40
 
6-17-2002
 
11-2-7


2002-07-44
 
7-15-2002
 
3-9-1—3-9-4


2002-08-45
 
8-5-2002
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


2002-08-49
 
8-19-2002
 
16-12-1; 16-12-2; 16-13-2; 16-13-4; 16-18-1


2002-08-50
 
8-19-2002
 
7-4-18


2002-09-57
 
9-16-2002
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV; Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I; Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


2002-09-59
 
9-16-2002
 
16-9-4


2002-11-72
 
11-18-2002
 
16-10-3


2002-12-74
 
12-16-2002
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


2002-12-75
 
12-16-2002
 
16-10-2


2003-02-05
 
2-3-2003
 
11-2-7


2003-02-07
 
2-18-2003
 
10-4-1—10-4-16


2003-03-09
 
3-3-2003
 
11-2-7


2003-03-11
 
3-17-2003
 
12-1-2


2003-03-12
 
3-17-2003
 
7-8-19


2003-03-13
 
3-17-2003
 
7-8-16


2003-04-15
 
4-7-2003
 
13-3-13


2003-04-17
 
4-21-2003
 
Ch. 5, Art. 1; 5-4-2; 5-12-1—5-12-5


2003-04-18
 
4-21-2003
 
Ch. 5, Art. 2


2003-05-22
 
5-5-2003
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II


2003-05-23
 
5-5-2003
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


2003-05-34
 
5-19-2003
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


2003-07-43
 
7-21-2003
 
15-9-00—15-9-07


2003-07-45
 
7-21-2003
 
13-3-13; 13-3-25


2003-09-55
 
9-3-2003
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I; Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II


2003-10-68
 
10-20-2003
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


2003-10-69
 
10-20-2003
 
8-2-18


2003-11-74
 
11-17-2003
 
11-2-7


2003-11-75
 
11-17-2003
 
1-1-17


2003-11-76
 
11-17-2003
 
4-2-9


2003-11-77
 
11-17-2003
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I


2003-12-78
 
12-1-2003
 
10-1-19; 10-4-4; 10-4-8


2003-12-82
 
12-1-2003
 
16-15-1; 16-15-8; 16-15-9


2003-12-84
 
12-1-2003
 
8-7-1—8-7-4


2003-12-85
 
12-1-2003
 
15-4-2; 15-4-5


2003-12-87
 
12-15-2003
 
5-7-5


2004-01-02
 
1-19-2004
 
11-2-7


2004-01-01
 
1-19-2004
 
11-2-7


2004-01-07
 
1-19-2004
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I; Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


2004-02-09
 
2-2-2004
 
13-3-13


2004-04-21
 
4-19-2004
 
14-4-4


2004-04-23
 
4-19-2004
 
6-15-1—6-15-8


2004-05-27
 
5-3-2004
 
11-2-7


2004-05-28
 
5-3-2004
 
11-2-7


2004-05-31
 
5-17-2004
 
10-1-19; 10-4-8


2004-06-32
 
6-7-2004
 
6-11-15


2004-06-33
 
6-7-2004
 
5-10-1; 5-10-2; 5-10-5; 5-10-8—5-10-10


2004-06-34
 
6-21-2004
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I; Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II


2004-06-35
 
6-21-2004
 
11-2-7


2004-06-36
 
6-21-2004
 
13-3-23


2004-06-37
 
6-21-2004
 
6-1-1; 6-2-1; 6-3-1; 6-4-1; 6-5-1; 6-6-1; 6-7-1; 6-16-1; 6-17-1


2004-06-38
 
6-21-2004
 
11-2-36


2004-08-44
 
8-16-2004
 
10-4-14


2004-08-46
 
8-16-2004
 
4-1-5


2004-10-56
 
10-4-2004
 
8-1-1; 8-1-2


2004-11-61
 
11-1-2004
 
11-2-7


2004-12-67
 
12-6-2004
 
11-2-7


2005-01-01
 
1-3-2005
 
10-1-19


2005-02-10
 
2-22-2005
 
13-3-13


2005-02-11
 
2-22-2005
 
11-2-7


2005-04-18
 
4-18-2005
 
11-2-7


2005-04-19
 
4-18-2005
 
11-2-7


2005-04-20
 
4-18-2005
 
10-4-13


2005-05-21
 
5-2-2005
 
13-3-13


2005-06-28
 
6-6-2005
 
11-2-7


2005-06-29
 
6-6-2005
 
11-2-7


2005-06-30
 
6-6-2005
 
11-2-7


2005-05-31
 
6-6-2005
 
11-2-7


2005-05-32
 
6-6-2005
 
11-2-7


2005-08-42
 
8-1-2005
 
11-2-7


2005-08-44
 
8-1-2005
 
6-11-12; 16-9-3; 16-12-2


2005-08-45
 
8-15-2005
 
5-10-1; 5-10-2; 5-10-9—5-10-13; 5-10-15


2005-08-49
 
8-15-2005
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II; Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III


2005-09-52
 
9-19-2005
 
9-1-4


2005-11-61
 
11-21-2005
 
5-8-3; 5-8-17


2005-12-63
 
12-5-2005
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


2005-02-04
 
2-6-2006
 
7-2-5


2006-02-05
 
2-6-2006
 
15-4-5


2006-03-09
 
3-6-2006
 
15-8-2


2006-04-17
 
4-17-2006
 
11-2-7


2006-05-21
 
5-15-2006
 
11-2-7


2006-05-22
 
5-15-2006
 
11-2-7


2006-06-26
 
6-19-2006
 
11-2-7


2006-06-27
 
6-19-2006
 
11-2-7


2006-08-38
 
8-7-2006
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. VII


2006-08-41
 
8-21-2006
 
16-12-6


2006-09-49
 
9-5-2006
 
16-9-5


2006-09-56
 
9-18-2006
 
7-3-14; 16-5-6


2006-11-58
 
11-6-2006
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


2006-11-60
 
11-20-2006
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


2006-11-61
 
11-20-2006
 
11-2-7


2006-11-62
 
11-20-2006
 
11-2-7


2006-11-63
 
11-20-2006
 
11-2-7


2006-11-64
 
11-20-2006
 
11-2-7


2006-11-65
 
11-20-2006
 
11-2-7


2006-11-67
 
11-20-2006
 
6-11-18


2006-12-71
 
12-4-2006
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III


2006-12-72
 
12-4-2006
 
11-2-7


2006-12-73
 
12-4-2006
 
11-2-7


2006-12-75
 
12-18-2006
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


2007-03-10
 
3-19-2007
 
4-1-5


2007-03-11
 
3-19-2007
 
7-4-18; 7-6-11; 16-12-1; 16-13-2; 16-14-3; 16-18-1


2007-04-16
 
3-19-2007
 
4-1-5


2007-04-14
 
4-16-2007
 
16-9-2; 16-9-3; 16-18-1


2007-04-17
 
4-16-2007
 
11-2-7


2007-05-19
 
5-7-2007
 
11-2-7


2007-05-21
 
5-7-2007
 
11-2-7


2007-06-25
 
6-18-2007
 
6-12-4—6-12-9; 6-12-11—6-12-15


2007-07-28
 
7-16-2007
 
16-15-6


2007-07-29
 
7-16-2007
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III


2007-10-37A
 
10-15-2007
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


2007-10-38
 
10-15-2007
 
17-9-1—17-9-4


2007-10-39
 
10-15-2007
 
17-1-2; 17-1-6; 17-5-1—17-5-6


2007-10-40
 
10-15-2007
 
11-2-7


2007-10-41
 
10-15-2007
 
11-2-7


2007-10-42
 
10-15-2007
 
11-2-7


2007-11-44
 
11-5-2007
 
11-2-7


2007-11-45
 
11-5-2007
 
11-2-7


2007-12-50
 
12-17-2007
 
14-3-22


2007-12-51
 
12-17-2007
 
9-1-4


2008-02-02
 
2-4-2008
 
9-1-7


2008-02-05
 
2-19-2008
 
10-1-19; 10-4-7; 10-4-8


2008-02-06
 
2-19-2008
 
8-9-1—8-9-14


2008-04-08
 
4-7-2008
 
13-3-13


2008-04-13
 
4-21-2008
 
11-2-7


2008-04-14
 
4-21-2008
 
11-2-7


2008-04-15
 
4-21-2008
 
8-2-20; 15-4-5


2008-05-21
 
5-19-2008
 
11-2-7


2008-05-22
 
5-19-2008
 
11-2-7


2008-05-23
 
5-19-2008
 
11-2-7


2008-05-24
 
5-19-2008
 
11-2-7


2008-06-27
 
6-2-2008
 
5-7-5


2008-06-28
 
6-2-2008
 
14-4-8


2008-08-36
 
8-4-2008
 
11-2-7


2008-08-37
 
8-4-2008
 
5-9-1; 5-9-2; 5-9-4


2008-10-49
 
10-6-2008
 
7-1-7; 7-2-4; 7-3-16; 16-5-7; 16-12-1; 16-12-2; 16-16-3; 16-16-8; 16-16-9;
16-18-1


2008-10-57
 
10-20-2008
 
16-5-2; 16-5-4; 16-5-5; 16-15-1


2008-11-61
 
11-17-2008
 
16-9-3; 16-13-3


2008-11-63
 
11-17-2008
 
16-12-1; 16-12-2; 16-18-1


2008-11-64
 
11-17-2008
 
3-5-1—3-5-10


2008-12-71
 
12-15-2008
 
4-1-2


2008-12-72
 
12-15-2008
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I; Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II


2009-02-02
 
2-2-2009
 
13-3-13


2009-02-03
 
2-2-2009
 
16-9-4; 16-13-3


2009-03-09
 
3-2-2009
 
14-1-3


2009-04-14
 
4-6-2009
 
5-10-7


2009-05-18
 
5-4-2009
 
4-1-11


2009-05-20
 
5-4-2009
 
2-7-13; 6-1-1; 6-2-1; 6-3-1; 6-4-1; 6-5-1; 6-6-1; 6-7-1; 6-16-1; 6-17-1


2009-05-22
 
5-4-2009
 
12-5-1—12-5-24


2009-06-31
 
6-15-2009
 
10-5-6


2009-07-35
 
7-20-2009
 
13-5-1—13-5-27


2009-07-36
 
7-20-2009
 
11-2-7


2009-08-36A
 
8-3-2009
 
10-7-1—10-7-4


2009-08-37
 
8-3-2009
 
16-12-6


2009-08-38
 
8-3-2009
 
6-12-8


2009-09-41
 
9-21-2009
 
14-3-18


2009-10-51
 
10-19-2009
 
16-12-1


2009-10-57
 
10-19-2009
 
9-1-5


2009-10-58
 
10-19-2009
 
8-9-8


2009-10-59
 
10-19-2009
 
2-1-9


2009-11-62
 
11-16-2009
 
5-10-1; 5-10-2; 5-10-6


2009-11-63
 
11-16-2009
 
11-2-7


2009-11-65
 
11-16-2009
 
11-2-7


2009-12-66
 
12-7-2009
 
8-2-18


2009-12-68
 
12-21-2009
 
11-2-7


2009-12-69
 
12-21-2009
 
11-2-7


2010-01-02
 
1-19-2010
 
8-8-1—8-8-10


2010-01-03
 
1-19-2010
 
13-3-13


2010-01-04
 
1-19-2010
 
11-2-7


2010-03-07
 
3-15-2010
 
3-2-4


2010-03-08
 
3-15-2010
 
11-2-7


2010-03-09
 
3-15-2010
 
10-1-19; 10-11-1—10-11-7


2010-03-10
 
3-15-2010
 
6-11-5; 6-11-10; 6-11-15—6-11-17


2010-03-11
 
3-15-2010
 
13-3-13


2010-03-13
 
3-15-2010
 
4-1-2


2010-04-15
 
4-5-2010
 
Ch. 5, Art. 1; Ch. 5, Art. 2


2010-04-23
 
4-5-2010
 
6-13-1—6-13-17; 7-2-5; 7-5-5; 7-6-2; 7-6-3; 7-6-9; 7-6-10; 7-6-15; 7-7-17;
13-2-7; 13-2-8 ; 13-2-11—13-2-15; 13-2-18; 13-2-21; 16-17-1


2010-05-24
 
5-3-2010
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II


2010-05-25
 
5-3-2010
 
11-2-7


2010-06-36
 
6-21-2010
 
16-12-1; 16-12-2; 16-15-10; 16-17-1


2010-06-37
 
6-21-2010
 
16-10-2; 16-13-3; 16-18-1


2010-08-43
 
8-2-2010
 
11-2-7


2010-09-45
 
9-7-2010
 
16-10-2; 16-13-3; 16-18-1


2010-09-46
 
9-7-2010
 
6-11-11; 6-11-15


2010-10-47
 
10-4-2010
 
11-2-7


2010-11-53
 
11-15-2010
 
6-13-9


2011-01-01
 
1-18-2011
 
11-2-7


2011-02-02
 
2-7-2011
 
11-2-36


2011-02-03
 
2-7-2011
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III; Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV; Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I;
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


2011-04-07
 
4-4-2011
 
13-3-13


2011-04-10
 
4-18-2011
 
1-6-22; Ch. 2, Art. 4


2011-04-11
 
4-18-2011
 
6-11-3; 6-11-5; 6-11-6; 6-11-8—6-11-12; 6-11-15—6-11-21; 6-11-26; 6-13-4


2011-06-19
 
6-20-2011
 
16-12-1


2011-08-25
 
8-1-2011
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


2011-08-26
 
8-1-2011
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


2011-09-30
 
9-6-2011
 
11-2-7


2011-09-31
 
9-6-2011
 
11-2-7


2011-09-33
 
9-19-2011
 
11-2-7


2011-10-35
 
10-3-2011
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I; Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II


2011-10-34
 
10-3-2011
 
16-5-6; 16-8-1—16-8-5; 16-9-1—16-9-4; 16-10-2; 16-10-3; 16-12-1; 16-12-2;
16-13-2—16-13-4; 16-15-8; 16-18-1


2011-11-36
 
11-7-2011
 
6-13-18; 6-14-1; 7-2-8


2011-12-40
 
12-5-2011
 
13-3-13


2011-12-43
 
12-19-2011
 
16-5-6; 16-16-5


2011-12-44
 
12-19-2011
 
14-2-32


2011-12-45
 
12-19-2011
 
8-1-2


2011-12-46
 
12-19-2011
 
14-2-33


2011-12-47
 
12-19-2011
 
11-2-2; 11-2-7


2012-02-02
 
2-6-2012
 
8-8-1—8-8-10


2012-02-03
 
2-6-2012
 
10-2-6


2012-02-04
 
2-6-2012
 
11-2-7


2012-02-05
 
2-6-2012
 
11-2-7


2012-03-09
 
3-19-2012
 
11-2-7


2012-04-11
 
4-2-2012
 
11-2-7


2012-04-14
 
4-16-2012
 
11-2-7


2012-05-18
 
5-7-2012
 
11-2-7


2012-05-19
 
5-7-2012
 
11-2-7


2012-07-27
 
7-16-2012
 
6-9-1—6-9-11; 6-14-1; 7-5-1—7-5-11; 7-7-1—7-7-17; 7-9-1—7-9-4


2012-08-28
 
8-6-2012
 
11-2-27; 11-2-37


2012-10-34
 
10-15-2012
 
6-11-15


2012-11-36
 
11-19-2012
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Sch. VI


2012-12-40
 
12-3-2012
 
16-9-5


2012-12-43
 
12-17-2012
 
13-3-13


2013-01-01
 
1-7-2013
 
11-2-7


2013-02-04
 
2-4-2013
 
11-2-7; 11-2-36


2013-03-06
 
3-4-2013
 
11-2-7


2013-04-08
 
4-1-2013
 
11-2-7


2013-04-11
 
4-15-2013
 
6-13-1—6-13-19; 12-3-17


2013-05-13
 
5-6-2013
 
11-2-7; 11-2-27


2013-05-14
 
5-6-2013
 
11-2-7


2013-05-15
 
5-6-2013
 
11-2-7


2013-05-16
 
5-6-2013
 
11-2-7


2013-05-17
 
5-6-2013
 
14-2-15—14-2-17; 15-5-1; 15-5-5


2013-05-18
 
5-6-2013
 
11-2-7


2013-05-22
 
5-20-2013
 
11-2-7


2013-05-23
 
5-20-2013
 
11-2-7


2013-06-24
 
6-3-2013
 
11-2-7


2013-06-25
 
6-3-2013
 
11-2-7


2013-06-26
 
6-3-2013
 
11-2-7


2013-06-28
 
6-17-2013
 
11-2-7


2013-06-29
 
6-17-2013
 
11-2-7


2013-08-36
 
8-5-2013
 
11-2-7


2013-08-37
 
8-19-2013
 
11-2-7


2013-08-35
 
8-20-2013
 
1-5-1; 1-5-4


2013-10-43
 
10-21-2013
 
6-14-1


2013-10-44
 
10-21-2013
 
6-14-1; Ch. 6, Art. 16, App. A


2013-11-46
 
11-4-2013
 
11-2-7


2013-12-50
 
12-16-2013
 
13-3-13


2013-12-51
 
12-16-2013
 
11-2-7


2013-12-52
 
12-16-2013
 
11-2-7


2013-12-53
 
12-16-2013
 
11-2-7


2013-12-54
 
12-16-2013
 
11-2-7


2013-12-55
 
12-16-2013
 
11-2-7


2014-01-01
 
1-6-2014
 
10-9-1—10-9-4, 10-9-6, 10-9-7


2014-01-02
 
1-6-2014
 
11-2-7


2014-01-03
 
1-6-2014
 
11-2-7


2014-02-06
 
2-3-2014
 
16-9-2


2014-02-07
 
2-18-2014
 
6-1-1 ; 6-2-1 ; 6-3-1 ; 6-4-1 ; 6-5-1 ; 6-6-1 ; 6-7-1 ; 6-16-1


2014-02-08
 
2-18-2014
 
9-1-5 ; 9-1-7 ; 9-1-15 ; 9-2-3 ; 9-2-4 ; 9-4-1 —9-4-5


2014-02-09
 
2-18-2014
 
11-2-7 ; 11-2-24


2014-03-10
 
3-3-2014
 
11-2-7


2014-03-11
 
3-3-2014
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Sch. IV


2014-04-15
 
4-7-2014
 
6-11-9


2014-04-16
 
4-21-2014
 
11-2-7


2014-04-17
 
4-21-2014
 
11-2-7; 11-2-24


2014-04-20
 
4-21-2014
 
16-16-8


2014-06-21
 
6-2-2014
 
6-1-1; 6-2-1; 6-4-1; 6-5-1; 6-6-1; 6-7-1; 6-10-1; 6-16-1; 6-17-1


2014-06-27
 
6-16-2014
 
11-2-7


2014-07-29
 
7-7-2014
 
11-2-7


2014-07-30
 
7-7-2014
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


2014-07-31
 
7-7-2014
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


2014-08-34
 
8-4-2014
 
11-2-7


2014-08-36
 
8-18-2014
 
11-2-7


2014-08-37
 
8-18-2014
 
11-2-7


2014-08-38
 
8-18-2014
 
11-2-7


2014-08-39
 
8-18-2014
 
11-2-7


2014-08-40
 
8-18-2014
 
9-4-2


2014-08-42
 
8-18-2014
 
16-9-4; 16-18-1


2014-09-45
 
9-2-2014
 
16-9-5; 16-10-2; 16-18-1


2014-09-46
 
9-15-2014
 
10-12-1 - 10-12-6


2014-10-50
 
10-20-2014
 
11-2-7


2014-10-51
 
10-20-2014
 
11-2-7; 11-2-24


2014-11-53
 
11-3-2014
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. VI


2014-12-55
 
12-15-2014
 
13-3-13


2014-12-56
 
12-15-2014
 
8-2-5


2015-01-01
 
1-5-2015
 
11-2-7


2015-03-02
 
3-2-2015
 
16-9-2, 16-9-3


2015-05-08
 
5-4-2015
 
11-2-7


2015-05-09
 
5-4-2015
 
11-2-7


2015-07-15
 
7-20-2015
 
16-9-4; 16-13-3; 16-18-1


2015-10-20
 
10-5-2015
 
11-2-7


2015-10-21
 
10-19-2015
 
13-3-27


2015-11-25
 
11-2-2015
 
11-2-7


2015-11-27
 
11-16-2015
 
11-2-7


2015-11-28
 
11-16-2015
 
11-2-7


2016-02-07
 
2-16-2016
 
11-2-7


2016-02-08
 
2-16-2016
 
11-2-7


2016-03-12
 
3-7-2016
 
11-2-7


2016-03-13
 
3-7-2016
 
11-2-7


2016-03-14
 
3-21-2016
 
11-2-7


2016-03-15
 
3-21-2016
 
13-3-13


2016-03-16
 
3-21-2016
 
11-2-7


2016-03-17
 
3-21-2016
 
11-2-7


2016-03-18
 
3-21-2016
 
11-2-7


2016-04-19
 
4-4-2016
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV; Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


2016-04-20
 
4-18-2016
 
14-2-34


2016-04-24
 
4-18-2016
 
11-2-7


2016-05-26
 
5-2-2016
 
11-2-7


2016-06-28
 
6-6-2016
 
10-12-4; 10-12-5; 10-12-6


2016-07-31
 
7-18-2016
 
10-10-16; 11-2-38


2016-07-32
 
7-18-2016
 
9-1-5; 10-6-4


2016-07-34
 
7-18-2016
 
5-8-3; 5-8-14


2016-12-48
 
12-19-2016
 
11-2-7


2016-12-49
 
12-19-2016
 
5-7-1 - 5-7-11


2017-01-01
 
1-17-2017
 
11-2-7


2017-01-02
 
1-17-2017
 
11-2-7


2017-02-06
 
2-21-2017
 
6-13-3; 6-13-4; 6-13-7


2017-03-08
 
3-20-2017
 
12-5-1; 12-5-2; 12-5-4; 12-5-9; 12-5-15; 12-5-16


2017-03-10
 
3-20-2017
 
17-5-2


2017-03-11
 
3-20-2017
 
12-6-1 - 12-6-20


2017-04-12
 
4-3-2017
 
13-3-13


2017-05-17
 
5-1-2017
 
14-2-35; 14-2-36


2017-05-22
 
5-1-2017
 
10-9-1; 14-2-31


2017-06-23
 
6-5-2017
 
9-5-1 - 9-5-4


2017-06-24
 
6-5-2017
 
11-2-7


2017-06-25
 
6-5-2017
 
11-2-7


2017-06-26
 
6-5-2017
 
11-2-7


2017-07-31
 
7-17-2017
 
11-2-7


2017-07-32
 
7-17-2017
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


2017-07-33
 
7-17-2017
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I; Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


2017-07-35
 
7-17-2017
 
11-2-7


2017-08-47
 
7-17-2017
 
11-2-7


2017-08-48
 
8-7-2017
 
11-2-7


2017-08-49
 
8-7-2017
 
11-2-7


2017-08-50
 
8-21-2017
 
11-2-7


2017-08-51
 
8-21-2017
 
11-2-7


2017-08-52
 
8-21-2017
 
11-2-7


2017-09-53
 
9-5-2017
 
11-2-7


2017-09-55
 
9-18-2017
 
5-8-3


2017-09-56
 
9-18-2017
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV; Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


2017-10-57
 
10-2-2017
 
11-2-7


2017-10-58
 
10-2-2017
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III; Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


2017-10-59
 
10-2-2017
 
11-2-7


2017-10-60
 
10-2-2017
 
11-2-7


2017-10-61
 
10-16-2017
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. VIII


2017-11-62
 
11-6-2017
 
15-4-5


2017-11-63
 
11-6-2017
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


2017-11-64
 
11-6-2017
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I


2017-11-65
 
11-6-2017
 
16-12-1; 16-12-2; 16-18-1


2017-11-67
 
11-20-2017
 
11-2-7


2017-11-68
 
11-20-2017
 
11-2-7


2017-12-71
 
12-4-2017
 
11-2-7


2017-12-72
 
12-4-2017
 
11-2-7


2017-12-73
 
12-18-2017
 
1-9-1—1-9-8


2018-01-01
 
1-16-2018
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III


2018-01-02
 
1-16-2018
 
11-2-7


2018-02-03
 
2-5-2018
 
11-2-7


2018-02-05
 
2-20-2018
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I, III


2018-02-06
 
2-20-2018
 
11-2-7


2018-03-08
 
3-5-2018
 
Ch. 5, Art. 1; Ch. 5, Art. 2


2018-03-09
 
3-5-2018
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


2018-4-11
 
4-2-2018
 
13-3-13


2018-04-12
 
4-2-2018
 
5-13-1—5-13-8


2018-04-17
 
4-16-2018
 
1-8-1—1-8-17


2018-05-18
 
5-7-2018
 
11-2-7


2018-05-19
 
5-7-2018
 
10-1-19; 10-13-1—10-13-24


2018-05-20
 
5-21-2018
 
11-2-7


2018-06-21
 
6-18-2018
 
11-2-7


2018-06-22
 
6-18-2018
 
5-9-1—5-9-8


2018-07-24
 
7-2-2018
 
11-2-7


2018-07-29
 
7-16-2018
 
2-7-13


2018-07-30
 
7-16-2018
 
12-7-1—12-7-21


2018-09-33
 
9-4-2018
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


2018-10-39
 
10-15-2018
 
11-2-7


2018-10-40
 
10-15-2018
 
11-2-7


2018-11-41
 
11-5-2018
 
1-9-6


2018-12-45
 
12-3-2018
 
11-2-7


2018-12-46
 
12-17-2018
 
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I


2018-12-50
 
12-17-2018
 
8-2-6


2019-02-01
 
2-4-2019
 
11-2-7


2019-02-04
 
2-19-2019
 
5-7-1—5-7-11


2019-02-05
 
2-19-2019
 
6-13-3, 6-13-4, 6-13-7


2019-02-06
 
2-19-2019
 
5-8-15


2019-03-08
 
3-4-2019
 
11-2-7


2019-03-09
 
3-18-2019
 
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV


2019-04-11
 
4-1-2019
 
5-14-1—5-14-13


2019-04-12
 
4-1-2019
 
13-3-13


2019-04-13
 
4-1-2019
 
11-3-1—11-3-7


2019-04-15
 
4-15-2019
 
1-9-1—1-9-8


 
 
 
 
 




 



 


