6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 1/251
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Colona, Illinois, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and including ordinance 0-19-01, passed
February 25, 2019.
Ordinances up to and including ordinance 96-04, passed by the City of Green Rock on March 25, 1996, and ordinance 2-1-96, passed
by the Borough of Colona on February 1, 1996, created the newly consolidated City Code of Colona. Ordinances subsequent to the
above noted ordinances supersede the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 97-07
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING
THE CITY CODE OF COLONA, ILLINOIS
Be it ordained by the Mayor and the City Council of the City of Colona, Illinois, an Illinois Municipal Corporation:
Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the City Code of the City of Colona, Illinois prepared by Sterling
Codifiers, Inc. containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with the changes made to said ordinances, under
the direction of the governing body of the City, shall be accepted in all Courts without question as the Official Code and Law of the City
as enacted by the Mayor and the City Council.
Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous
supplement service, whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding, or deleting
provisions of the Official City Code is identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies,
three (3) copies of which shall be maintained in the office of the City Clerk, certified as to correctness and available for inspection at any
and all times that said office is regularly open.
Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official City Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance
provision and the fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing body shall not serve to cause any
interruption in the continuous effectiveness of ordinances included in said Official City Code. All ordinances of a special nature, such as
tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, traffic ordinances, vacating ordinances, and annexation ordinances shall continue in
full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the City Code. Such ordinances are not intended to be
included in the Official Code.
Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of
such Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will
cause the law of the City to be misrepresented thereby.
Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
Section 6: This Ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval in
accordance with law, as printed and published in book form by order of the Mayor and the City Council.
Approved by the Colona City Council this 27th day of October, 1997.
Title 1
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 2/251
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the City Council, this City Code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the Official City Code of the
City of Colona. This City Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the COLONA CITY CODE, and it is hereby published by
authority of the Council and shall be kept up to date as provided in Section 1-1-3 of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any
section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and
to the general penalty clause, relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this City Code by title in any
legal documents1. (1997 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all
administrative tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances
enumerated in Section 1-2-1 of this Code2. (1997 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the City Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended,
and this shall constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of
any part of this City Code. All such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers and the said
ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this City Code. Each such replacement page shall
be properly identified. (1997 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this City Code in
such a manner that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to
the official instructions when so authorized by the City Council. The City Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk. Any person having in his custody an official copy of the City Code
shall make every effort to maintain said Code in an up to date and efficient manner. He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or
replacement pages when such are delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the City Clerk. Said Code books, while
in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be returned to the
office of the Clerk when directed so to do by order of the City Council. (1997 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this City Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this
City Code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following
sections), and excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances;
ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances;
ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances;
ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the City; and all special
ordinances. (1997 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinances relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of
public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as the City
Code may contain provisions for such matters, in which case this City Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or
ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1997 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 3/251
A. No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or
not, as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act
so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such
proceeding. So far as practicable, if any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such
provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
B. This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any
new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
C. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance
of the City herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing
provisions and not a new enactment of the same provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or
altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this City Code. (1997 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this City Code or any part thereof is for any reason
held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or
effectiveness of the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed
each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective.
(1997 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this City Code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties
or persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this City Code by words importing the singular number only, or the masculine
gender, several matters, parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included;
provided, that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this City Code which contains any express provision
excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the City has been changed in the content of this City Code, to "Title", "Chapter",
"Section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the City's
ordinances is not meant to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1997 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the
context makes such meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
ALLEY: A public right of way, other than a street, affording secondary means of access to abutting property.
CITY: The City of Colona, County of Henry, State of Illinois.
CODE: The City Code of the City of Colona.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by
the words "of the City of Colona".
FISCAL YEAR: The "fiscal year" of the City shall commence on May 1 of each year and end on April 30 of the following year.1
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 4/251
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be
imposed, and/or fine up to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
MONTH: A calendar month.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the City; or any act or thing repugnant to, or
creating a hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the community.
OCCUPANT; TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or
land whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer by title only, it shall be construed as though followed by the words
"of the City of Colona".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the
whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, government or any other group acting as a unit,
as well as a natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written
instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated,
discharged or diminished and every right or interest therein.
PROPERTY OWNER: A person owning private property in the City as shown by the County Auditor's plats of the City.
PUBLIC PLACE: Shall include in its meaning, but is not restricted to, any City-owned open place such as parks and squares.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any and all property owned by the City or held in the name of the City by any of the departments, commissions or
agencies within the City government.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in
small quantities direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property.
SIDEWALK: That portion of the street between the edge of the travelled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property.
STREET: Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be
understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of
any person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person,
or in case he is unable to write, by his proper mark. (1997 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the City Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall
not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning
or intent of the provisions of any division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any such
sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. (1997 Code)
Chapter 4
GENERAL PENALTY
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
A. Violation; Minimum Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this Code shall be fined in a sum not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) except for the violation of any of the following sections, and as to any violation of the following sections,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 5/251
the minimum fine shall be the amount set forth below, as the case may be:
Section Offense Fine
3-1-2C Failure to register $ 50.00
4-1-1 Nuisances; public health 50.00
4-2-1 Weeds and grass height 50.00
5-2-1-6 Theft 250.00
5-2-1-9 Intoxication 150.00
5-2-2-1 Disorderly conduct 200.00
5-2-3-1 Indecent conduct 200.00
5-2-3-2 Profanity 75.00
5-2-4-1 Damage or injury to property 150.00
5-2-4-2 Obstruction of sidewalk 50.00
5-2-4-3 Snow removal on sidewalk 50.00
5-2-4-5 Burning restrictions 75.00
5-2-4-6 Keeping junk restricted 75.00
5-2-4-11 Abandoned refrigerators 75.00
5-2-4-13 Prohibited activities in street 50.00
5-2-5-2 Businesses; prohibited activities 50.00
5-2-5-3 Parking of campers, ownership 50.00
5-2-5-4 Hitchhiking 50.00
5-2-5-5 Weapons offenses (minor) 200.00
5-2-5-6 Loudspeakers; attached to vehicles 50.00
5-2-5-7 Injury to birds 50.00
5-2-6-2 Possession of drug paraphernalia 250.00
5-2-7A1 Possession of less than 2.5 grams of cannabis 250.00
5-3-1 Curfew 75.00
5-3-2 Cigarette or tobacco possession/sale 75.00
5-4B-1 Animals; dangerous; running at large 75.00
5-4B-2 Animals, all; disturbing the peace 50.00
5-4B-3 Animal yards 50.00
5-4B-5 Biting animal 75.00
5-4B-7 Cruelty to animals 150.00
5-4B-10 Trapping in City limits 75.00
5-4B-13 Animal waste 50.00
5-4B-14 Burial of animals 50.00
5-4C-1 Dog or cat; running at large 50.00
5-4C-2 License required; dog or cat 50.00
5-4C-5 Limitation; dogs or cats 50.00
5-4C-6 Inoculation required 50.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 6/251
5-4C-12-2 Violation; dangerous dog 75.00
6-1-11B Snowmobiles 50.00
6-2-3 Parking penalty 50.00
6-5-7 Vehicle equipment 75.00
6-6-1A Operation of bicycle without a light 50.00
6-7-13 Derelict/abandoned vehicle 50.00
7-1-12 Burning leaves and rubbish 50.00
9-3-1 Uniform plan house numbering 50.00
B. Violation; Maximum Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this Code shall be fined a sum not more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). No imprisonment for failure to pay such fine, penalty or cost shall exceed six (6) months for each
offense. (Ord. 0-18-05, 2-12-2018)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this Code the same as though it were a part of each and
every separate section unless otherwise indicated. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this Code where a duty is
prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any action which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful, shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains
unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code.
B. In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this Code, the prosecuting
officer may elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
C. Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this Code and there
shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (1997 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee
liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intent of the City Council to impose such fine or
penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1997 Code)
ARTICLE A. MUNICIPAL CODE VIOLATIONS
1-4A-1: HEARING DEPARTMENT OVERVIEW:
DIVISION 2.2. CODE HEARING DEPARTMENTS
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-1)
Section 1. Applicability. This Division 2.2 applies only to municipalities that are non-home rule units. Nothing in this Division 2.2
allows a non-home rule municipality to pursue any remedies not otherwise authorized by statute.
(Source: P.A. 90-777, eff. 1-1-99.)
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-5)
Section 5. Definitions. As used in this Division, unless the context requires otherwise:
"Code" means any municipal ordinance except for (i) building code violations that must be adjudicated pursuant to Division 31.1 of
Article 11 of this Act and (ii) any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the
movement of vehicles and except for any reportable offense under Section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
"Hearing officer" means a municipal employee or an officer or agent of a municipality, other than a law enforcement officer, whose
duty it is to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 7/251
(1) preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or not a code violation exists;
(2) hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested parties relevant to the existence of a code violation;
(3) preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
and
(4) issue and sign a written finding, decision, and order stating whether a code violation exists.
(Source: P.A. 90-777, eff. 1-1-99.)
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-10)
Section 10. Code hearing department. The corporate authorities of any municipality may adopt this Division and establish a code
hearing department within an existing code enforcement agency or as a separate and independent agency in the municipal
government. The function of the hearing department is to expedite the prosecution and correction of code violations in the manner
set forth in this Division.
The code hearing department may adjudicate any violation of a municipal ordinance except for (i) building code violations that
must be adjudicated pursuant to Division 31.1 of Article 11 of this Act and (ii) any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or similar
offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles and except for any reportable offense under Section 6-204
of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
(Source: P.A. 90-777, eff. 1-1-99.)
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-15)
Section 15. Hearing procedures not exclusive. In any municipality where this Division is adopted, this Division does not preclude
the municipality from using other methods to enforce the provisions of its code.
(Source: P.A. 90-777, eff. 1-1-99.)
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-20)
Section 20. Instituting code hearing proceedings. When a police officer or other individual authorized to issue a code violation finds
a code violation to exist, he or she shall note the violation on a multiple copy violation notice and report form that indicates (i) the
name and address of the defendant, (ii) the type and nature of the violation, (iii) the date and time the violation was observed, and
(iv) the names of witnesses to the violation.
The violation report form shall be forwarded to the code hearing department where a docket number shall be stamped on all
copies of the report and a hearing date shall be noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose on the form. The hearing date
shall not be less than 30 nor more than 40 days after the violation is reported. However, if the code violation involves a municipal
ordinance regulating truants, the hearing date shall not be less than 7 nor more than 40 days after the violation is reported.
One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files of the code hearing department and shall be part of the record
of hearing, one copy of the report form shall be returned to the individual representing the municipality in the case so that he or
she may prepare evidence of the code violation for presentation at the hearing on the date indicated, and one copy of the report
form shall be served by first class mail to the defendant along with a summons commanding the defendant to appear at the
hearing. In municipalities with a population under 3,000,000, if the violation report form requires the respondent to answer within a
certain amount of time, the municipality must reply to the answer within the same amount of time afforded to the respondent.
(Source: P.A. 94-616, eff. 1-1-06; 95-1016, eff. 6-1-09.)
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-25)
Section 25. Subpoenas; defaults. At any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer assigned to hear the case may, at the
request of either party, direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. If on the date set for hearing the defendant or
his or her attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer may find the defendant in default and shall proceed with the hearing and
accept evidence relevant to the existence of a code violation.
(Source: P.A. 90-777, eff. 1-1-99.)
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-30)
Section 30. Continuances; representation at code hearings. No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in
proceedings under this Division except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the
defendant. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance authorized by a hearing officer under this
Division shall not exceed 25 days. The case for the municipality may be presented by an attorney designated by the municipality
or by any other municipal employee, except that the case for the municipality shall not be presented by an employee of the code
hearing department. The case for the defendant may be presented by the defendant, his or her attorney, or any other agent or
representative of the defendant.
(Source: P.A. 90-777, eff. 1-1-99.)
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-35)
Section 35. Hearing; evidence. At the hearing a hearing officer shall preside, shall hear testimony, and shall accept any evidence
relevant to the existence or non-existence of a code violation. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall
not apply to hearings authorized by this Division.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 8/251
(Source: P.A. 90-777, eff. 1-1-99.)
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-40)
Section 40. Qualifications of hearing officers. Prior to conducting proceedings under this Division, hearing officers shall
successfully complete a formal training program that includes the following:
(1) instruction on the rules of procedure of the hearing that they will conduct;
(2) orientation to each subject area of the code violations that they will administer;
(3) observation of administrative hearings; and
(4) participation in hypothetical cases, including rules on evidence and issuing final orders.
In addition, every hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois for at least 3 years.
(Source: P.A. 90-777, eff. 1-1-99.)
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-45)
Section 45. Findings, decision, and order. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a determination on the
basis of the evidence presented at the hearing as to whether or not a code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing
and shall be designated as findings, decision, and order. The findings, decision, and order shall include (i) the hearing officer's
findings of fact; (ii) a decision of whether or not a code violation exists based upon the findings of fact; and (iii) an order that states
the sanction or dismisses the case if a violation is not proved. A monetary sanction for a violation under this Division shall not
exceed the amount provided for in Section 1-2-1 of this Act. A copy of the findings, decision, and order shall be served on the
defendant within 5 days after it is issued. Service shall be in the same manner that the report form and summons are served under
Section 1-2.2-20 of this Division. Payment of any penalty or fine and the disposition of fine money shall be in the same manner as
set forth in the code, unless the corporate authorities adopting this Division provide otherwise.
(Source: P.A. 90-777, eff. 1-1-99.)
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-50)
Section 50. Review under Administrative Review Law. The findings, decision, and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to
review in the circuit court of the county in which the municipality is located. The provisions of the Administrative Review Law, and
the rules adopted pursuant thereto, shall apply to and govern every action for the judicial review of the findings, decision, and
order of a hearing officer under this Division.
(Source: P.A. 90-777, eff. 1-1-99.)
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-55)
Section 55. Judgment on findings, decision, and order.
(a) Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the
exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the Administrative Review Law shall be a debt due and
owing the municipality and, as such, may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
(b) After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final
determination of the code violation, the municipality may commence a proceeding in the circuit court of the county in which the
municipality is located for purpose of obtaining a judgment on the findings, decision, and order. Nothing in this Section shall
prevent a municipality from consolidating multiple findings, decisions, and orders against a person in such a proceeding. Upon
commencement of the action, the municipality shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision, and order, which shall be
accompanied by a certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision, and order was issued in accordance
with this Division and the applicable municipal ordinance. Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any
method provided for by Section 2-203 of the Code of Civil Procedure or by certified mail, return receipt requested, provided that
the total amount of fines, other sanctions, and costs imposed by the findings, decision, and order does not exceed $2,500. If the
court is satisfied that the findings, decision, and order was entered in accordance with the requirements of this Division and the
applicable municipal ordinance and that the defendant had an opportunity for a hearing under this Division and for judicial review
as provided in this Division:
(1) The court shall render judgment in favor of the municipality and against the defendant for the amount indicated in the
findings, decision and order, plus costs. The judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced in the same manner as
other judgments for the recovery of money.
(2) The court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that are requested by the municipality to enforce the order of the
hearing officer to correct a code violation.
(c) In place of a proceeding under subsection (b) of this Section, after expiration of the period in which judicial review under the
Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of a code violation, unless stayed by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the findings, decision, and order of the hearing officer may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment
entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
In any case in which a defendant has failed to comply with a judgment ordering a defendant to correct a code violation or imposing
any fine or other sanction as a result of a code violation, any expenses incurred by a municipality to enforce the judgment,
including, but not limited to, attorney's fees, court costs, and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure, after they are fixed
by a court of competent jurisdiction or a hearing officer, shall be a debt due and owing the municipality and may be collected in
accordance with applicable law. Prior to any expenses being fixed by a hearing officer pursuant to this subsection (c), the
municipality shall provide notice to the defendant that states that the defendant shall appear at a hearing before the administrative
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 9/251
hearing officer to determine whether the defendant has failed to comply with the judgment. The notice shall set the date for such a
hearing, which shall not be less than 7 days from the date that notice is served. If notice is served by mail, the 7-day period shall
begin to run on the date that the notice was deposited in the mail.
Upon being recorded in the manner required by Article XII of the Code of Civil Procedure or by the Uniform Commercial Code, a
lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the defendant in the amount of any debt due and owing the
municipality under this Section. The lien may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a
court of competent jurisdiction.
A hearing officer may set aside any judgment entered by default and set a new hearing date, upon a petition filed within 21 days
after the issuance of the order of default, if the hearing officer determines that the petitioner's failure to appear at the hearing was
for good cause or at any time if the petitioner establishes that the municipality did not provide proper service of process. If any
judgment is set aside pursuant to this subsection (c), the hearing officer shall have authority to enter an order extinguishing any
lien which has been recorded for any debt due and owing the municipality as a result of the vacated default judgment.
(Source: P.A. 99-293, eff. 8-6-15.)
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-60)
Section 60. Adoption of Division by municipality. This Division may be adopted by a non-home rule municipality by incorporating
the provisions of this Division in an ordinance and by passing and publishing the ordinance in the manner provided in Division 2 of
Article 1 of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 90-777, eff. 1-1-99.)
(Ord. 0-18-02, 1-22-2018)
1-4A-2: CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT CREATED:
The Corporate Authorities of the City of Colona do hereby establish a Code Hearing Department as a separate and independent agency
within the City of Colona. The function of the Hearing Department is to expedite the prosecution and correction of Code violations and to
collect fines, costs and attorneys fees imposed, in the manner set forth in this article. The Code Hearing Department shall be known as
the City of Colona Ordinance Enforcement Department, hereinafter, "COCOED". The COCOED shall consist of a Hearing Officer and
such support personnel as shall be necessary to effect the purposes of this article. The Hearing Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor,
provided, however, that the Hearing Officer shall at all times comply with the qualification requirements set forth in section 1-4A-1,
section 40 of division 2.2, of this article. (Ord. 0-18-02, 1-22-2018)
ARTICLE B. MUNICIPAL BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS
1-4B-1: BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS OVERVIEW:
DIVISION 31.1. BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-1)
Section 1. Definitions. As used in this Division, unless the context requires otherwise:
(a) "Code" means any municipal ordinance, law, housing or building code or zoning ordinance that establishes construction,
plumbing, heating, electrical, fire prevention, sanitation or other health and safety standards that are applicable to structures in a
municipality or any municipal ordinance that requires, after notice, the cutting of weeds, the removal of garbage and debris, the
removal of inoperable motor vehicles, or the abatement of nuisances from private property;
(b) "Building inspector" means a full time state, county or municipal employee whose duties include the inspection or
examination of structures or property in a municipality to determine if zoning or other code violations exist;
(c) "Property owner" means the legal or beneficial owner of a structure;
(d) "Hearing officer" means a municipal employee or an officer or agent of a municipality, other than a building inspector or law
enforcement officer, whose duty it is to:
(1) preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or not a code violation exists;
(2) hear testimony and accept evidence from the building inspector, the building owner and all interested parties relevant to
the existence of a code violation;
(3) preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the
hearing;
(4) issue and sign a written finding, decision and order stating whether a code violation exists.
(Source: P.A. 91-162, eff. 7-16-99.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-2) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-2)
Section 2. Code hearing department. The corporate authorities of any municipality may adopt this Division and establish a Code
Hearing Department within an existing code enforcement agency or as a separate and independent agency in the municipal
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 10/251
government. The function of the hearing department is to expedite the prosecution and correction of code violations in the manner
set forth in this Division.
(Source: P.A. 88-37.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-3) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-3)
Section 3. Hearing procedures not exclusive. In any municipality where this Division is adopted, this Division does not preclude the
municipality from using other methods to enforce the provisions of its code.
(Source: P.A. 86-1039.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-4) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-4)
Section 4. Instituting code hearing proceedings. When a building inspector finds a code violation while inspecting a structure, he
shall note the violation on a multiple copy violation notice and report form, indicating the name and address of the structure owner,
a citation to the specific code provision or provisions alleged to have been violated, a description of the circumstances present that
constitute the alleged violation, the date and time the violation was observed, the names of witnesses to the violation, and the
address of the structure where the violation is observed.
The violation report form shall be forwarded by the building inspector to the Code Hearing Department where a Docket number
shall be stamped on all copies of the report, and a hearing date noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose on the form.
The hearing date shall not be less than 30 nor more than 40 days after the violation is reported by the building inspector.
One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files of the Code Hearing Department and shall be part of the
record of hearing, one copy of the report form shall be returned to the building inspector so that he may prepare evidence of the
code violation for presentation at the hearing on the date indicated, and one copy of the report form shall be served by first class
mail on the owner of the structure, along with a summons commanding the owner to appear at the hearing. If the municipality in
which the structure is situated has an ordinance requiring property owners to register with the municipality, service may be made
on the owner by mailing the report and summons to the owner's address registered with the municipality. If the name of the owner
of the structure cannot be ascertained or if service on the owner cannot be made by mail, service may be made on the owner by
posting or nailing a copy of the violation report form on the front door of the structure where the violation is found, not less than 20
days before the hearing is scheduled.
(Source: P.A. 97-1088, eff. 8-24-12.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-5) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-5)
Section 5. Subpoenas; Defaults. At any time prior to the hearing date the hearing officer assigned to hear the case may, at the
request of the building inspector or the attorney for the municipality, or the owner or his attorney, issue subpoenas directing
witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. If on the date set for hearing the owner or his attorney fails to appear, the
hearing officer may find the owner in default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a
code violation.
(Source: P.A. 86-1039.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-6) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-6)
Section 6. Continuances - Representation at code hearings. No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in
proceedings under this Division except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the owner.
Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance authorized by a hearing officer under this Division
shall not exceed 25 days. The case for the municipality may be presented by the building inspector, by any other municipal
employee or by an attorney designated by the municipality. However, in no event shall the case for the municipality be presented
by an employee of the Code Hearing Department. The case for the dwelling owner may be presented by the owner, his attorney,
or any other agent or representative.
(Source: Laws 1967, p. 1905.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-7) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-7)
Section 7. Hearing; Evidence. At the hearing, a hearing officer shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence
relevant to the existence or non-existence of a code violation in the structure indicated. The strict rules of evidence applicable to
judicial proceedings shall not apply to hearings authorized by this Division.
(Source: P.A. 86-1039.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-8) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-8)
Section 8. Eviction - Rights of the occupants. No action for eviction, abatement of a nuisance, or other similar proceeding shall be
threatened or instituted against an occupant of a dwelling solely because such occupant agrees to testify or testifies at a code
violation hearing.
(Source: P.A. 100-173, eff. 1-1-18.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-9) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-9)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 11/251
Section 9. Defenses to code violations. It shall be a defense to a code violation charged under this Division if the owner, his
attorney, or any other agent or representative proves to the hearing officer's satisfaction that:
(a) The code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact exist, or at the time of the hearing the violation has been remedied or
removed;
(b) The code violation has been caused by the current property occupants and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner
to maintain the dwelling free of such violations, the current occupants continue to cause the violations;
(c) An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the owner or his agent to all or a part of the dwelling for the
purpose of correcting the code violation.
(Source: P.A. 89-372, eff. 1-1-96.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-10) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-10)
Section 10. Findings, decision, order. At the conclusion of the hearing the hearing officer shall make a determination on the basis
of the evidence presented at the hearing whether or not a code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing and shall be
designated as findings, decision and order. The findings, decision and order shall include the hearing officer's findings of fact, a
decision whether or not a code violation exists based upon the findings of fact, and an order, ordering the owner to correct the
violation or dismissing the case, in the event a violation is not proved. If a code violation is proved, the order may also impose the
sanctions that are provided in the code for the violation proved. A copy of the findings, decision, and order shall be served on the
owner within 5 days after they are issued; service shall be in the same manner as the report form and summons are served
pursuant to Section 11-31.1-4. Payment of any penalty or fine and the disposition of fine money shall be in the same manner as
set forth in the code, unless the corporate authorities adopting this Division provide otherwise.
(Source: P.A. 86-1039.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-11) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-11)
Section 11. Administrative review. The findings, decision and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to review in the circuit
court of the county where the municipality is located, and the provisions of the Administrative Review Law, and all amendments
and modifications thereto, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto are adopted and shall apply to and govern every action for the
judicial review of the final findings, decision and order of a hearing officer under this Division.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-11.1) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-11.1)
Section 11.1. Judgment on findings, decision, order.
(a) Any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction or costs imposed remaining unpaid after the
exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the Administrative Review Law shall be a debt due and
owing the municipality and, as such, may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
(b) After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final
determination of the code violation, the municipality may commence a proceeding in the circuit court of the county where the
municipality is located for purposes of obtaining a judgment on the findings, decision and order. Nothing in this Section shall
prevent a municipality from consolidating multiple findings, decisions and orders against a person in such a proceeding. Upon
commencement of the action, the municipality shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision and order, which shall be
accompanied by a certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision and order was issued in
accordance with this Division and the applicable municipal ordinance. Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may be
by any method provided by Section 2-203 of the Code of Civil Procedure or by certified mail, return receipt requested, provided
that the total amount of fines, other sanctions and costs imposed by the findings, decision and order does not exceed $2500. If
the court is satisfied that the findings, decision and order were entered in accordance with the requirements of this Division and
the applicable municipal ordinance, and that the property owner had an opportunity for a hearing under this Division and for
judicial review as provided in this Division: (1) the court shall render judgment in favor of the municipality and against the
property owner for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and order, plus costs. Such judgment shall have the same
effect and may be enforced in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money; and (2) the court may also issue
such other orders and injunctions as are requested by the municipality to enforce the order of the hearing officer to correct a
code violation.
(Source: P.A. 89-372, eff. 1-1-96.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-12) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-12)
Section 12. Sanctions applicable to owner - Property. The order to correct a code violation and the sanctions imposed by a
municipality as the result of a finding of a code violation under this Division shall attach to the property as well as to the owner of
the property, so that a finding of a code violation against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying or transferring the property to
another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner of property takes subject to the findings, decision and order of a hearing
officer under this Division.
(Source: Laws 1967, p. 1905.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-12.1) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-12.1)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 12/251
Section 12.1. (a) The owner of a building located in a municipality in a county having a population in excess of 100,000 inhabitants
who, directly or indirectly, has collected, or caused to be collected, rentals from an occupant of that building during a period in
which the number of apartments or family units in that building exceeded the number permitted for that building by an ordinance of
the municipality in which the building is located, is liable to any such occupant in an amount equal to not more than 3 times the
amount of any rentals paid by any such occupant, or in his behalf, after January 1, 1970, together with court costs and reasonable
attorney's fees. If the occupant is a recipient of public aid under Article III, IV, or VI of "the Illinois Public Aid Code", approved April
11, 1967, as amended, in whose behalf vendor payment of the rental was made by the Illinois Department of Public Aid, the
Department of Human Services (acting as successor to the Department of Public Aid under the Department of Human Services
Act), or a local governmental unit, as the case may be, the liability as herein provided is to the Illinois Department of Public Aid, the
Department of Human Services (acting as successor to the Department of Public Aid under the Department of Human Services
Act), or the local governmental unit making the vendor payment of the rental.
(b) For the purposes of this Section:
(1) "Owner" means the legal or beneficial owner of a building.
(2) "Family unit" means a room or group of rooms used or intended to be used as a housekeeping unit for living, sleeping,
cooking and eating. The fact that any such family unit is used or intended to be used with cooking or eating accommodations in
common with another family unit in any such building does not affect liability hereunder.
(c) No liability accrues under this Section until 30 days after the owner of record of a building has been notified in writing that such
owner is in violation of any such municipal ordinance. Such notice shall be personally served upon such owner of record or sent by
registered mail to the last known address of such owner.
(Source: P.A. 89-507, eff. 7-1-97.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-12.2) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-12.2)
Section 12.2. (a) A person who contracts with the federal government or any of its agencies, including without limitation the
Department of Housing and Urban Development, to care for vacant residential real estate shall be responsible for maintaining the
property to prevent and correct municipal health and safety code violations.
(b) A person who intentionally violates this Section is guilty of a business offense and shall be fined not less than $501 and not
more than $1,000.
(Source: P.A. 86-315.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-13) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-13)
Section 13. Adoption of Division by municipality. This Division may be adopted by a municipality by incorporating the provisions of
this Division in an ordinance and passing and publishing the ordinance in the manner provided in Division 2 of Article 1 of this Act.
(Source: Laws 1967, p. 1905.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-14) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-14)
Section 14. Application for grants. Any municipality adopting this Division may make application to the Department of Commerce
and Economic Opportunity for grants to help defray the cost of establishing and maintaining a code hearing department as
provided in this Division. The application for grants shall be in the manner and form prescribed by the Department of Commerce
and Economic Opportunity.
(Source: P.A. 94-793, eff. 5-19-06.)
(Ord. 0-18-03, 1-22-2018)
1-4B-2: HEARING DEPARTMENT CREATED:
The Corporate Authorities of the City of Colona do hereby establish a Building Code Violation Hearing Department as a separate and
independent agency within the City of Colona. The function of the Building Code Violation Hearing Department is to expedite the
prosecution and correction of Building Code violations and to collect fines, costs and attorneys fees imposed, in the manner set forth in
this article. The Building Code Hearing Department shall be known as the Colona Building Code Enforcement Department, hereinafter,
"CBCED". The CBCED shall consist of a Hearing Officer and such support personnel as shall be necessary to effect the purposes of
this article. The Hearing Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor, provided, however, that the Hearing Officer shall be an attorney
licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois for at least three (3) years. (Ord. 0-18-03, 1-22-2018)
Chapter 5
MAYOR
1-5-1: ELECTION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 13/251
The mayor shall be elected for a four (4) year term, and shall serve until his successor is elected and qualified as is provided by
statute1. The term of office for mayor shall begin one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) midnight May 1 and shall end at twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight April 30. (1997 Code)
1-5-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Generally: The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city, and shall preside over the meetings of the city council and shall
perform such duties as may be required of him by statute and ordinance. The mayor shall have supervision over all of the executive
officers and employees of the city, and shall have the power and authority to inspect all books and records pertaining to city affairs
and kept by any officer and employee of the city at any reasonable time.
B. Appointment Of Officers: The mayor shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the council, all officers of the city whose
election and appointment is not otherwise provided for. Any vacancies occurring in an appointive office shall be filled in the same
manner.
C. Designation Of Officer's Duties: Whenever there is a dispute as to the respective duties or powers of any appointed officer of the city,
this dispute shall be settled by the mayor after consultation with all city officers involved and the council; and the mayor shall have
the power to delegate to any appointed officer any duty which is to be performed when no specific officer has been directed to
perform that duty. (1997 Code)
D. Tax Increment Finance Administrator: The tax increment finance administrator duties may be a part of the mayoral duties as stated
within this code with compensation to be set at two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) each month and an additional twenty dollars
($20.00) for each development meeting attended in addition to his/her regular monthly salary beginning May 1, 2005. The salary
may be determined by city council from time to time and shall be paid from the appropriate tax increment financing fund as the act
allows. (Ord. 19-04, 10-25-2004)
1-5-3: MAYOR PRO TEM:
During a temporary absence or disability of the mayor, the city council shall elect one of its members to act as mayor pro tem who,
during such absence or disability, shall possess the powers of mayor as is provided by statute2. (1997 Code)
1-5-4: ACTING MAYOR:
In the event of a vacancy in the office of mayor, the council may appoint one of its members as acting mayor to serve until the vacancy
is filled at a regular or special election as is provided by law3. (1997 Code)
1-5-5: FORMAL OCCASIONS:
The mayor shall act for and on behalf of the city on formal occasions and receptions but in the mayor's absence or inability to attend to
any such function, the city council may select any other city officer to so act. (1997 Code)
Chapter 6
ALDERMANIC COUNCIL
1-6-1: ELECTION1:
There shall be two (2) aldermen to serve each ward, elected by the voters of the wards in which the aldermen reside, and such elected
aldermen shall serve for four (4) year terms. The term of office for aldermen shall begin one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M.
May 1 and shall end at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight April 30. (1997 Code)
1-6-2: MEETINGS2:
A. Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the city council shall be held twice a month on such days and at such times as the city
council shall determine and announce at the commencement of the fiscal year, May 1 of each year. In the event the date and time of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 14/251
a scheduled meeting falls on a legal holiday or cannot be held on the date and time scheduled, the council shall announce the date
and time at the next preceding meeting and shall notify the news media of the date and time such meeting is rescheduled.
B. Special Meetings: Special meetings of the council may be called by the mayor or three (3) aldermen; provided, that a written notice of
such meeting shall be given to each member of the council at least forty eight (48) hours before the time set for the meeting.
Provided further, that in case all of the elective members of the council are present at any special meeting, then the requirement of
notice shall be unnecessary and shall be deemed waived.
C. Presiding Officer: The mayor shall be the presiding officer of the council at all regular or special meetings and when the council meets
as a committee of the whole. (1997 Code)
D. Records: As is customary and traditional throughout the history of city clerks, the city clerk, or the deputy clerk in the clerk's absence,
will attend the city council meetings and prepare the minutes for open and closed sessions as prescribed by the open meetings act.
The minutes must contain the date, time, and place of the meeting; the members of the public body recorded as either present (and
noted if physical or by electronic means) or absent; a synopsis of discussions on all matters proposed, deliberated, or decided, and a
record of any and all votes taken. The minutes should be a record of what took place and nothing else. The preservation of minutes
and the journal of ordinances and resolutions are customary duties of the city clerk or the deputy clerk in the clerk's absence. Any
recording of the meeting will be the responsibility of the clerk, or the deputy clerk in the clerk's absence. (Ord. 0-16-3, 4-25-2016)
E. Disturbing Meetings: It shall be unlawful to disturb any meeting of the council or of any committee thereof, or to behave in a disorderly
manner at any such meeting. (1997 Code)
1-6-2-1: ELECTRONIC ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS RULES:
A. Rules Statement: It is the decision of the city of Colona council that any member of the council may attend any open or closed
meeting of the city of Colona via electronic means (such as by telephone, video or internet connection) provided that such
attendance is in compliance with these rules and any applicable laws.
B. Prerequisites: A member of the city council may attend a meeting electronically if the member meets the following conditions:
1. The member should notify the clerk at least twenty four (24) hours before the meeting, unless impractical, so that necessary
communications equipment can be arranged. Inability to make the necessary technical arrangements will result in denial of a
request for remote attendance.
2. The member must assert one of the following three (3) reasons why he or she is unable to physically attend the meeting:
a. The member cannot attend because of personal illness or disability; or
b. The member cannot attend because of employment purposes or the business of the City of Colona; or
c. The member cannot attend because of a family or other emergency.
C. Authorization To Participate:
1. The Clerk, after receiving the electronic attendance request, shall inform the Corporate Authority of the request for electronic
attendance.
2. After establishing that there is a quorum physically present at a meeting where a member of the City of Colona Council desires to
attend electronically, the presiding officer shall state that: a) a notice was received by a member of the City of Colona in
accordance with these rules, and b) the member will be deemed authorized to attend the meeting electronically unless a motion
objecting to the member's electronic attendance is made, seconded, and approved by two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the City
of Colona Council physically present at the meeting. If no such motion is made and seconded or if any such motion fails to achieve
the required vote by the members of the City Council physically present at the meeting, then the request by the member to attend
the meeting electronically shall be deemed approved by the City of Colona Council and the presiding officer shall declare the
requesting member present. After such declaration by the presiding officer, the question of a member's electronic attendance may
not be reconsidered.
D. Adequate Equipment Required: The member participating electronically and other members of the City of Colona must be able to
communicate effectively, and members of the audience must be able to hear all communications at the meeting site. Before allowing
electronic attendance at any meeting, the City of Colona shall provide equipment adequate to accomplish this objective at the
meeting site.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 15/251
E. Minutes: Any member attending electronically shall be considered an off site attendee and counted as present electronically for that
meeting if the member is allowed to attend. The meeting minutes shall also reflect and state specifically whether each member is
physically present or present by electronic means.
F. Rights Of Remote Member: A member permitted to attend electronically will be able to express his or her comments during the
meeting and participate in the same capacity as those members physically present, subject to all general meeting guidelines and
procedures previously adopted and adhered to. The member attending electronically shall be heard, considered, and counted as to
any vote taken. Accordingly, the name of any member attending electronically shall be called during any vote taken, and his or her
vote counted and recorded by the Clerk and placed in the minutes for the corresponding meeting. A member attending electronically
may leave a meeting and return as in the case of any member, provided the member attending electronically shall announce his or
her leaving and returning.
G. Committees, Boards And Commissions: These rules shall apply to all committees, boards and commissions established by authority
of the City of Colona. (Ord. 0-05-13, 11-11-2013, eff. 11-11-2013)
1-6-3: QUORUM:
A majority of the elected members of the Council shall constitute a quorum thereof, but no ordinance or measure for the expenditure of
money shall be passed except on the favorable vote of a majority of the elected members as provided by statute3. (1997 Code)
1-6-4: COMMITTEES:
A. Standing Committees: The following shall be the standing committees of the City Council:
1. Administrative/Finance Committee: This committee considers all matters of finance, fiscal policy, budgets, appropriations, tax
levies and bond issues, and economic development issues. This committee shall also promote community awareness through
effective two-way communication between the City, the City Council, residents, business entities, local community organizations,
and surrounding government entities in addition to identifying economic development opportunities.
2. Public Safety Committee: This committee considers all matters relating to the Police Department and all other public safety
concerns.
3. Public Works Committee: This committee deals with issues regarding the City Streets Department, Water Department, Sewer
Department, wastewater treatment plant, Building Department (including the upkeep of all City owned buildings and grounds),
building inspections, zoning enforcement, Park Department, as well as all engineering aspects for the City.
Colona's Scott Family Park is an area within the City, approximately eighty (80) acres in size, consisting of a campground,
clubhouse with swimming pool, pavilion, lodging facilities, playgrounds, etc. This committee shall oversee all maintenance and
administration aspects of the park and report such to the City Council.
B. Special Committees: Special committees shall be created from time to time, as deemed necessary or directed by the Mayor and/or
City Council.
C. Membership:
1. Appointment/Chairman: The Mayor shall appoint the members of all standing and special committees, with consent and approval
of the City Council. The Mayor shall designate the Chairman of each committee. Each Alderman shall be appointed to a minimum
of one committee.
2. Composition: Every committee of the City Council shall consist of at least three (3) members, including the Chairman, unless the
Council shall provide otherwise. City staff members shall assist committees as needed.
D. Meetings: All standing committees shall meet at least monthly to conduct business, unless determined by the committee that
additional meetings are necessary. The committees shall set their meetings in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act and/or
other appropriate laws and statutes. (Ord. 0-17-7, 5-8-2017)
1-6-5: RULES OF ORDER:
A. Order Of Business: The agenda shall be adopted at the first meeting of each fiscal year.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 16/251
B. Rescinded Action: No vote or action of the Council shall be rescinded at any special meeting unless there be present at such special
meeting as many members of the Council as were present at the meeting when such vote on such was taken, as provided by
statute4.
C. Resolutions: Any resolution submitted to the City Council shall be reduced to writing before voted upon when such request is made
by any two (2) members of the Council. (1997 Code)
D. Addressing Meetings: Only the Mayor, the City Clerk, the City Attorney, or members of the Council, or other elected officials of the
City of Colona, or employees shall address the body at any regular meeting or special meeting of the Council that is in progress,
except as allowed during public comment, or that person is recognized by the Mayor to speak. (Ord. 0-16-3, 4-25-2016)
E. Suspension Of Rules: The rules of order, other than those prescribed by statute, may be suspended at any time by consent of the
majority of the members present at any meeting.
F. Robert's Rules Of Order Revised: Except when in conflict with the provisions set forth in this section, "Robert's Rules of Order
Revised" shall govern the deliberations of the Council. (1997 Code)
G. Public Comment:
1. A public comment period not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes with any speaker being limited to three (3) minutes to address the
body of the Council to be held during each regularly scheduled or special City Council meetings, and at any Municipal committee
meeting. This right to speak does not apply to closed sessions.
2. Anyone desiring to address the city council/committee must complete and submit a public comment card available at the meeting
location up to fifteen (15) minutes prior to the start of the meeting. The person must state his/her name. (Ord. 0-16-3, 4-25-2016)
3. There shall be a maximum of five (5) speakers in any public comment period. In the event more than five (5) public comment
cards are submitted, the mayor/committee chair shall randomly select five (5) speakers. Comments are limited to three (3) minutes
per speaker. A speaker cannot give his or her allotted minutes to another speaker to increase that person's allotted time. (Ord. 0-
03-11, 11-14-2011)
4. Speakers will be acknowledged by the mayor/chairman and shall address the city council/committee in a respectful manner from
the designated area. Minutes are not transferable to another speaker. (Ord. 0-16-3, 4-25-2016)
5. Statements are to be directed to the city council/committee as a whole and not to individual council/committee members or
individual city staff. Public comment is not intended to require council/committee members or city staff to provide any answer to the
speaker. Discussions between speakers and members of the audience will not be allowed.
6. After the speaker has made his or her statement, he or she shall be seated with no further debate, dialogue or comment. (Ord. 0-
03-11, 11-14-2011)
1-6-6: PUBLIC RECORDINGS OF MEETINGS:
A. Right To Record: The public has the right to record open meetings conducted by the city or its committees whether by audio or video
equipment as pursuant to the open meetings act.
B. Right To Set Rules: The city reserves the right to set rules to govern the recording of open meetings by the city council or committees
as long as they are in accordance with the open meetings act.
C. Acknowledgment Of Recording: Any person who is recording must inform the council/committee that a recording will be taking place,
so the placement of equipment, if needed, can be adjusted, so it does not interfere with the conducting of business, or the audience's
ability to hear and see the meeting, and to ensure only the open sessions are recorded. This includes elected officials or city staff.
Just placing a recording device within view of a fellow official or city staff does not constitute informing the council/committee of the
intent to record. Notice will be given by the mayor to all in attendance that recordings are taking place.
D. Placement Of Equipment: The placement of the equipment must not interfere with anyone's view, hearing, or impede traffic flow or
jeopardize safety of others.
E. Time Allowed To Record: Recordings of any open meeting may only commence from the call to order until adjournment. Recording
must cease as soon as the meeting is adjourned. This includes recordings done by elected officials and or city staff that are done on
their own behalf.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 17/251
F. Closed Sessions: No recordings may be made of a closed session by the public or by an elected official, and/or city staff on their own
behalf as pursuant to the open meetings act.
G. Sharing Of Recordings: Elected officials, and/or city staff, who make recordings on their own behalf, agree to give a copy to the city if
something happens to the city recording. The city will accept the cost of making a copy if there is any cost involved. (Ord. 0-16-3, 4-
25-2016)
Chapter 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1-7-1: BONDS1:
A. Bonds Required: Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, the mayor, clerk, treasurer and aldermen shall execute a
bond2 with surety, to be approved by the corporate authorities.
B. Faithful Performance: These bonds shall be payable to the city in the penal sum as directed herein, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the duties of the officers and the payment of all monies received by such officers, according to law and also the
ordinances of the city.
C. Payment: The premiums for all bonds provided for herein shall be paid for by the city and shall be considered as a regular expense
against the general corporate fund.
D. Filing: All bonds, with surety thereon, as provided herein, shall be filed with the city clerk excepting the bond of the clerk which shall
be filed with the city treasurer.
E. Bond Amounts:
1. Mayor: The mayor's bond, with surety thereon, shall be in the sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000,00).
2. Treasurer: The treasurer's bond shall be an amount of money that is not less than three (3) times the latest federal census
population or any subsequent census figure used for motor fuel tax purposes.
3. Clerk: The clerk's bond, with surety thereon, shall be in the sum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
4. Police Officers: All police officers, including the police matron, shall have bond, with surety thereon, in the sum of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00). (1997 Code)
1-7-2: SALARIES:
A. Elected Officials:
1. Mayor: The salary of the mayor shall be in the amount of four thousand eight hundred dollars ($4,800.00) per year payable in
twelve (12) monthly payments of four hundred dollars ($400.00) for duties as mayor and liquor control commissioner.
2. Aldermen: The salary of the alderman of the city shall be in the amount of two thousand one hundred dollars ($2,100.00) per year
payable in twelve (12) monthly payments of one hundred seventy five dollars ($175.00) for duties as aldermen.
3. Clerk: The salary of the city clerk shall be in the amount of four thousand two hundred dollars ($4,200.00) per year payable in
twelve (12) monthly payments of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for duties as city clerk. (1997 Code)
B. Appointed Officers And Employees:
1. Treasurer: The salary of the city treasurer shall be in the amount of three thousand five hundred seventy seven dollars ($3,577.00)
per year payable in twelve (12) monthly payments of two hundred ninety eight dollars eight cents ($298.08) for duties as city
treasurer.
2. Attorney: The retainer of the city attorney shall be fixed by the city council as per annual budget, per year, for the ordinary and
customary services of said city attorney. Service rendered to the city in addition to the ordinary and customary service shall be
paid as the city attorney and city council agree.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 18/251
3. Collector: The salary of the city collector shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the city council.
4. Animal Control Officer: The salary of the animal control officer shall be set by the city council as per the annual budget.
5. Officers And Employees: All appointed officers' and employees' pay shall be set by the city council as per the annual budget.
(1997 Code)
1-7-3: REIMBURSEMENT RATES:
A. Mileage: All city officials and employees shall be reimbursed at a rate of thirty cents ($0.30) per mile as a mileage rate while on city
business and not using city owned vehicles. Mileage slips shall be presented monthly to the council.
B. Lost Time: Appointed officers and employees shall be reimbursed at a maximum rate of ten dollars fifty cents ($10.50) per hour or
their regular rate of pay, whichever is less, for lost time from their employment. This rate may be changed from time to time by the
city council. (1997 Code)
1-7-4: BACKGROUND CHECKS:
A. Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to protect the public by requiring police background checks of all employees and certain
independent contractors, together called applicants, having contact with the public to ensure that the employees and independent
contractors do not have criminal backgrounds, that, because of their position or association with the city, could endanger the public.
B. Condition Of Employment: Prior to the hiring of any employee, and as a condition of employment, employees shall submit to a police
background check pursuant to this section to ensure that they have no felony convictions or crimes involving truth or veracity. The
conviction will not be deemed a disqualification from the position if the sentence, including probation time, has been completed ten
(10) years prior to the start of the employment.
C. Sex Related Or Crimes Involving Children: Any independent contractor and/or the contractor's employees who will have any contact
with youth, shall also submit to a police background check, pursuant to this section, to ensure that they are free from convictions of
any sex related crimes or crimes involving children.
D. Conduct Of Checks; Report: The background checks shall be conducted by the chief of police and his/her designee and the report
shall be made by the chief of police to the mayor. If the position is for the chief of police, the mayor shall designate an officer to
conduct the investigation and the report shall be made to the mayor. The mayor shall then notify the employee or independent
contractor if the background check was or was not satisfactory.
E. Appeal:
1. Appeal To Council: Any potential employee or independent contractor who would otherwise not qualify for employment or work
pursuant to this section shall have the right to appeal to the city council for a final determination.
2. Request For Appeal: The request for appeal must be made within seven (7) days of being notified by the mayor that the
background check disclosed unsatisfactory information.
3. Hearing: The council shall take evidence and consider any mitigating factors and the position and job duties for which the
individual is being considered. The council shall be the final judge of whether the applicant meets the criteria of this section.
4. Vote Of Council: The decision shall be by majority vote with the mayor breaking any ties. If the applicant is found not qualified
under this section, the council may still vote to accept the applicant but only by a two-thirds (2/3) vote. (1997 Code)
1-7-5: ELECTRONIC OR DIGITAL COMMUNICATION:
A. Definitions:
ELECTED OFFICIALS: Include those elected or appointed to an elected position such as, but not limited to:
1. Corporate authorities.
2. Mayor.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 19/251
3. City clerk.
4. Aldermen/alderwomen.
ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS: Any means of communication that takes place using any type of electronic or digital
communication such as, but not limited to:
1. E-mails.
2. Text messages.
3. Instant messaging services.
4. Social media communication.
B. Electronic Communication Policy: All electronic communication for elected officials will be governed by the same set of rules set forth
in the employee handbook. Employees are expected to have city e-mail accounts to conduct business and are warned not to forward
city confidential information. Elected officials will conduct business in the same manner.
All electronic communications that need to be examined due to a freedom of information act request or open meetings act review will
be governed by Illinois state statutes or approved policies of the attorney general's office of Illinois. An elected official will be allowed
to be present while his/her personal electronic communication is examined by a FOIA/OMA certified city official or staff member.
(Ord. 0-16-2, 3-28-2016)
ARTICLE A. CITY CLERK
1-7A-1: TERM:
The clerk shall be elected for a four (4) year term, and shall serve until his/her successor is elected and qualified as is provided by
statute1. The term of office for city clerk shall begin at one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) midnight May 1 and shall end at twelve
o'clock (12:00) midnight April 30. (1997 Code)
1-7A-2: DUTIES:
The duties of the city clerk shall be as follows2:
A. Office: The clerk shall keep his/her office at the city hall and his/her office hours shall be as set from time to time by the council.
B. Revenues; Annual Report:
1. Supervision: The clerk shall exercise a general supervision over all the officers of the city charged in any manner with the receipt,
collection, or disbursement of corporation revenue, and the collection and return of all such revenues to the treasurer.
2. Custody And Control Of Records: The clerk shall have the charge, custody and control of all deeds, leases, warrants, vouchers,
books and papers of any kind, the custody and control of which is not by this code given to any other officers.
3. Annual Report:
a. Estimate Of Expenses: The clerk shall, on or before May 1 in each year, and before the annual appropriations are to be made
by the council, submit to the council a report of his/her estimates, as nearly as may be, of the monies necessary to defray the
expenses of the corporation during the current fiscal year3. The clerk shall, in said report, class the different objects and
branches of expenditures, giving, as nearly as may be, the amount required for each. (1997 Code)
b. Authority To Require Statements: For the purpose of making such report, the clerk is authorized to require of all officers their
statement of the condition and expense of their respective offices or departments, with any proposed improvements and
probable expense thereof, all contracts made and unfinished, and the amount of any and all unexpended funds shown in the
preceding year budget. (Ord. 0-15-017, 9-14-2015)
c. Aggregate Income: The clerk shall, in such report, show the aggregate income of the preceding fiscal year from all sources, the
amount of liabilities outstanding upon which interest is to be paid, the bonds and debts payable during the year, when due and
when payable.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 20/251
d. Additional Information: In such report, the clerk shall give such other information to the council as he/she may deem necessary
to the end that the council may fully understand the money exigencies and demands upon the corporation for the current year.
C. Attendance At Council Meetings: The clerk shall attend all meetings of the council and shall keep a full and correct record of all of its
proceedings and shall perform all duties which may be required of him/her by law, and all other duties which, by usage and custom,
devolve upon clerks of incorporated bodies.
D. Administration Of Oaths: The clerk shall also be authorized to administer oaths.
E. Seal And Attest Corporate Documents: The clerk shall seal and attest all contracts of the city, and all licenses, permits and other
documents which require this formality.
F. Accounts: The clerk shall keep accounts showing all money received by him/her, and the source and disposition thereof; and such
other accounts as may be required by statute or the applicable provisions of this code.
G. Deposit Of Funds: The clerk, upon receipt by him/her of any money in payment for licenses or permits of any kind or nature
whatsoever, shall deposit the money in the treasury in the proper account thereof.
H. Records:
1. Licenses And Permits: In addition to the record of ordinances and other records which the clerk is required by statute to keep, the
clerk shall keep a register of all licenses and permits issued, and a record of the payment thereon.
2. Officers And Employees: The clerk shall keep a record showing all of the officers and regular employees of the city, and such
other records as may be required by the council.
3. Index Of Documents: The clerk shall keep and maintain a proper index to all documents and records kept by the clerk so that
ready access thereto and use thereof may be had.
4. Council Proceedings: The clerk shall keep all records, papers, ordinances, notes and proceedings of the council, and of the city
during the recess of the council, and of all elections of the city officers.
5. Ordinances: The clerk shall record and index in a book to be kept for that purpose, all ordinances passed by the council, and at
the foot of the record of each ordinance so recorded shall make a memorandum of the date of the passage and of the publication
of the ordinance, which record and memorandum, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the passage and
legal publication of such ordinances for all purposes whatsoever. The clerk shall have all ordinances published immediately after
their passage when required by law so to do.
I. Removal Of Records: The clerk shall not suffer any records, papers or other writings belonging to the city to be taken out of his/her
office.
J. Custodian Of Corporate Seal: The clerk shall be the custodian of the city seal and shall affix its impression on documents whenever
required. The corporate seal of the city shall be the seal heretofore established.
K. Additional Duties: In addition to the duties herein provided, the clerk shall perform such other duties and functions as may be required
by statute or the provisions of this code. (1997 Code)
1-7A-3: DEPUTY CLERK:
A. Office Established: There shall be established in the city the appointed office of deputy clerk, appointed by the city clerk with the
advice and consent of the city council4.
B. Duties; Compensation: The deputy clerk shall perform those duties and functions as provided by law5 or such duties and functions as
prescribed by the city clerk or by ordinance adopted by the city council; and shall receive such compensation as the council may
provide for in the annual budget. (1997 Code)
ARTICLE B. CITY TREASURER
1-7B-1: APPOINTMENT:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 21/251
Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-20-5, the position of City Treasurer shall be an appointed position. Such appointment
shall be made by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. (1997 Code)
ARTICLE C. CITY ATTORNEY
1-7C-1: OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of city attorney, an executive office of the city. The city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor with
the approval of the council1. (1997 Code)
1-7C-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Suits And Actions: The city attorney shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law or equity to which the city may be a
party, or in which it may be interested, or which may be brought against, or by any officer of the city on behalf of the city, or in the
capacity of such person as an officer of the city.
B. Legal Advisor: The city attorney shall be the legal advisor of the city, and shall render advice on all legal questions affecting the city,
whenever requested to do so by any city official. Upon request by the mayor or council, the city attorney shall reduce such opinion to
writing.
C. Drafting Ordinances And Contracts: It shall be the duty of the city attorney to draft or supervise the phraseology of any contracts,
leases or other documents or instruments, to which the city may be a party; and to draft ordinances and resolutions covering any
subjects within the powers of the city. (1997 Code)
ARTICLE D. CITY COLLECTOR
(Rep. by Ord. 0-22-14, 2-23-2015)
ARTICLE E. BUDGET OFFICER
1-7E-1: OFFICE CREATED:
There shall be established the appointed office of Budget Officer, which position shall be filled by designation of the Mayor with approval
of the City Council1. (1997 Code)
1-7E-2: COMPENSATION:
The Budget Officer shall receive compensation in such sum as the Council shall from time to time provide. (1997 Code)
ARTICLE F. CITY ADMINISTRATOR
(Rep. by Ord. 0-23-14, 2-23-2015)
ARTICLE G. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR-TAX INCREMENT
FINANCE COORDINATOR
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 22/251
(Rep. by Ord. 0-21-14, 2-23-2015)
ARTICLE H. FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT OFFICERS
1-7H-1: OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby established the office of information officer for the city of Colona. (Ord. 0-15-010, 7-13-2015)
1-7H-2: APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
There shall be a minimum of two (2) freedom of information officers appointed. A minimum of one shall be appointed from the Colona
police department, and a minimum of one shall be appointed from the city of Colona clerk's office. Each FOIA officer may appoint deputy
FOIA officers to assist in the preparation of FOIA responses.
The terms of the office for the FOIA officers shall be consistent with the term of the mayor who appoints them. The term of the office
shall terminate either at the pleasure of the mayor or at the end of the term of office when the sitting mayor shall end. (Ord. 0-15-010, 7-
13-2015)
1-7H-3: DUTIES:
The FOIA officer's responsibilities shall be as follows:
A. The FOIA officer's responsibilities are to receive FOIA requests from the public and to send responses in compliance with FOIA. All
FOIA requests should be submitted to a designated FOIA officer. FOIA requires that each public body appoint one or more FOIA
officers who must complete an electronic training developed by the attorney general's PAC.
B. The FOIA officer will note the date of receipt of a request, compute the deadline for a response and note that date on the request,
maintain a copy of the request, maintain files of communication with requestors and copies of requests and attend required training.
Each FOIA officer for a public body must develop and make available upon request a list of documents maintained by the public
body. (Ord. 0-15-010, 7-13-2015)
ARTICLE I. CITY HALL OFFICE MANAGER
1-7I-1: CREATION OF EMPLOYEE POSITION:
The employee position of City Hall Office Manager is hereby created, which position shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval
of the City Council. The City Hall Office Manager shall hold office at the pleasure of the Mayor and the City Council. The City Hall Office
Manager shall perform his/her duties under the direction of the Mayor and the Finance/Administrative/Personnel Committee.
A. Hiring Procedure: The Finance/Administrative/Personnel Committee, at the direction of and in consultation with the Mayor, will solicit
applications/resumes, review all applications, check all references, and interview the most qualified applicant(s). The Mayor shall
appoint the successful candidate with the approval of the City Council. (Ord. 0-18-11, 6-25-2018)
1-7I-2: INITIATION OF REMOVAL:
Either the Mayor or any member of the City Council may initiate the removal of the City Hall Office Manager. (Ord. 0-18-11, 6-25-2018)
1-7I-3: REMOVAL:
Once either the Mayor or any member of the City Council initiates removal of the City Hall Office Manager at a regular meeting the City
Hall Office Manager shall be subject to removal only by a favorable vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the City Council.
(Ord. 0-18-11, 6-25-2018)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 23/251
1-7I-4: PURPOSE OF THE POSITION:
Under the direction of the Mayor and the Finance/Administrative/Personnel Committee, in consultation with the City Clerk, the City Hall
Office Manager is responsible for organizing, reviewing, and coordinating office operations, policy and procedures in order to ensure
organizational effectiveness, accuracy, and efficiency to be able to provide all the necessary information to the City Council for their
deliberation prior to any action being taken, and any additional duties as may be assigned by the Mayor or his designee. (Ord. 0-18-11,
6-25-2018)
1-7I-5: COMPENSATION:
The compensation of the City Hall Office Manager starting salary shall be determined by Finance/Administrative/Personnel Committee
in consultation with the Mayor and with the approval of City Council. Any increases in compensation will be determined by the
Finance/Administrative/Personnel Committee in consultation with the Mayor and with the approval of City Council. (Ord. 0-18-11, 6-25-
2018)
1-7I-6: RESTRICTION ON PARTICIPATION OF PARTISAN POLITICS:
The City Hall Office Manager shall not, while being employed by the City, engage in partisan politics in connection with the City
elections. (Ord. 0-18-11, 6-25-2018)
1-7I-7: RESIDENCY:
There shall be no requirement for residency. (Ord. 0-18-11, 6-25-2018)
1-7I-8: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. Administrative Policies, Procedures And Personnel: Supervises the office administrative policies, procedures and personnel.
B. Develops Employee Job Descriptions, Appraisal And Review System: Develops and maintains office job descriptions, office
employee performance appraisal and review system.
C. City Municipal Systems: Supervises, monitors, and assists the staff with City Municipal systems of budgeting, payroll, accounts
payable, and accounts receivable.
D. Compliance With Statutes And Ordinances: Reviews journal entries, ordinances, resolutions, minutes, and motions for accuracy and
ensures compliance with Illinois State Statutes and City ordinances. Confers with and provides assistance and information to the
City Attorney.
E. Budget And Fiscal Concerns: Assists and works closely with the Budget Director on the formulation of budgets and assists with
budget and fiscal concerns as necessary.
F. TIF Districts: Administers the existing TIF districts. Provides assistance and information to City TIF Attorney. Will serve as the initial
contact/coordinator for all prospective developers and provide the information immediately to all Corporate Authorities.
G. City Audit: Coordinates and assists with the year end independent audit for the City; assisting City officials and employees with
preparing various schedules, spreadsheets, and possibly financial statements and notes to the financial statements for use as
supporting documentation for the external auditors and for use in the City's annual report.
H. Business Relationships: The position also coordinates and facilitates favorable external business relationships with the varying
contacts of the position, will serve as the initial contact and coordinator for job related vendors, external auditors, attorneys, banking
and financial institutions representatives, insurance providers and pension consultants, and Federal, State, County and local
authorities/officials.
I. Website Maintenance Of Information And Organization: Will serve as the website webmaster.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 24/251
J. Year Planner: Develops, maintains, and incorporates a year planner to facilitate planning and documentation of City Council business,
agendas, upcoming annual renewals of standard contracts and investments, and local and regional events.
K. Conventions And Seminars: At the Corporate Authorities' direction will attend Municipal government educational conventions or
seminars such as the Illinois Municipal League, TIF educational conventions or seminars or any other educational
conventions/seminars as the Corporate Authorities deem necessary.
L. Budget Documents: Assists with the formulation of the official budget documents and annual appropriation ordinance and provides all
necessary documents to department heads and City officials.
M. City Council Meetings: Will attend all City Council meetings and assist with any requests for information and equipment. Will be able
to flex regular daily work schedule.
N. Committees: Staff member of the Finance Committee and serves on other City committees as directed by the Mayor.
O. Confidentiality; Appearance: Maintains confidentiality where needed and maintains a professional appearance and demeanor.
P. Other Duties: Any and all other duties as assigned by the Mayor or his designee. (Ord. 0-18-11, 6-25-2018)
1-7I-9: LIAISON:
Build and maintain strong relationships between Henry County, the City and the fire district, library district, the Township, the school
district, the Chamber of Commerce, business owners, elected and appointed City officials, City employees, and the general public. (Ord.
0-18-11, 6-25-2018)
1-7I-10: PROBATION PERIOD:
Probation period will be one year from the date of hire. (Ord. 0-18-11, 6-25-2018)
1-7I-11: EMPLOYEE BENEFITS:
The City Hall Office Manager shall be entitled to employee benefits, such as vacation, sick leave, and health insurance in accordance
with the City's employee handbook, as amended. (Ord. 0-18-11, 6-25-2018)
1-7I-12: QUALIFICATIONS:
The City Hall Office Manager shall have the following minimum qualifications: a two (2) year associates degree in a business office
related field and/or any similar combination of education, training and experience. (Ord. 0-18-11, 6-25-2018)
Chapter 8
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
1-8-1: ELECTIONS:
Elections for Municipal officers shall be held as provided by statute, and at the time prescribed by statute1. (1997 Code)
1-8-2: CONTEST OF ELECTION:
A. Alderman, Contest Of Election: The election of any Alderman may be contested by any elector of the City, and the proceedings shall
be in accordance with the general laws of the State regulating the mode of contesting elections of County officials, so far as the
same may be applicable. The Mayor and Council shall be the tribunal before which such contest shall be heard and their decision
shall be final.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 25/251
B. Statement Of Contest; Filing: Whenever any person shall desire to contest the right of another to hold the office of Alderman, he/she
shall, within thirty (30) days after the person whose election is to be contested is declared elected, file with the Clerk a statement in
writing, briefly stating the points on which he/she will contest the election, which statement shall be verified by affidavit.
C. Notice To Respondent: Upon filing such statement, such contestant shall also serve a copy thereof upon the person whose election
he/she intends to contest, and in case such person is absent from the City, or cannot be found, then by leaving a copy of the
statement at such person's usual place of abode, with some member of the family of the age of ten (10) years or upwards, and
informing such person of the contest thereof.
D. Taking Of Testimony: When said statement shall have been filed and served as aforesaid, it shall be the duty of the Mayor and
Council, upon the request of either party, to meet and affix the time and place for taking the depositions of witnesses when either
party may proceed to take the testimony of any witness, in the manner provided by law for taking depositions in courts of records,
before any judge, magistrate, or notary public, at the time and place so fixed and continue the same from day to day thereafter, until
the testimony shall have been taken.
E. Proofs Taken And Filed: In all cases of such contested elections, the proofs shall be taken and filed with the Clerk within sixty (60)
days from the day fixed by the Council for taking the same; provided, the Council may, from time to time upon sufficient cause
shown, extend the time for taking and filing such proofs. No testimony shall be taken or proof received or produced on the hearing
before the Mayor and Council, except upon the points set forth in the statement required to be filed with the Clerk and served upon
the respondent.
F. Procedure Of Board: When all the evidence shall have been taken, as aforesaid, the same shall be forthwith filed in the office of the
Clerk, who shall at once lay the same before the Mayor and Council, and the latter shall, without delay, refer the same to some
appropriate committee to examine and report thereon. Upon such report being made, the Mayor and Council shall hear the case,
and may require all the testimony and proofs taken to be read in open meeting, and shall, by a majority vote, upon the call of the
"yeas" and "nays", declare as elected the person who shall appear by the evidence to have been elected; and the Clerk shall enter
such decision and declaration upon the official minutes of the Council.
G. Respondent Not To Act: In any such contest, the respondent or person whose election is subject to the contest, shall not take any
part in such contest, so far as the determination thereof is concerned, nor shall such person cast any vote in connection therewith.
H. Legal Disqualification: Whenever it shall appear, in any case, that the person receiving the highest number of votes is ineligible to the
office because of any legal disqualification, it shall, for that reason, be the duty of the mayor and council to declare such election null
and void, and immediately call a special election to fill said office.
I. Counting Ballots: In all cases of contested elections, the parties thereto shall be entitled to have the package or packages of ballots
which have been returned to the clerk pursuant to law, opened in the presence of a committee of the mayor and council, and the
officer having the custody thereof, and to have said ballots counted; or the same may be brought into open council meeting, and then
and there counted by a committee of three (3) members appointed for that purpose.
J. Preservation Of Ballots: It shall be the duty of the clerk to carefully preserve all ballots returned to the clerk by the judges of any city
election for six (6) months thereafter; and at the expiration of that time, if there be no contest instituted in the meantime, and which
may be still pending, said clerk shall destroy such ballots by burning, under the direction of the mayor and council2. (1997 Code)
1-8-3: ELECTION WARDS:
The city of Colona is divided into four (4) wards, the boundaries of which shall be as follows:
A. First Ward: All of MHP1 LLC (formerly Kershaw Trailer Court) traveling east to the intersection of Cleveland Road and State Highway
84 East along the south side of Cleveland Road up to the address of 729 Cleveland Road then it includes both sides of Cleveland
Road up to the address of 909 Cleveland Road. Addresses of 909, 913, 917, 925, 927, 931, and 937 Cleveland Road are not within
the legal boundaries of the City of Colona. After 937 Cleveland Road travel again on the South side of Cleveland Road to the West
side of Maple Court of Rokis Subdivision, then South to the Hennepin Canal. This includes undeveloped parcels 0611251003 &
0611207026. From there West along the canal to Route 84 at its intersection with First Street, go North to the intersection of Fourth
Avenue; North side of Fourth Avenue West to Third Street; North to Third Avenue; West along Third Avenue on the North side to its
intersection of Seventh Street; then North on Seventh Street to First Avenue; then North to First Avenue. This includes the East side
of Seventh Street starting at 222 7th Street and going down to 102 7th Street; then along First Avenue going East to cross Route 84
back at MHP1 LLC trailer court.
This includes Blocks 13, 12, 11, 10, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2 and 1 of Reese Gardens Addition, 4, 3, 2 and 1 of Canalvue Addition, MHP1 LLC
formerly Kershaw Trailer Court, Robert Davis farm, Rokis Addition, Skinner Subdivision, Shriver Addition Original Town of Colona,
Reggentin Addition and lands incorporated.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 26/251
B. Second Ward: Northwest Corner of Seventh Street at its intersection with First Avenue including the West side only of Seventh
Street, then South to Third Avenue along the South side going East to Third Street then South to Fourth Avenue and East to First
Street; go South to the Hennepin Canal then West to Second Street on the West side only, South to Sixth Avenue and West to Third
Street and South to Tenth Avenue, includes South side of Tenth Avenue; go East at intersection of Tenth Avenue and Third Street to
First Street, then South to the Green River including all of Tenth Avenue from Third Street and all of Eleventh Avenue to the West
North to Ninth Avenue then West to Ninth Street and North to the intersection of Seventh Street and First Avenue. This includes all of
9th, 8th, 7th, 6th, 5th and 4th Streets and the West Side of Third Street South of the Canal and includes Hennepin Canal road West
to the Rock River, the 300 block of Seventh Street, 300 block of Sixth Street, 300 block of Fifth Street and all of Fifth Avenue and
Fourth Street to Third Avenue and Third Street to Fourth Avenue.
This includes Blocks 15, 14, 9 and 8 of Reese Gardens Addition, Blocks 2, 3, 4 and 5 of Canalvue, Blocks 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 and 25 of Ryan's Garden Addition; Blocks 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12 and Lots 15 through
34 of Block 11 in Green River Heights Addition and all of Park Terrace Addition.
C. Third Ward: Beginning at the East side of Second Street at the Hennepin Canal traveling South to Sixth Avenue then West to Third
Street includes the East Side of Third Street South to Tenth Avenue, includes north side of Tenth Avenue; East to IL Highway 84 then
south including the following: IL Highway 84 right-of-way; Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad (BNSF RR) right-of-way; 11.83
acres, parcel number 0615276005, known as 21467 Briar Bluff Road; 2.01 acres, parcel number 0615426006; 3.56 acres, parcel
number 0615426007; 0.61 acres, parcel number 0615426008, known as 21619 Briar Bluff Road; 9.89 acres, parcel number
0615426005; 20 acres, parcel number 0614300001, known as 1201 IL Highway 84; and 1.22 acres, parcel number 0614300003.
Then follow BNSF RR right-of-way north to Poppy Garden Road. Travel east along the north side of Poppy Garden Road, except for
the addresses of 4733 and 4751 and parcel number 0611358001, to Interstate 80 and also includes 4726 Poppy Garden Road on
the south side. Travel north from Interstate 80 to Iowa Interstate Railroad and west to the Hennepin Canal, including railroad right-ofway,
with the exception of Carroll Farm. Travel along Hennepin Canal west to its intersection with Second Street.
This includes all of First Street and East side of Second Street to Sixth Avenue then all of Second Street to Tenth Avenue North side,
all of Green Park Addition, Greenwood Additions 1 and 2, Greenwood Place, Carroll's Addition and Greenview Estates and Nancy's
Trailer Court. Riverview Trailer Park is excluded.
The Poppy Garden Road addresses that are included are 4068, 4076, 4090 and 4726.
D. Fourth Ward: At intersection Interstate 80 and Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad East travel along tracks, including railroad rightof-
way and all of Level Acres Extensions 1 _ 7 Subdivisions, Heartland Subdivision, Schneider's 2nd Addition, Green River Industrial
Park, 201 and 202 Exchange Street, and 240 and 242 Parkway. The address at 227 Union Street is excluded. Continue traveling
south along Briargate Drive, then east along Poppy Garden Road, south along Osco Road, including Indian Trails Resort. The
address at 21639 Green River Road is excluded. Then travel west along south edge of Indian Trails Resort to east edge of
Stonebridge Crossing, continuing southward past U.S. Highway 6, following the Colona corporate limits line, including the following
addresses: 5715 U.S. Highway 6, 20780 E. 550th Street, and 20812 E. 550th Street; and the undeveloped area, parcel numbers
0624200007, 0624200009, and 0624200011. Also included is the undeveloped area bordered by U.S. Highway 6, Interstates 280/74
and 80, and E. 450th Street. Also included are all of Heeren's Subdivision, Lavender Crest Subdivision, Level Acres West
Subdivision, Mortensen's Subdivision 1st & 2nd Additions, Stonebridge Crossing Re-subdivision 1 _ 3 and Subdivision Phase 1, and
Werner Addition.
Stonebridge Addition includes Mineral Creek Drive, Rock Point Road, River Mist Drive, Stonebridge Boulevard, Woodbridge Lane,
Misty Lane, Portage Way, Stonebridge Court and Stonebridge Place. Lavender Crest Winery at 5201 U.S. Highway 6 is included.
Mortensen Addition includes addresses on the following streets Clover, Cedar, Linden, Spruce Drives and Pine Court.
The Poppy Garden Road addresses that are included are 5387, 5421, 5690, 5696, 5712, 5726, 5750, 5765, 5770, 5775 and 5777.
The addresses on Briargate Drive included are 213, 219, 220, 223, 224, 227, 228, 231, 232, 235, 236, 239, 240, 243, 244, 248, 251,
252, 255, 256, 259, 260, 263, 264, 267, 268, 271, 272, 275, 276, 279, 280, 283, 284, 287, 288, 291, 292, 296, 489, 492, 496, 500,
510 and 607. The rest of the addresses on Briargate are excluded.
Rita Drive is also excluded.
(Ord. 0-07-12, 6-11-2012)
1-8-4: ELECTION WARD MAP:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 27/251
2011 Ward Map
(Ord. 0-07-12, 6-11-2012)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 28/251
Chapter 9
MUNICIPAL FINANCES
1-9-1: ANNUAL APPROPRIATIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 0-15-009, 7-27-2015)
1-9-2: TAX LEVY:
A. Tax Levy Ordinance: A tax levy ordinance shall be enacted as required by law.
B. Filing With County: A certified copy of the tax levy ordinance shall be filed with the county clerk not later than the last Tuesday of
December. Such ordinance shall show the total funds reserved for each item and the amount of tax levied therefor. (Ord. 0-15-016,
9-14-2015)
1-9-3: ANNUAL AUDIT:
As soon as practicable at the close of each fiscal year and no later than six (6) months thereafter, there shall be an audit of all accounts
of the city made by a competent person authorized to act as an auditor under the laws of the state, to be designated by the council.
Copies of such audit shall be filed with the clerk and with the director of the state department of revenue and in such other places as
may now or hereafter be required by law. (1997 Code)
1-9-4: INDEBTEDNESS:
No indebtedness shall be incurred, excepting such indebtedness as may be payable solely from the proceeds of a duly authorized bond
issue, or from a designated specified source, unless there is a prior reserving of funds in the budget document out of which such
indebtedness could be paid, as provided by statute1. (Ord. 0-15-018, 9-14-2015)
1-9-5: BIDDING AND CONTRACT PROCEDURES2:
A. Competitive Bidding Required: Any work or other public improvement that is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special
assessment or special taxation, and all purchases of and contracts for supplies, materials, and services shall, except as specifically
provided herein, be based whenever possible on competitive bids.
B. Formal Contract Procedure: All work or other public improvement that is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment
or special taxation, and all purchases, orders, or contracts for supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services except as
otherwise provided herein, when the estimated cost thereof shall meet or exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), shall be
purchased from the lowest responsible bidder, after due notice inviting bids, unless competitive bidding is waived by a vote of twothirds
(2/3) of the city council then holding office.
C. Advertisement For Bids: A notice inviting bids shall be published a least once in a newspaper with general circulation within the City.
The City shall also advertise all pending work or purchases by posting a notice on the public bulletin board in the City Hall.
D. Scope Of Notice: The newspaper notice required herein shall include a general description of the work to be performed or the articles
to be purchased, shall state where specifications may be secured, and shall specify the time and place for opening bids.
E. Bid Deposits:
1. Prescribed In Notice: When deemed necessary by the City Council, bid deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting
bids.
2. Unsuccessful Bidders: Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of their bid deposits upon the award of the contract by the
City Council.
3. Forfeiture By Successful Bidder: A successful bidder shall forfeit any bid deposit required by the City Council upon failure on
his/her part to enter into a contract within ten (10) days after the award.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 29/251
4. Form Of Deposit: Such bid deposit may be in the form of a certified check, bond, or letter of credit in an amount as specified in the
advertisement for bids to ensure finalization of the contract and to indemnify the City against all loss, damages, and claims that
may accrue against the City as a consequence of the granting of the contract.
F. Bid Opening Procedure:
1. Sealed: Bids shall be submitted sealed to the City Clerk and shall be identified as bids on the envelope.
2. Opening: Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notice.
3. Tabulation: A tabulation of all bids received shall be made by the City Council or by a City employee, in which event a tabulation of
the bids shall be furnished to the City Council at its next regular meeting.
G. Rejection Of Bids: The City, through its corporate authorities, shall have the authority to reject all bids or parts of all bids when the
public interest will be served thereby.
H. Bidders In Default: The City shall not accept the bid of a contractor who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses, or other
money due the City.
I. Award Of Contract:
1. Authority: The City Council shall have the authority to award contracts within the purview of this Section.
2. Lowest Responsible Bidder: Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder on the basis of the bid that is in the best
interest of the City to accept. In awarding the contract, in addition to price, the City Council shall consider:
a. The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the contract to provide the service required;
b. Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or
interference;
c. The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and efficiency of the bidder;
d. The quality of the performance of previous contracts or services with this or other governmental bodies;
e. The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service;
f. The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service;
g. The quality, availability, and adaptability of the equipment, supplies or contractual services to the particular use required;
h. The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract;
i. The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.
j. The City Council may, by resolution, appoint or designate someone or a committee to investigate and report to the Council his,
her or its findings regarding the qualifications of each bidder. Said report or reports may be used by the Council in determining
who is a responsible bidder.
3. Performance Bonds: The City Council shall have the authority to require a performance bond, before entering into a contract, in
such amounts as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the City and to conform to the statutory
requirements for such bonds.
J. Open Market Procedure: All work and purchases of supplies, materials, and services of less than the estimated value of ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) shall be made in the open market, without newspaper advertisement and without observing the procedure
prescribed by this section for the award of formal contracts in such a manner so as to ensure the best interests of the public after
solicitation of bids on proposals by mail, telephone, facsimile transmission, or otherwise.
K. Professional Service Contracts: All contracts for professional services, including, but not limited to, attorneys, engineers, real estate
appraisers, and architects, and any other profession whose ethical code involves, prohibits or discourages involvement in normal
bidding procedures, may be entered into by the City without observing the bidding procedures prescribed by this section for the
award of formal contracts.
L. Regular Employment Contracts: Regular employment contracts in the Municipal service shall likewise be exempt from the provisions
of this section.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 30/251
M. Emergency Purchases: In case of an apparent emergency that requires immediate work or purchase of supplies, materials, or
services, the City Council shall be empowered to secure by open market procedure as herein set forth, at the lowest obtainable
price, any work, supplies, materials, or services regardless of the amount of the expenditure. A finding of such an emergency shall
be made in an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the City Council at the time of such emergency contract or no later than
the first regular City Council meeting thereafter.
N. Cooperative Purchasing: The City shall have the authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans
when the best interests of the City would be served thereby. (1997 Code)
O. Execution Of Contracts: The Mayor, or any other person designated by the Council, may sign on behalf of the City any contract
authorized by the Council. No contract may be entered into without the authority of the Council. (Ord. 0-16-12, 9-26-2016)
1-9-6: COUNCIL APPROVAL OF BILLS:
All bills payable by the City, other than for the payment of salaries established by the Council, shall be submitted to the Council for
approval before payment. (1997 Code)
1-9-7: PAYMENTS BY TREASURER:
The Treasurer shall pay out money in payment of all bills, or for salaries, or for any other purpose other than the retirement of principal
or interest on bonds or tax anticipation warrants only upon warrant signed by the Mayor and Clerk as provided by statute. Such warrants
shall designate the item to be paid and the funds from which they are to be paid. (1997 Code)
1-9-8: SURETY BONDS:
A. State Authorized Surety Company: Whenever a surety bond to indemnify the City is required as a prerequisite to exercising the
duties of any office or position, or to the issuance of a license or permit for the exercise of any special privilege, the surety on such
bond shall be a corporation licensed and authorized to do business in this State as a surety company, except on approval of the
Council.
B. Additional Surety: Whenever, in its opinion, additional sureties or an additional surety may be needed on any bond to indemnify the
City against loss or liability because of the insolvency of the existing surety or sureties, or for any other reason, the Council may
order a new surety or sureties to be secured for such bond. If such new surety or sureties are not procured within ten (10) days from
the time such order is transmitted to the principal on the bond, or his/her assignee, the Council shall declare the bond to be void, and
thereupon such principal, or assignee, shall be deemed to have surrendered the privilege or position as condition of which the bond
was required. (1997 Code)
1-9-9: BANK DEPOSITORY:
A. The City Council shall from time to time by resolution designate a financial institution as the City's primary financial depository
hereinafter called PFD.
B. The City Treasurer is directed as soon as practical after such designation to relocate and/or establish City deposits and accounts with
the designated PFD.
C. At all times the Treasurer shall require the PFD to collateralize Municipal deposits with securities held by another institution with a
market value in an amount of at least equal to the amounts on deposit that exceed the insurance limitations of the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation or other similar Federal insurance entity. (Ord. 99-16, 12-13-1999)
Chapter 10
ETHICAL CONDUCT
1-10-1: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT:
A. The regulations of section 5-151 and article 102 of the state officials and employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et
seq., (hereinafter referred to as the "act" in this section) are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the officers and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 31/251
employees of the city to the extent required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5.
B. The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or accepted under the act, by any officer or any employee of the city,
is hereby prohibited.
C. The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an officer or employee of the city under the act, is hereby
prohibited.
D. The participation in political activities prohibited under the act, by any officer or employee of the city, is hereby prohibited.
E. For purposes of this section, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall be defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-
5(c).
F. The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as those penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for
similar violations of the act.
G. This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of city
officers and employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less restrictive than this section, however, the
provisions of this section shall prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(a).
H. Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by
reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities.
However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this section
by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the city.
I. If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the
Illinois supreme court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals or rehearings. This section shall be deemed
repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the city if the act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois supreme court.
J. If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act, or
does not address the remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as adopted by this section shall remain in full force and
effect; however, that part of this section relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further
action by the corporate authorities of the city. (Ord. 08-04, 5-10-2004)
Chapter 11
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND
RESPONSIBILITY
1-11-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND
RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-2: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the city's procedures in connection with all of the city's locally imposed and administered
taxes. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
ACT: The "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act".
CITY: The city of Colona, Illinois.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 32/251
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The city's mayor and city council.
HEARING OFFICER: An administrative individual appointed by the city mayor with the advice and consent of the corporate authorities
to conduct hearings and to issue final determinations regarding the collection of all locally imposed and administered taxes.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The city's collector is charged with the administration and collection of the locally imposed and
administered taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the
local tax administrator's stead. The local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this chapter to give full
effect to this chapter. The exercise of such authority by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the city that is collected or administered by the city, not
an agency or department of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the property tax code or fees
collected by the city other than infrastructure maintenance fees.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or communication in connection with each of the city's locally
imposed and administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the city that imposes any locally imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax and generally includes the person upon whom the
legal incidence of such tax is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the
locally imposed and administered tax to the city. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-4: NOTICES:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar
days prior to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent
by the local tax administrator as follows:
A. First-class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or
B. Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-5: LATE PAYMENT:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the city pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late
unless it is: a) physically received by the city on or before the due date, or b) received in an envelope or other container displaying a
valid, readable U.S. postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the city, with adequate postage prepaid. (Ord. 01-
01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-6: PAYMENT:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the following order: a) first to the tax due for the applicable
period; b) second to the interest due for the applicable period; and c) third to the penalty for the applicable period. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-
2001)
1-11-7: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
A. The city shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a
taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to protest the
taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.
B. The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be four (4) years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in
error was made. The city shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a
person who has not paid the amounts directly to the city.
C. The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as
follows:
1. The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 33/251
a. The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
b. The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
c. The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled check or receipt for the payment;
d. The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
e. A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties
overpaid, and, as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that there shall be no refund and only
a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes any monies to the city.
2. Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall
either:
a. Grant the claim; or
b. Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
3. In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of 2.5 percent per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the
number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit. (Ord.
01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any locally administered tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
A. Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
1. The tax;
2. The time period of the audit; and
3. A brief description of the books and records to be made available for the auditor.
B. Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not
agreeable to the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty (30) days after the originally
designated audit and during normal business hours.
C. The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7)
days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator agreed to
some other convenient time. In the event taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may
request another date within the thirty (30) days, approved in writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
D. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's business or activities, including original source documents
and books of entry denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction.
All books shall be kept in the English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the city.
E. It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and records for inspection by the city. If the taxpayer or
tax collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax
determination and assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax liability.
F. If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written
notice of the amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of the city's determination of the amount of
overpayment.
G. In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-9: APPEAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 34/251
A. The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice
of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following information:
1. The reason for the assessment;
2. The amount of the tax liability proposed;
3. The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
4. The obligations of the city during the audit, appeal, refund and collection process.
B. A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The
written protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within forty five (45) days of receipt of the written
notice of the tax determination and assessment.
C. If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall
give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written
protest and petition for hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
D. If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the forty five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment
shall become a final bill due and owing without further notice.
E. Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued
as of the due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and petition for
hearing. In no event shall the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more than ninety
(90) days after the expiration of the forty five (45) day period. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-10: HEARING:
A. Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and petition for hearing under section 1-11-9 of this chapter,
the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal. The taxpayer may request that a hearing officer conduct the
hearing rather than the local tax administrator.
B. No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer.
Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
C. At the hearing the local tax administrator/hearing officer shall preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to
the tax determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.
D. At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator/hearing officer shall make a written determination on the basis of the
evidence presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the written decision. (Ord. 01-01, 1-
22-2001)
1-11-11: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be
paid within the time frame otherwise indicated.
A. Interest: The city hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the
tax, to be 2.5 percent per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed.
B. Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a
late filing penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late
payment penalty of five percent (5%) of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the
controlling tax ordinance and prior to the city issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty
shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was
required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance.
(Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 35/251
1-11-12: ABATEMENT:
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty
if the local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-13: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The city may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local
tax administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon
written notice by the local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working
days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or fails to demonstrate
good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further
notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-14: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
The city, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any
amounts due and owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice of the reviewed tax returns to make any
request for refund or provide any tax still due and owing.
A. No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4) years maximum after the end of the calendar year for which
the return for the applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due, whichever
occurs later.
B. If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued
by the city, the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years
maximum after the end of the calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which
the return for the applicable period was filed.
C. No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-15: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or
assessment from the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the local tax administrator for a voluntary
disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with
interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the
date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or
penalty for any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the
amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the
underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The
payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the
date agreed to by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and interest
previously paid under this section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of
the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-16: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax
ordinance on the internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax ordinances shall be made available to the public
upon request at the city clerk's office. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-17: INTERNAL REVIEW PROCEDURE:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes.
Upon a determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is
determined to be improper, the local tax administrator shall:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 36/251
A. Timely remove the lien at the city's expense;
B. Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
C. Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-18: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of the city's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax
ordinance is in conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be controlling. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
Chapter 12
PUBLIC WORKS
1-12-1: PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT:
A. Creation: There is hereby created a public works department in the city of Colona. This department shall be administered by a
director of public works directed by the mayor and aldermanic council. The director shall supervise the various divisions of this
department, and in addition, thereto he shall perform such further duties as may from time to time be directed by the mayor and
aldermanic council.
B. Organization: The public works department oversees the operations of many other city departments. The public works department is
organized as follows:
1. Public Works Director (PWD): The public works director is the manager of the department, responsible for the direction, operation,
and budget management of the public works department to include all other departments assigned for the city. Runs the public
works department and subdepartments with the responsibility of coordinating with other governmental agencies for the public
works department and as directed for city including ensuring that mandatory/required reports and/or procedures, etc., are
completed. Has the duty to advise, communicate concisely, and keep the aldermanic council informed to aid in their decision
making process. Helps to coordinate the other public works subdepartments, etc., for related projects and/or as other assigned
duties may require for the city. The PWD is able to designate a public works department employee having the knowledge and
experience as the assistant public works director (APWD). The PWD as a city officer reports directly to the mayor and the
aldermanic council as a whole. The PWD also serves on and reports to the public works standing committee as a city staff
member and coordinates its activities with the counsel of the aldermen serving on the said committee (see section 1-12-2, "Public
Works Director", of this chapter).
2. Building Department: The building department's mission is the upkeep of all city owned buildings and grounds.
3. Building Inspectors: The city building inspector's mission is to inspect remodeling and new construction work being done that
require a city building permit. In the absence of a city building inspector, the PWD assumes the responsibilities for enforcing and
making decisions regarding the related laws, codes, practices, etc., as approved and/or accepted within this code.
4. Park Department: The park department's mission is the upkeep of all park areas and grounds.
5. Colona's Scott Family Park At Indian Trails Resort: The park's mission is to provide recreational opportunities for Colona residents
and the general public.
6. Sewer Department: The sewer department's mission is the upkeep of all lift stations, sewer mains and manholes.
7. Street Department: The street department's mission is the upkeep on all drainage, roads, snow plowing, tree trimming, etc.
8. Wastewater Treatment Plant: The wastewater treatment plant's mission is the upkeep and operation of the sewer treatment plant,
daily testing, sludge removal and reports to the IEPA.
9. Water Department: The water department's mission is to maintain all wells, water mains and distribution system, replacement of
water meters, chemical treatment, water testing, reports to IEPA.
10. Zoning:
a. Mission: Enforce city zoning ordinance. Review any zoning request or related questions.
b. Zoning officer: Normally is the public works director.
11. Henry County Dispatcher: The Henry County dispatcher will be used for contact after hours at 309-755-8747. (Ord. 0-15-003, 3-
11-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 37/251
1-12-2: PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR:
A. Creation Of Position: The position of Public Works Director is hereby created, which position shall be filled by a majority of all
members of the Aldermanic Council confirming the recommendation from the Mayor. The Public Works Director shall hold position at
the pleasure of the Aldermanic Council and shall be subject to removal only by a two-thirds (2/3) majority vote of the Aldermen
holding office. The position holder will supervise under the direction of the Mayor and Aldermanic Council. (Ord. 0-17-11, 6-26-2017)
B. Compensation, Vacation, And Sick Time: The compensation of the Public Works Director shall be determined by resolution set by the
Aldermanic Council. Vacation and sick time is outlined in the City Employee Handbook.
C. Restriction On Participation Of Partisan Politics: The Public Works Director shall not, during employment, engage in partisan politics
in connection with the City elections.
D. Initiation Of Removal: Either the Mayor or any member of the Aldermanic Council may initiate the removal of the Public Works
Director. The Aldermanic City Council can decide to remove the Public Works Director and/or position by vote after the proper
motions followed by appropriate discussion.
E. Residency: There shall be no residency requirement.
F. Duties And Responsibilities: The Public Works Director shall direct and supervise the entire Public Works Department. This includes,
but is not limited to, the Water and Sewer Treatment Department, Street Department, Park Department, Colona's Scott Family Park,
and Activity Center:
1. Direct and supervise all staff activities.
2. Enforce all City personnel rules and regulations.
3. Prepare annual budget for the Public Works Department.
4. Submit agenda for and attend monthly Public Works Committee meetings.
5. Serve as the City's Assistant Engineer.
6. Perform such other duties prescribed by the Mayor and/or Aldermanic Council.
7. Serve on and report to the City's public works standing committee as a staff member and coordinate its activities with the counsel
of the Aldermen serving on the said committee. (Ord. 0-15-004, 3-11-2015)
8. Be responsible for the facilities and ground maintenance for the Colona's Scott Family Park and Activity Center. Coordinate the
activities as required, budget preparation, and administration with the Chairman of the Public Works Committee and/or authorized
designee and with the direction and/or counsel of the majority of this committee's Aldermen. The Public Works Director also
serves on said committee as a staff member. (Ord. 0-17-11, 6-26-2017)
Title 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Chapter 1
PLAN COMMISSION1
2-1-1: CREATION; MEMBERSHIP:
There is hereby created a plan commission for the city which shall consist of six (6) members; seven (7) including the mayor, to include
the following:
A. Mayor: The mayor shall be ex officio member of said plan commission, with power to vote.
B. Appointment: Six (6) other members; citizens of the city, appointed by the mayor, on the basis of their particular fitness for their duty
on said plan commission, and subject to the approval of the council. (1997 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 38/251
2-1-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
Ex officio members shall serve for the term of their elective office. Of the six (6) appointed citizen members, two (2) shall serve for a
period of one year, two (2) for a period of two (2) years, two (2) for a period of three (3) years, etc. Thereafter, such appointed citizen
members shall serve for a period of three (3) years. Vacancies shall be filled by appointments for unexpired terms only. (1997 Code)
2-1-3: COMPENSATION:
All members of the commission shall serve without compensation except that, if the council deems it advisable, the secretary may
receive such compensation as may be fixed from time to time by said council and provided for in the budget. (Ord. 0-15-013, 9-14-2015)
2-1-4: ORGANIZATION:
A. Officers; Rules And Regulations: Immediately following their appointment, the members of the plan commission shall meet, organize,
elect such officers as it may deem necessary, and adopt and later change or alter, rules and regulations of organization and
procedure consistent with city ordinances and state laws.
B. Record Of Proceedings: The commission shall keep written records of its proceedings, which shall be open at all times to public
inspection.
C. Annual Report: The commission shall also file an annual report with the mayor and council, setting forth its transactions and
recommendations. (1997 Code)
2-1-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The plan commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. Official Plan:
1. Preparation: To prepare and recommend to the council a comprehensive plan of public improvements, looking to the present and
future development and growth of the city. Such a plan, after its adoption by the council, will be known as the official plan.
2. Scope: Such plan shall include reasonable requirements in reference to streets, alleys, and public grounds within the corporate
limits and in contiguous territory outside of and distant not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles from such limits and not
included in any municipality, such requirements to be effective whenever such lands shall be subdivided after the adoption of such
plan.
B. Amendments To Plan: To prepare and recommend to the council from time to time such changes in the plan or any part thereof as
may be deemed necessary by the council or by the plan commission.
C. Improvements: To prepare and recommend to the council from time to time plans and/or recommendations for specific improvements
in pursuance of such official plan.
D. Aid City Officials: To give aid to the city officials charged with the direction of projects for improvements embraced within the official
plan, to further the making of such improvements, and generally to promote the realization of the official plan.
E. Publicity: To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its activities for the general purpose of public understanding.
F. Other Planning Commissions: To cooperate with municipal or regional planning commissions and other agencies or groups to further
the local planning program and to assure harmonious and integrated planning for the area.
G. Statutory Powers: To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted by statute2. (1997 Code)
2-1-6: LAND SUBDIVISION OR RESUBDIVISION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 39/251
Following the adoption of an official plan in the manner prescribed by statute, no map or plat of any subdivision presented for record,
affecting land within the corporate limits of the city or in contiguous territory outside of and distant not more than one and one-half (11/2)
miles from such limits and not included in any other municipality, shall be entitled to record or shall be valid, unless the subdivision
thereon shall provide for streets, alleys, and public grounds in conformity with any requirements applicable thereto of such official plan.
(1997 Code)
2-1-7: IMPROVEMENTS:
The city clerk shall furnish the plan commission, for its consideration, a copy of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public
improvements of any nature. The plan commission may report in relation thereto if it deems a report necessary or advisable for the
consideration of the council. (1997 Code)
2-1-8: EXPENDITURES:
The commission may, at the discretion of the council, employ necessary help whose salaries, wages, and other necessary expenses
shall be provided for by adequate reservation of funds made by the council from public funds. If said plan commission shall deem it
advisable to secure technical advice or services, it may be done upon authority from the council and reservation of funds by the council
therefor. (Ord. 0-15-013, 9-14-2015)
Title 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUSINESS LICENSES1
3-1-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No business shall be operated in the city of Colona until the operator of such business shall have secured from the city a license to
operate such business. This requirement applies to all businesses including home based businesses. (Ord. 0-14-10, 5-10-2010)
3-1-2: APPLICATION AND REGISTRATION:
A. Application for the operation of a retail business within the city limits shall be made to the city clerk. An application for the operation of
a retail business shall state the nature of the business, the address of the premises where said business will be operated and such
other pertinent information as may be required by the city council by ordinance or resolution. (1997 Code; amd. Ord. 0-14-10, 5-10-
2010)
B. All businesses are required to annually register with the city of Colona. There shall be no cost to the business for such annual
registration after the payment of the initial licensing fee. (Ord. 0-14-10, 5-10-2010)
C. Any business within the city of Colona, Henry County, Illinois, which has failed to annually register with the city of Colona by February
1 of each calendar year shall be deemed in violation of this section requiring such registration. Failure to register annually with the
city of Colona, by February 1 each calendar year shall carry a fine to be established under the "general penalty clause" of this code.
The fine to be established for violation of the failure to register requirement may also be covered under its "no contest" section in title
5, chapter 5, "Fines", of this code. (Ord. 0-18-12, 10-8-2012)
3-1-3: LICENSE FEES:
The council establishes the license fee for a nonexpiring license to be fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 12-08, 8-11-2008)
3-1-4: COUNCIL AUTHORITY:
Upon receipt of an application to operate a retail business, the city council shall have the sole authority to determine whether or not such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 40/251
license shall be issued. (1997 Code)
3-1-5: TERM:
All existing licenses shall be considered nonexpiring licenses and any newly issued license shall be determined to be a nonexpiring
license. (Ord. 12-08, 8-11-2008)
3-1-6: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
All businesses licensed under this title shall be inspected by the proper officials of the city at least semiannually to ensure that certain
businesses comply with the ordinances of the city. (1997 Code)
3-1-7: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Ordinance Violation: Any violation of any ordinance of the city will constitute grounds for the revocation of a retail business license
after the city council finds it a fact that any actual violation is detrimental to the best interests of the city and its inhabitants.
B. Notice Of Violation:
1. Written Notice: The licensing authority shall give written notice thereof by certified mail addressed to the licensee or applicant.
2. Contents Of Notice: Such notice shall specify the alleged grounds of said violation and shall inform the recipient of his/her right to
demand a hearing before a hearing officer designated for such purpose by the licensing authority.
C. Demand For Hearing: A demand for hearing shall be made in writing to the licensing authority and submitted no later than the tenth
day next succeeding the date of mailing of the aforesaid notice. If no demand for hearing is made within said time, the license shall
forthwith be revoked, suspended or denied.
D. Hearing: If a hearing is demanded, it shall be held within ten (10) days thereafter, upon written notice to the party demanding hearing.
E. Hearing Officer: The hearing officer for such hearing shall be the zoning officer and is empowered to hear testimony, take evidence,
and to make findings of fact.
F. Findings: The hearing officer shall thereafter report these findings along with the hearing officer's recommendation, to the licensing
authority.
G. Action Of Licensing Authority: Upon receipt of the hearing officer's findings and recommendations, the licensing authority shall take
final action.
H. Immediate Revocation:
1. Grounds: Any violation of any ordinance of the city or any violation of any agreement made by license holder with the city which
agreement existed prior to the issuance of the license or thereafter will constitute grounds for the immediate revocation of a retail
business license after the city council makes a fact finding that an actual violation of the ordinance and/or agreement exists and
such violation is detrimental to the best interests of the city.
2. Determination Of Immediate Action: Should the elected authorities determine that such violation requires immediate action, then
upon the concurrence of two-thirds (2/3) of the elected authorities, the reasons for such revocation shall be stated and such
revocation shall be immediate.
3. Demand For Immediate Hearing: Licensee shall have twenty four (24) hours after receipt of the notice of revocation to demand an
immediate hearing which hearing shall be held within forty eight (48) hours of such demand for a hearing.
4. Findings Of Hearing Officer: The hearing officer shall make findings and shall be empowered with the concurrence of the mayor to
temporarily lift such revocation until the next council meeting. (1997 Code)
3-1-8: PENALTY:
Any person who shall operate a business without a license shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1997
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 41/251
Code)
3-1-9: BUSINESSES INVOLVING NUDITY PROHIBITED:
A. It shall be cause for revocation or suspension of a business license and/or liquor license issued by the city if a licensee, his manager
or agent shall allow any live person to appear or have reasonable cause to believe that any live person shall appear in any licensed
premises in a state of nudity to: provide entertainment; provide service; act as hostess, manager or owner, or to serve as an
employee in any capacity.
B. This section shall additionally include any establishment or business operating within the city whether they be licensed or not.
C. For the purposes of this section, the term "nudity" shall mean the showing of human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks,
or the female breast including the nipple or any portion below the nipple with less than a full opaque covering. Each live person
appearing in any establishment or business is a separate offense.
D. In addition to suspension or revocation of any business and/or liquor license2 as set forth in subsections A and B of this section, the
business violating subsections A and B of this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 99-
07, 7-26-1999)
Chapter 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words are used in this chapter, they shall have such meanings as ascribed to them below, unless the context
specifically states otherwise:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol contents,
spirits, wine or beer, and capable of being consumed as a beverage by human beings.
BEER: A beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of barley, or other grain, malt and hops in water, and
includes among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of this state, and not for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common
object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquor, which conforms to the definition of a "club" in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/1-3.24.
LICENSEE: Any person, firm, partnership, club, association, or corporation who receives a license under this chapter.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, key, hogshead or other receptacle or container, whatsoever used, corked
or capped, sealed and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey any alcoholic liquor.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where meals are served,
and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided with adequate and
sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to
prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
RETAIL SALE: Sales for use or consumption and not for resale in any form.
SALE: Any transfer, exchange or barter, in any manner or by any means whatsoever for a consideration, and includes and means all
sales made by any person, whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee, and includes, but is not limited to, all of the
following acts when done for consideration:
A. The selling of liquor.
B. The giving away of liquor.
C. The dispensing of liquor.
D. The providing of mix, ice, water, or glasses for the purpose of mixing drinks containing alcoholic liquor for consumption on the
same premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 42/251
E. The pouring of liquor.
F. The maintaining of a private or public club which serves liquor on its premises to its patrons or members.
G. The maintaining of a restaurant which serves liquor on its premises to its patrons.
H. The possessing in any business or commercial establishment of alcoholic liquor to be served to patrons on the premises.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural contents of fruits or vegetables, containing sugar, including
such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits. (1997 Code)
3-2-2: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
A. Mayor To Serve As Commissioner: The Mayor is authorized to be the Local Liquor Control Commissioner and shall be charged with
the administration of the Liquor Control Act, chapter 235 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, and of such ordinances and resolutions
relating to alcoholic liquor as may be enacted.
B. Assistants: The Mayor may appoint a person or persons to assist him/her in the exercise of the powers and the performance of the
duties provided for such Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
C. Entry Powers: The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the power to enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter
at any time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of chapter 235 of the Illinois Compiled
Statutes, or any rules or regulations adopted by such Commissioner or by the State Commission have been or are being violated,
and at such time to examine the premises of said licensee in connection therewith.
D. List: The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all such licenses issued by such
Commissioner. (1997 Code)
3-2-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale in the City any alcoholic liquor without having a license or in violation of the terms or such
license. (1997 Code)
3-2-4: APPLICATION:
Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. Such applications shall be made in writing, and
shall be signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a club or corporation, verified by oath or
affidavit, and shall contain the following information and statements:
A. Required Information:
1. The name; age; place of birth; if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of naturalization; and address of the applicant. In the
case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; in the case of a corporation for profit or a club, the date
of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, the names and addresses of the stockholders of such corporation and
his/her interest in such corporation; if owned by one person or his/her nominee, the name and address of such person. In the case
of a partnership or corporation, the information required from the applicant shall be furnished as to each partner or the principal
officers of the corporation.
2. The character of business of the applicant; and in the case of a corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
3. The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that character, or in the case of the corporation, the date on which
its charter was issued.
4. The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license.
5. A statement as to whether applicant has made similar application for a similar license on premises other than described in this
application, and the disposition of such application.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 43/251
6. A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any
matter or thing contained in this chapter, laws of the state or the ordinances of the city.
7. Whether a previous license by state or subdivision thereof, or by the federal government has been revoked and the reasons
thereof.
8. A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the city, county, state or the United States in the conduct of his/her
place of business.
9. That the applicant is of good moral character. (1997 Code)
10. A statement that the applicant is not a manufacturer, bottler, jobber or wholesaler of liquors, wine or beer; and the further
statement that no manufacturer, any person, other than the applicant himself/herself, directly or indirectly supplied, furnished, gave
or paid, or lent money, for any furnishings, fixtures, or equipment on the premises or place of business or license of the applicant;
that no manufacturer, bottler, jobber or wholesaler of liquor, wine or beer or any agent, or any person other than the applicant
himself/herself is directly or indirectly interested in the ownership, conduct or operation of the business of such applicant. These
restrictions do not apply to a microbrewery. (Ord. 0-16-5, 4-25-2016)
11. A statement that the applicant agrees to permit any police officer or other official of the city free and unrestricted access to the
licensed premises for the purpose of inspecting the same. (1997 Code)
12. (Rep. by Ord. 00-05, 2-14-2000)
13. That applicant has all of the qualifications necessary to receive a retail license from the state pursuant to the requirements of 235
Illinois Compiled Statutes article VII.
B. False Statement: The making of any false statement in the application or the violation by the applicant of any of the agreements or
stipulations by applicant entered into by execution of the application shall be sufficient grounds for the revocation of any license
granted and shall further be deemed a violation of this chapter and subject the person so offending to the penalties provided for.
(1997 Code)
3-2-5: RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSES:
No such license shall be issued to: (1997 Code)
A. (Rep. by Ord. 0-16-5, 4-25-2016)
B. A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which such person resides.
C. A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
D. A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state law.
E. A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of or is the keeper of a house of ill fame.
F. A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
G. A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for cause.
H. A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license under a
first application.
I. A copartnership, unless all of the members of such copartnership shall be qualified to receive a license.
J. A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five
percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than
citizenship and residency within the city.
K. A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless said manager or agent possesses the same
qualifications required of the licensee.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 44/251
L. A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which
the license is to be issued.
M. Any law enforcing public officials, mayor or alderman, and no such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or indirectly,
in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor.
N. Any person, association or corporation not eligible for a state retail liquor license.
O. Any person with any outstanding bills or liens with the city. (1997 Code)
3-2-6: LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS; FEES:
A. Classifications: Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in the city shall pay an annual license
fee as set forth in this section. Such licenses shall be divided into the following classes:
1. Class A: Class A license which shall entitle the licensee to make only package liquor sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption
only off the premises.
2. Class B: Class B license which entitles the licensee to make only beer and wine sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption only
off of the premises.
3. Class C: Class C license which shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine on premises operated as a restaurant in which food
is served and sales of food constitute sixty percent (60%) or more of the gross receipts of the business.
4. Class D: Class D license which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for on and/or off the premises consumption.
5. Class E: Class E license shall entitle the licensee to sell, keep, or offer for sale at retail, on the premises licensed, any liquor, wine
or beer as defined for consumption on the premises where such sales do not constitute the principal item of business but are
incidental to the business of furnishing food and entertainment on the premises. Said license shall not be construed to prohibit
sales in the original package. (1997 Code)
6. Class T: Upon approval by the local liquor commissioner, a class T or temporary license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail may be
granted to organized clubs, societies, associations, fraternal organizations, duly constituted churches, or other entities. A
temporary license may be issued pursuant to this subsection A6 for one day, two (2) days, or three (3) consecutive days. The
license shall specify on its face the duration.
a. Number Of Licenses: No organization shall be issued more than one temporary license during any thirty (30) day period.
b. Time Of Application: All applications for temporary licenses must be received by the liquor commissioner at least thirty (30) days
prior to the dates being requested.
c. Dramshop Liability Insurance: All applicants for a temporary license shall show evidence of dramshop liability insurance or other
proof of financial responsibility prior to the issuance of such license.
d. Fee: The fee for a class T license shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day. (Ord. 0-16-13, 3-12-2014)
B. Fees: The yearly fees for the respective liquor licenses shall be as follows:
Class A $700.00
Class B 650.00
Class C 650.00
Class D 800.00
Class E 800.00
Class T 25.00 per day
C. Term; Disposition And Proration Of Fees:
1. Disposition Of Fees: All such fees shall be paid to the clerk at the time application is made, and shall be forthwith turned over to
the treasurer. In the event the license applied for is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant; if the license is granted, then
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 45/251
the fee shall be deposited in the general fund or in such other fund as shall have been designated by the city council by proper
action.
2. Term; Proration: The official licensing year shall begin on June 1 in each year and end on May 30 of the next succeeding calendar
year. All licenses shall expire on May 31 in each calendar year but the license fees provided for shall be reduced in proportion to
the number of full calendar months which have expired in the official license year, prior to the issuance of such licenses, but the full
license fee shall be charged for any license issued at any time during the first month of such license year. The license fee shall be
paid and there shall be no refund of any portion of the same except that the initial license fee to be paid shall be reduced in
proportion to the full calendar months which have expired in the year prior to the issuance of such license. No license shall be
issued for any term less than the balance of the unexpired license year. (1997 Code)
3-2-7: INVESTIGATION; APPROVAL OF LICENSE:
A. Investigation: All applications for a retailer's license shall be filed with the local liquor control commissioner who shall investigate all of
the statements contained in each application.
B. Examination Of Applicant: The local liquor control commissioner shall have the right to examine, or cause to be examined, under
oath, any applicant for a local license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension has
been served as provided by statute, and to examine or cause to be examined the books and records of any such applicant or
licensee, to hear testimony and take proof for his/her information in the performance of his/her duties, and for such purpose to issue
subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of this state. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the local
liquor control commissioner under this section, such commissioner may authorize his/her agent to act on his/her behalf as provided
by statute. (1997 Code)
C. Issuance: Upon investigation, if the local liquor control commissioner shall be satisfied that the matter and things contained are true
and that the applicant is of good moral character, entitled to a license, and that the applicant has complied with all the requirements
of this chapter, the local liquor control commissioner may with the approval and consent of the majority of the city council in
attendance, approve the same and upon the receipt of the required license fee, issue a license in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 0-17-12, 12-10-2012)
3-2-8: BOND:
Each person to whom a retailer's license is about to be issued, under the provisions of this chapter, shall execute a penal bond in the
form and with sureties acceptable to the local liquor control commissioner in the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00), conditioned upon
faithful performance and observance of the provisions of the laws of Illinois, and of this chapter, and further conditioned upon the prompt
payment of any fine which may be levied or assessed against any licensee for the violation of any of the penal provisions of the state
and this chapter, and such bond shall, upon approval, be filed in the office of the local liquor control commissioner. (1997 Code)
3-2-9: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. Separate License Required: A separate license shall be required for and with respect to each location or premises at which or upon
which any liquor, wine or beer is to be sold or offered for sale at retail.
B. Business Or Residential Districts:
1. Approval Of Adjacent Landowners: No retailer's class D license shall be granted to any applicant for any premises within the
corporate limits of the city where the same is located in any block in the city which is at the time of the application either wholly or
partly devoted to business uses or residential uses unless the applicant shall first file in the office of the local liquor control
commissioner a petition signed by a majority of property owners of the frontage within one hundred feet (100') in each direction of
the proposed location on both sides of the street on which the proposed location shall front, signifying their willingness to have a
license issued; provided, that in any case if the property owners of at least one hundred feet (100') of the property immediately
adjacent to or abutting on any side of the proposed location shall not appear as signers on the petition, no license shall be issued;
provided further, that the signature of any adjacent property owner who is then conducting a place of business in the block under a
license issued shall not be deemed necessary for the purpose of this subsection B1.
2. Vacation Of Premises: In the event any location to which a license is issued on the petition of property owners as above shall
become and remain vacant for a period of five (5) or more months consecutively, no new license shall issue to the premises
without the necessary petition of property holders being again presented in accordance with the provisions of this subsection B.
C. Proximity To Church, School, Etc.: No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet
(100') of any church, school, hospital, home for the aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their wives or children, or any military or
naval station; provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to clubs or restaurants, food shops or other places where the sale of
alcoholic liquor is not the principal business carried on, if such place of business not exempted shall have been established for such
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 46/251
purpose prior to the taking effect of this Chapter; nor to the renewal of a license for the sale of alcoholic liquor on premises within one
hundred feet (100') of any church where such church has been established within such one hundred feet (100') since the issuance of
the original license.
D. Stores Selling School Supplies, Lunches: No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor at any
store or other place of business where the majority of customers are minors of school age or where the principal business transacted
consists of school books, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such minors.
E. View From Street:
1. Clear View Required; Exceptions: In premises in which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises is licensed,
other than in restaurants, hotels or clubs, no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be permitted in the windows or
upon the doors of such licensed premises nor inside such premises which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such
licensed premises from the street, road or sidewalk at all times, and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction nor any
arrangement of lights or lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of such premises which shall prevent a full view of the
entire interior of such premises, and the entire space used by the public must be so located that there shall be a full view of the
same from the street, road of sidewalk.
2. Lighting: All rooms where alcoholic liquor is sold for consumption on the premises shall be continually lighted during business
hours by natural or artificial white lights so that all parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible.
3. Violation: In case the view into such licensed premises required by the foregoing provisions shall be wilfully obscured by the
licensee or by licensee wilfully suffered to be obscured or obstructed, such license may be revoked in the manner herein provided.
4. Plans, Drawings And Photographs Required: In order to enforce the provision of this subsection, the City shall have the right to
require the filing with the Local Liquor Control Commissioner of plans, drawings and photographs showing the clear line of the
view as above required.
F. Change Of Location: A liquor dealer's license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in the application
and license. Such location may be changed only upon the written permission to make such change issued by the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner. No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor under the Statute of the State and the provisions of this City Code. (1997 Code)
3-2-10: POSTING LICENSE:
Every person licensed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter shall immediately post and keep posted while in force, in a
conspicuous place on the premises, the license so issued. (1997 Code)
3-2-11: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
All premises used for the sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the storage of such liquor for sale, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition,
and shall be kept in full compliance with the Code provisions regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for
human consumption. (1997 Code)
3-2-12: HOURS OF SALE:
A. Consumption On Premises: Unless otherwise herein provided, it shall be unlawful to keep open or permit to be open any place where
alcoholic liquor is sold for consumption on the premises between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of
any day of the week.
B. Package Liquor: It shall be unlawful to keep open or permit to be open under a Class A license as issued by the City, any package
liquor store before the hour of five o'clock (5:00) A.M. and subsequent to the hour of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on any day of the
week.
C. Class B: It shall be lawful to keep open or permit to be open any establishment operating under a class B license as issued by the
city during normal business hours. (1997 Code)
3-2-13: PROHIBITED ACTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 47/251
A. Sale To Minors, Intoxicated Persons Or Habitual Drunkards: No person licensed under this chapter shall sell, or permit to be sold, any
"alcoholic liquor", "beer" or "wine" as defined, to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, or to any person notoriously
addicted by habit to the abnormal use of the same.
B. Written Affidavit: No licensee or licensee's agent shall require any person suspected of being under the permissible drinking age to
sign a written affidavit of age as well as requiring written identification and proof of age. (1997 Code)
C. Gambling: There shall be no illegal card games or illegal gambling allowed on any premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquor, except
for video gaming as authorized by the Illinois legislature and as licensed by the Illinois gaming board, which shall be allowed. (Ord.
0-09-12, 8-27-2012)
D. Minors Drawing, Pouring Or Mixing Liquor: No person under the age of twenty one (21) shall attend any bar to draw, pour or mix any
alcoholic liquor, beer or wine in any licensed retail premises.
E. Delivery On Sunday: No person licensed under this chapter shall order or receive delivery of any liquor, beer or wine on Sunday at
the premises so licensed, or at any other premises.
F. Peddling: It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the city. (1997 Code)
3-2-14: MINORS:
A. Purchase Or Obtaining Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age as defined by the state to be in possession
of any alcoholic liquor in any place in the city. Any person convicted of a violation of this provision shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code.
B. Possession: It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age as defined by the state to be in possession of any alcoholic liquor
in any place in the city. Any person convicted of a violation of this provision shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of
this code.
C. Misrepresentation Of Age: It shall be unlawful for any person under legal age as defined from time to time by the state to
misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any tavern or other place in the city where
alcoholic liquor is sold.
D. Presence Prohibited:
1. It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retailer's liquor license or his/her agent or employee to suffer or permit any minor to remain
in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to or situated in the room or place where such licensed premises is located;
provided, that this subsection shall not apply to any minor who is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or to any licensed
premises which derives its principal business from the sale of, or services of, commodities other than alcoholic liquor. In addition to
all other fines and penalties, the local liquor control commissioner may revoke or suspend the retail liquor license for any violation
of this subsection.
2. No person under the age of twenty one (21) shall frequent any tavern or other place in the city where alcoholic liquor is sold.
E. Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit any minor child of which he or she may be the parent
or guardian to violate any of the provisions of this section.
F. Sale, Gift Or Delivery Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any minor.
G. Display Of Warning: In every tavern or other place in the city where alcoholic liquor is sold there shall be displayed at all times in a
prominent place a printed card which shall read substantially as follows:
WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 21
Under the ordinances of the City of Colona, any person under the age of 21 years who, for the purpose of buying, accepting or
receiving alcoholic liquor, beer or wine represents that he or she is 21 years of age or over shall be subject to a fine of up to $200.00.
(1997 Code)
H. Consumption: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) to consume alcohol beverages in the city.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 48/251
1. The penalty for violating this subsection shall fall under the general penalty provisions.
2. This offense shall also be included as a no contest option. The no contest fine is one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 00-08, 2-28-
2000)
3-2-15: EMPLOYEES:
A. Disease: It shall be unlawful for any person to employ in any premises used for the sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted
with, or who is a carrier of, any contagious, infectious or venereal diseases; and it shall be unlawful for any person afflicted with or
who is a carrier of any such disease to work in or about any such premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or
distribution of such liquor.
B. Minor: It shall be unlawful for any person to employ, for the purpose of serving alcoholic liquor, any person who is under legal age as
defined by the statutes of the state in effect from time to time. (1997 Code)
3-2-16: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
Any licensee shall have and be given the right to a renewal or reissue of such license at the same place upon compliance with the
ordinances now in force in the city or which may be passed governing the issuance of such licenses; provided, however, the privilege of
renewal and/or reissue provided in this section shall apply only so long as the license in each case shall have been kept in force
continually and uninterruptedly in the name of the licensee or licensee's successor in interest, and nothing shall be deemed to restrict
the right of the local liquor control commissioner to revoke any such license. (1997 Code)
3-2-17: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A license shall be a purely personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance unless sooner revoked as in this chapter
provided, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to being encumbered or hypothecated. Such licenses shall cease upon
the death of the licensee; provided, that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, when such estate consists
in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale or manufacture of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court,
and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license, but not longer than six
(6) months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. A refund shall be made of that portion of the license fees paid for
any period in which the licensee shall be prevented from operating under such license in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(1997 Code)
3-2-18: DUPLICATE LICENSE:
Whenever such license shall be lost or destroyed, a duplicate shall be issued by the local liquor control commissioner upon application
made by the licensee, who also shall take a verified statement of such loss or destruction. (1997 Code)
3-2-19: REVOCATION; SUSPENSION1:
A. Suspension By Local Liquor Control Commissioner: The local liquor control commissioner may suspend or revoke any license issued
under any one or more of the following circumstances:
1. When the local liquor control commissioner is satisfied that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or any
valid resolution enacted by the city council or any applicable rule or regulation established by the local liquor control commissioner
that is consistent with the law.
2. The violation by the licensee of any law of the state relating to the regulation of the sale of liquor.
3. The wilful making of any false statement by the licensee as to a material fact in an application for a license.
B. Nonuse: When any license is voluntarily not used by the licensee within a period of sixty (60) days from the date of issuance of said
license, said license is suspended. Further, if such license is issued and used by the licensee and licensee voluntarily ceases to use
such license for a period of sixty (60) days, the license is suspended. The suspension for nonuse shall not apply to a licensee or
applicant whose place of business is not yet constructed unless such construction of the business premises is not completed within
one hundred eighty (180) days after application for a liquor license. (1997 Code)
3-2-20: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 49/251
A. Should a license holder violate any provisions of this chapter, the license holder shall for the first and each subsequent offense, be
subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code, or in the discretion of the local liquor control commissioner, the license
may be revoked or suspended.
B. Any person not holding a Colona liquor license who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code.
C. Persons violating this chapter who are not holders of a Colona liquor license are eligible to have the offense handled pursuant to the
"no contest" procedures as enacted by city ordinance. The "no contest" fine for a violation of this chapter is hereby set at one
hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 99-03, 3-22-1999)
Chapter 3
MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX1
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
GROSS RECEIPTS: A. The consideration received for the transmission of messages, or for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling
gas, or electricity for use or consumption and not for resale, as the case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith
valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material, and
for all services rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of transmitting said messages
without any deduction on account of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied, at the cost of materials used, labor or
service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever.
B. As pertains to the "gross receipts" from the telephone company servicing the City, "gross receipts" means the consideration
received for supplying telephone service, and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received
in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material, and for all services rendered
therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied, the
cost of materials used, labor or service cost, and any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or maintaining within this State, directly or by a
subsidiary or other affiliate, an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility, sales office or other place of business,
or any employee, agent or other representative operating within this State under the authority of the person or its subsidiary or other
affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located in this State permanently or
temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is licensed or qualified to do business in this State.
PERSONS: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation,
municipal corporation or political subdivision of the State, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or the representative appointed by order of
court. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no Municipal utility tax shall be assessed upon bills for utility service rendered to the Municipality
itself.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall
not include the use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code2, directly in the generation,
production, transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the City, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail,
other than from an exempt purchaser.
TRANSMITTING MESSAGES: In addition to the usual and popular meaning of a person-to-person communication, shall include the
furnishing, for a consideration, of services or facilities (whether owned or leased) or both, to persons in connection with the transmission
of messages where such persons do not, in turn, receive any consideration in connection therewith, but shall not include such furnishing
of services or facilities to persons of the transmission of messages to the extent that any such services or facilities for the transmission
of messages are furnished for a consideration, by such persons to other persons, for the transmission of messages. (1997 Code; amd.
Ord. 99-05, 6-14-1999)
3-3-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or privileges:
A. Electricity:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 50/251
1. Tax:
a. Pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code3 and any and all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the
privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of
the City at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
(1) For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: $0.004514 per kilowatt-hour;
(2) For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: $0.002962 per kilowatt-hour;
(3) For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: $0.002664 per kilowatt-hour;
(4) For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: $0.002590 per kilowatt-hour;
(5) For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: $0.002516 per kilowatt-hour;
(6) For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: $0.002368 per kilowatt-hour;
(7) For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: $0.002331 per kilowatt-hour;
(8) For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: $0.002294 per kilowatt-hour;
(9) For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: $0.002257 per kilowatt-hour;
(10) For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: $0.002220 per
kilowatt-hour.
b. The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed by the City, the State or any other political
subdivision of the State.
c. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, the tax shall not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or
collection of the tax would violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States or the constitution of the State of Illinois.
d. The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by residential customers beginning with the first
bill issued on or after August 1, 1999; and with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by nonresidential customers
beginning with the first bill issued to such customers for delivery services in accordance with section 16-104 of the Public
Utilities Act4, or the first bill issued to such customers on or after January 1, 2001, whichever issuance occurs sooner.
2. Collection Of Tax:
a. Subject to the provision of this subsection regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this Chapter
shall be collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of business in this State who delivers electricity to such
purchasers. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is
recoverable at the same time and in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity.
b. Any tax required to be collected by this subsection, and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the City by the
person delivering the electricity, provided, that the person delivering electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to
deliveries of electricity the charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that if such charges are
thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax.
c. Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the
electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax they collect to
reimburse them for their expense incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing the filing returns, remitting the tax
and supplying data to the City upon request.
3. Tax Remittance And Return:
a. Every tax collector shall, on a monthly basis, file a return on a form prescribed by the City. The return and accompanying
remittance shall be due on or before the last day of the month.
b. Following the month during which the tax is collected of or is required to be collected of or is required to be collected under
subsection A2 of this Section.
c. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under
subsection A4 of this Section, then the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the City and pay the tax directly to
the City on or before the last day of the month following the month during which the electricity is used or consumed.
4. Resales:
a. Electricity that is delivered to a person in the City shall be considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the
person receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the Director of Finance and furnishes that number to the
person who delivers the electricity and certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially nontaxable as a sale for
resale.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 51/251
b. If a person who receives electricity in the Municipality claims to be an authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to
the Municipal Clerk for a resale number. The application shall state facts showing why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this
subsection on any purchases of electricity and shall furnish such additional information as the Director of Finance may
reasonably require.
c. Upon approval of the application, the Director of Finance shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the
number to the applicant.
d. The Director of Finance may cancel the resale number of any person if the person fails to pay any tax payable under this
subsection for electricity used or consumed by the person, or if the number: 1) was obtained through misrepresentation, or 2) is
no longer necessary because the person has discontinued making resales.
e. (1) If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed
by this subsection directly to the City pursuant to subsection A2b of this Section on the amount of electricity that the reseller
uses or consumes, and shall collect the tax pursuant to subsection A1 of this Section and remit the tax pursuant to subsection
A3 of this Section on the amount of electricity delivered by the reseller to a purchaser.
(2) Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active resale number and complying with all other conditions of
this subsection shall be excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity delivered to the reseller,
provided that the person reports to the municipality the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other
information that the city may reasonably require.
5. Books And Records: Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by this subsection shall keep
accurate books and records of its business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions
that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this subsection. The books and records shall be subject to and
available for inspection at all times during business hours of the day.
6. Statute Of Limitations: No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this subsection A shall be commenced
more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount.
7. Penalties: Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other provision
of this subsection A is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.
(Ord. 99-05, 6-14-1999)
B. Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax: The rate of the simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed under the
provisions of sections 5-25 and 5-30 of the simplified municipal telecommunications tax act, PA 92-0526 is 6.0 percent (in 1/4 percent
increments) that shall take effect for all gross charges billed by telecommunications retailers on and after January 1, 2003. (Ord. 08-
02, 9-9-2002)
C. Gas: Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate
limits of the city, and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom. (1997 Code)
3-3-3: EXEMPTIONS; REGULATIONS:
No tax is imposed by this chapter with respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such
business may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by this state or any political
subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or electricity, or
engaged in the business of transmitting messages be subject to taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any
persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or electricity, or engaged in the business of
transmitting messages be subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter for such transactions as are or may become subject to
taxation under the provisions of the "municipal retailers' occupation tax act" authorized by statute and this code. (Ord. 99-05, 6-14-1999)
3-3-4: TAX AS ADDITIONAL COMPENSATION:
Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or services furnished to the municipality by the taxpayer as
compensation from the use of its streets, alleys or other public places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon, or thereunder of
poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business. (Ord. 99-05, 6-14-1999)
3-3-5: RETURN FILED:
A. Initial Return: On or before June 30, each taxpayer not otherwise hereinbefore paying said tax, shall make a return to the city
treasurer for the months of March, April, and May stating:
1. His/her name;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 52/251
2. His/her principal place of business;
3. His/her gross receipts during those months on the basis of which the tax is imposed;
4. Amount of tax;
5. Such other and related information as the corporate authorities may require.
B. Subsequent Returns: On or before the last day of every third month thereafter, each taxpayer shall make a like return to the city
treasurer for a corresponding three (3) month period. (1997 Code)
3-3-6: PAYMENT:
The taxpayer making the return hereinbefore provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the city treasurer the amount of
tax herein imposed; provided, that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he/she so elects report and pay an amount based
upon his/her total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made exclusive of any amount
previously billed, with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any difference between such billings and the taxable gross
receipts. (1997 Code)
3-3-7: CREDIT FOR OVERPAYMENT:
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under the provisions of this chapter, whether as the result of a
mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this chapter from the
taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a
claim therefor, shall be so credited. If a taxpayer under this chapter is unable to use a credit authorized by this chapter solely because
the tax imposed by this chapter has been replaced by the tax imposed under subsection 3-3-2A of this chapter then the taxpayer may
apply such credit against any tax due under subsection 3-3-2A of this chapter. (Ord. 99-05, 6-14-1999)
3-3-8: PAYMENTS FROM CITY:
Payments made by the city to persons subject to this chapter shall not be included in the gross receipts of that person and the city shall
be exempt from any charges by such person as are allowed by law because of this chapter. (1997 Code)
Chapter 4
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES; AMUSEMENT ARCADES1
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
AMUSEMENT ARCADE: Any business establishment with three (3) or more automatic devices upon its premises and which allows said
automatic amusement devices to be operated thereon for use in games, contests or amusement through the exercise of skill.
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any machine or pool table which, upon insertion of a coin, slug or token in any slot or receptacle
in the machine or attached thereto, operates for use as a game, contest or amusement through the exercise of skill. (1997 Code)
3-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to establish or operate an "amusement arcade", as hereinabove defined, within the City without first obtaining a
license for an amusement arcade from the licensing authority designated by the City Council. The licensing authority shall be an officer
or agency designated by the City Council to be the licensing authority for amusement arcades. (1997 Code)
3-4-3: APPLICATION; FEE:
A. Application; Required Information: All persons seeking a license shall submit an application, in writing, to the licensing authority. Upon
said application, the applicant shall furnish to the licensing authority the following information:
1. The names and addresses of all persons, including corporations, in whose name the application is submitted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 53/251
2. The address of the location for which the applicant seeks a license.
3. The number and type of automatic amusement devices the applicant proposes to be maintained at said location.
4. The criminal felony conviction record of the applicant, or its officers, if the applicant is a corporation, if any, and, if the applicant
does bear a conviction record of a criminal felony or felonies, any information which the applicant believes would show that the
applicant has been rehabilitated.
B. Action Of Licensing Authority: Within not more than forty five (45) days of receipt of such application, the licensing authority shall
grant or deny the application for license.
C. Fee: The licensing authority shall be empowered to collect with any application for license or renewal application, any license fee
established by the City Council. (1997 Code)
3-4-4: TERM:
A license, if granted, shall be for a period of one year, and shall be automatically renewed from year to year thereafter upon application
and payment of the license fee. (1997 Code)
3-4-5: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
A. Location: No amusement arcade shall be located within three hundred feet (300') of any church, grammar or secondary school or
residential zoning district unless such amusement arcade was so located prior to the enactment of this Chapter, or unless the
licensing authority waives the requirements of this provision. Provided, however, that any amusement arcade so located prior to
enactment of this Chapter shall not receive a license pursuant to this Chapter if at any time following such enactment the automatic
amusement devices located on the premises of such amusement arcade are removed.
B. Outside Security Lighting: Outside security lighting must be installed when such lighting is deemed necessary by the licensing
authority and the licensee is notified of this fact. (1997 Code)
3-4-6: DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
A license may be denied, revoked or suspended for one or more of the following reasons:
A. Wilful violation of any provision of this Chapter.
B. Conviction of a felony, of any person seeking or holding a license, under any State or Federal law if the licensing authority determines
that such person has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust.
C. The maximum number of licenses permitted within the City, as the Council shall from time to time determine, have been issued.
D. Wilful violation of any ordnance of the City.
E. Failure to submit a license renewal application and pay the required renewal license fee. (1997 Code)
3-4-7: HEARING PROCEDURE:
A. Notice Of Violation: If the licensing authority shall find probable cause that a licensee or applicant has violated the provisions of this
Chapter or has falsified the application form, the licensing authority shall give written notice thereof by certified mail addressed to the
licensee or applicant. Said notice shall specify the alleged grounds of said violation and shall inform the recipient of his/her right to
demand a hearing before a hearing officer designated for such purpose by the licensing authority.
B. Demand For Hearing: A demand for hearing shall be made in writing to the licensing authority and submitted no later than the tenth
day next succeeding the date of mailing of the aforesaid notice. If no demand for hearing is made within said time, the license shall
forthwith be revoked, suspended or denied.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 54/251
C. Hearing: If a hearing is demanded, it shall be held within ten (10) days thereafter, upon written notice to the party demanding hearing.
D. Hearing Officer: The Hearing Officer for such hearing shall be the Zoning Officer, which officer is empowered to hear testimony, take
evidence, and to make findings of fact.
E. Findings: The Hearing Officer shall thereafter report these findings along with the Hearing Officer's recommendations to the licensing
authority.
F. Action Of Licensing Authority: Upon receipt of the Hearing Officer's findings and recommendations, the licensing authority shall take
final action. (1997 Code)
3-4-8: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
A. Supervision By Adult: All automatic amusement devices within the premises shall be visible to, and under the supervision of, a
person of adult age.
B. Age Limit; Hours: During the regular school year, excepting weekends or legal holidays, persons under the age of sixteen (16) years
shall not be allowed to operate automatic amusement devices Monday through Friday, between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M., unless accompanied by a parent or authorized guardian.
C. Curfew Enforcement: No persons under the age of sixteen (16) years shall be allowed to enter or remain inside an automatic
amusement arcade after the time for curfew, if any, for persons that age. (1997 Code)
3-4-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any licensee who, after notice and hearing, is found to have wilfully violated any provision of this Chapter shall be subject to the
following penalties:
A. First Violation: For any first violation, a suspension of license for any period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days in duration;
B. Second Violation: For any second violation, a suspension of license for any period of time not to exceed ninety (90) days in duration;
C. Third Violation: For any third violation or more, either a suspension of license for any period of time not to exceed one hundred twenty
(120) days in duration or a revocation of license.
In addition to other penalties provided for herein, any person in violation of this Chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in
Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code)
Chapter 5
BILLIARD AND POOL HALLS1
3-5-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate, maintain or conduct a billiard, pool or bagatelle or pigeon hole table open to the public without first obtaining a
license therefor as provided in this Chapter. (1997 Code)
3-5-2: APPLICATION:
All applications for such licenses as specified in Section 3-5-1 of this Chapter shall state thereon the location of the place of business,
the number of tables to be used and the names and addresses of all persons owning all or a share of the business. (1997 Code)
3-5-3: LICENSE FEE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 55/251
The applicant shall pay therefor such license fee as the City Council shall, from time to time, determine. (1997 Code)
3-5-4: BOND REQUIRED:
No license required by the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued unless the application for said license is accompanied by a bond in
the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) conditioned to indemnify the City for any loss, damage or liability that may be incurred in
the conduct of such business. (1997 Code)
3-5-5: MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of sixteen (16) years to enter or remain in any hall licensed under the provisions of this
Chapter; provided, that any such minor may enter if such minor has been ordered to do so by the direction, consent and knowledge of
such minor's parent or guardian, and it shall be unlawful for the proprietor, owner or person in charge to permit any violation of the
provisions of this Section. (1997 Code)
3-5-6: HOURS:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit, or for any place licensed under the provisions of this Chapter to permit, the operation of, or the
being open for business of such place between the hours of one minute past twelve o'clock (12:01) midnight and nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. the following morning. (1997 Code)
Chapter 6
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS1
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT: An operator-occupied residence that provides for a charge accommodation to the public of
no more than five (5) guest rooms and operates more than ten (10) nights in a one year period. Breakfast may be provided to the guests
only. Bed and breakfast establishments shall not include motels, hotels, boarding houses, or food service establishments.
GUEST ROOM: A sleeping room serving no more than two (2) transient adult guests per night.
OPERATOR: The owner or the owner's agent who resides in the bed and breakfast establishment or on contiguous property. (1997
Code)
3-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
Licensed owner or the owner's agent may apply for a license to operate a bed and breakfast establishment. No establishment shall be
permitted to operate without such license. Such license application shall be submitted to the City Clerk along with the following:
A. Fee: Licensing fee as determined by the City Council from time to time to be necessary for the enforcement of these regulations and
the processing of such application.
B. Liability Insurance: Proof of liability insurance in such minimum coverage as the City Council shall deem from time to time as
necessary for the protection of the public.
C. Authorization To Inspect: Authorization to permit inspections upon proper notice and identification of City inspectors including
building, plumbing and electrical inspectors. (1997 Code)
3-6-3: INSPECTION:
Upon receipt of the application and all other necessary information and documents, the proper inspector or such other employee of the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 56/251
City as is designated by the City Council shall inspect such establishment to determine compliance with all applicable City ordinances.
Such inspection shall be made within twelve (12) calendar days. (1997 Code)
3-6-4: REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM STANDARDS:
Bed and breakfast establishments in addition to applicable City ordinances shall comply with the requirements and minimum standards
set forth in the Illinois Bed and Breakfast Act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 820/1 et seq., and any subsequent amendments or revisions
of that Act. (1997 Code)
3-6-5: PROOF OF INSURANCE:
The applicant shall provide proof of adequate liability insurance as required by the licensing agency. (1997 Code)
3-6-6: RENEWAL:
Each application and other requirements as are set forth in Section 3-6-2 of this Chapter shall be submitted, annually, two (2) weeks
prior to the anniversary date of the issuance of the first license. (1997 Code)
3-6-7: VIOLATION AND NONCOMPLIANCE:
If the inspecting authority, after completing an inspection, shall determine that such establishment has failed to comply with the
provisions of this Chapter or any other applicable City ordinance or State law, such inspecting authority shall issue a notice in writing.
(1997 Code)
3-6-8: HEARING:
A. Request For Hearing: Any operator affected by such notice may request, in writing, a hearing before such body as the City Council
shall, from time to time, deem appropriate for such hearings. Such request must be filed within five (5) calendar days after receipt by
the operator of the notice by certified mail from the inspecting authority.
B. Notice Of Hearing: Such hearing shall be conducted within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt by the City Clerk of a request.
Notice of the time and date of such hearing shall be given to the operator five (5) calendar days prior to the hearing date and
delivered by certified mail.
C. Action Of Hearing Officer: The Hearing Officer shall conduct a hearing taking the testimony of the operator and the inspector. Upon
hearing such other witnesses as have relevant information concerning the notice, the Hearing Officer may extend the time for
compliance beyond that provided for by the inspecting authority, may modify or withdraw the notice, or take such other actions as is
necessary to protect the public and provide substantial justice.
D. Decision Of Hearing Officer: The determination of the Hearing Officer shall be in writing in five (5) calendar days following the hearing
unless such time is extended for good cause. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be final. (1997 Code)
3-6-9: PENALTY:
A. Revocation Of License: Any operator found to be in violation of any applicable ordinance including this Chapter or of State law and
having failed to comply with such ordinance or State law upon proper notice shall have their license revoked after a hearing for that
purpose before the Hearing Officer upon five (5) calendar days notice of the time, date and place of such hearing.
B. Misdemeanor: In the event that the Hearing Officer finds at such hearing that the operator's noncompliance is without reasonable
cause or grounds, such operator shall further be guilty of a misdemeanor and, if convicted, shall be subject to penalty as provided in
Section 1-4-1 of this Code. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. Such operator may be subject to being charged
with such violation either before or after the hearing provided for in this Section. (1997 Code)
Chapter 7
PEDDLERS1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 57/251
3-7-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this Chapter, the following term shall have the meaning ascribed to it in this Section:
PEDDLER: Any person who engages in the sale or solicitation for sale of any wares, magazines, services, photographs, nostrums, or
any other merchandise of any kind, or description, when the sale or solicitation for sale of such items is done from house to house.
(1997 Code)
3-7-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTION:
No person shall hawk or peddle goods, wares, magazines, pictures, coupons or other merchandise within the City limits without having
first obtained a license for that purpose; provided, that this Section shall not apply to newsboys. (1997 Code)
3-7-3: LICENSE FEES:
The applicant shall pay therefor such license fee as the City Council shall, from time to time, determine. (1997 Code)
3-7-4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
The City Clerk shall, on written application of any suitable person and the payment to the Clerk of the license fee as herein provided,
issue a license with the Corporate Seal of the City for the term paid. (1997 Code)
3-7-5: CLERK TO KEEP REGISTER:
The City Clerk shall keep a register of names of the persons to whom such licenses have been issued, the date and the number of such
licenses, the term for which such licenses are issued, and the date such licenses expire. (1997 Code)
3-7-6: HOURS:
Said license shall only be valid between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. (1997 Code)
3-7-7: NOTICE POSTED ON ROUTE 84:
There shall be posted a notice at the south end of the City limits on Route 84, at the west end of the City limits on Route 84, at the
eastern limits of Cleveland Road; and at the eastern limits of Poppy Garden Road. Such notice shall read as follows:
Peddlers are required by ordinance to obtain a license from the City Clerk.
(1997 Code)
Chapter 8
FOOD DELIVERY VEHICLES1
3-8-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any vehicle, including wagons and motor vehicles propelled by human power, for the
storage or carrying of any meat, milk, poultry, fish, butter, cheese, lard, vegetables, bread or bakery products, or any other provisions
intended for human consumption, including beverages, in the City for the purpose of delivering any such foodstuffs to any place in the
City for their use and consumption unless a license for such vehicle is first secured and the provisions of this Chapter are fully complied
with. (1997 Code)
3-8-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for such licenses shall be made to the City Clerk and shall recite the name and address of the owner of the vehicle, the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 58/251
name of the person for whom such deliveries are made and nature of the goods carried. The Clerk shall issue such licenses and shall
give to the Mayor a list of all such licenses issued. (1997 Code)
3-8-3: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for such license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each vehicle, and shall be issued for one year. Such fees
shall be paid to the City Clerk, who shall turn them over to the City Treasurer forthwith. (1997 Code)
3-8-4: EXEMPTION:
No license fee shall be required for any vehicle used to deliver foodstuffs from any establishment which is licensed and inspected as a
food-dealing establishment in the City; but all provisions of this Chapter, other than that providing for the payment of a fee, shall be
complied with in connection with such vehicle. (1997 Code)
3-8-5: SANITATION REGULATIONS:
A. Cleanliness: All such vehicles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be thoroughly cleaned each day they are so
used.
B. Waste Material: It shall be unlawful to permit stale food, decaying matter, or any other waste material or product to accumulate in or
on any such vehicle while it is so used.
C. Dust; Insects: If unwrapped foodstuffs are transported in any such vehicle, such goods will be carried in a portion or compartment of
the vehicle which is screened or protected against dust and insects. (1997 Code)
3-8-6: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the Mayor to make or cause to be made such inspections as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this Chapter. (1997 Code)
3-8-7: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Revocation By Mayor: Any license issued under the provisions of this Chapter may be revoked by the Mayor for any violation of any
regulation hereof and such revocations shall be in addition to any fine imposed by virtue of this Section.
B. Notice Of Revocation: The licensing authority shall give written notice thereof by certified mail addressed to the licensee or applicant.
Said notice shall specify the alleged grounds of said violation and shall inform the recipient of recipient's right to demand a hearing
before a hearing officer designated for such purpose by the licensing authority.
C. Demand For Hearing: A demand for hearing shall be made in writing to the licensing authority and submitted no later than the tenth
day next succeeding the date of mailing of the aforesaid notice. If no demand for hearing is made within said time, the license shall
forthwith be revoked, suspended or denied.
D. Hearing: If a hearing is demanded, it shall be held within ten (10) days thereafter, upon written notice to the party demanding hearing.
E. Hearing Officer: The Hearing Officer for such hearing shall be the Zoning Officer and is empowered to hear testimony, take evidence,
and to make findings of fact.
F. Findings: The Hearing Officer shall thereafter report these findings along with the Hearing Officer's recommendation to the licensing
authority.
G. Action Of Licensing Authority: Upon receipt of the Hearing Officer's findings and recommendations, the licensing authority shall take
final action. (1997 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 59/251
Chapter 9
TAXICABS1
3-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following word shall have the meaning ascribed to it in this Section:
TAXICAB: Any public passenger vehicle transporting passengers for hire on a trip basis to or from a destination as directed by the
passenger. (1997 Code)
3-9-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No automobile, autocar, cab or other similar vehicle shall be used for the transportation of persons for hire within the City, whether the
said automobile, autocar or other similar vehicle secures its passengers from a public stand or stands upon the street or whether the
same is kept in a private garage, unless every such vehicle be licensed as hereinafter provided. (1997 Code)
3-9-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
A. Form; Required Information: The owner of any such automobile, autocar, cab or other similar vehicle for which it is desired to secure
a license shall make application to the City Clerk, setting forth therein the name of such owner, a description of the vehicle for which
it is desired to secure a license, and the place where such vehicle is kept, if the same is kept in a private garage. The application
shall be provided by the said Clerk.
B. Bond; Insurance; Certificate Of Safety; Fee: Upon receipt of such application and upon proof being submitted to the Clerk that the
applicant has complied with the provisions of the Illinois State law pertaining to surety bonds or insurance policies by reason of the
operation of such vehicle, and upon proof that said vehicle has been tested and a certificate of safety issued thereon, the Clerk shall
issue or cause to be issued a license for such vehicle upon the payment by the applicant of a license fee as determined from time to
time by the City Council for each vehicle. (1997 Code)
3-9-4: SAFETY TEST REQUIRED:
A. Maintenance: Every taxicab operated on streets of the City shall be kept and maintained in a good and safe mechanical condition.
B. Safety Test: Every such taxicab, within fifteen (15) days before application for license is made, shall be subjected to the safety test
provided by an official testing station as established and set up by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/13-101 et seq. Said safety test
shall include the testing and inspection of brakes, lights, horns, reflectors, rear view mirrors, safety chains, frames, axles, body,
wheels, steering apparatus and other safety devices and appliances. The passing of the safety test shall not be a bar at any time to
prosecution for operating or causing to be operated a taxicab not in good and safe mechanical condition.
C. Display Of Certificate: If the taxicab is in safe mechanical condition, the operator of the official testing station shall at once issue and
affix to said taxicab a certificate of safety which shall at all times be displayed on said taxicab.
D. Subsequent Certification: No certificate of safety issued during the second six (6) months of the license year shall be of any effect
after the first day of the succeeding year.
E. Testing, Display Required: No taxicab shall be operated upon the street, alleys or public places of said City without having been
tested as herein required or without having said certificate of safety displayed on said taxicab. (1997 Code)
3-9-5: INSIGNIA; EMBLEM:
A. Required; Specifications: Every automobile, autocar, cab or other similar vehicle licensed under the provisions of this Chapter shall
have the name of the owner thereof plainly painted in letters at least one and one-half inches (11/2") in height, and the number of the
license plainly painted in numbers at least four inches (4") in height, in a conspicuous place on the outside of each side of such
vehicle, and such name and number shall be kept so painted plainly and distinctly at all times while such vehicle is in use during the
continuance of such license.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 60/251
B. Removal: Upon the expiration of such license (unless same is forthwith renewed) such name and number shall be at once erased
from such vehicle and such vehicle shall not thereafter be used with such name or number thereon. (1997 Code)
3-9-6: ARTICLES LEFT IN TAXICABS:
Whenever any package, article, baggage or goods of any kind shall be left in or upon any vehicle licensed under the provisions of this
Chapter, the operator of such vehicle shall, upon discovery of such package, baggage or goods, forthwith deliver the same to the
policeman on duty at the police station in the City. (1997 Code)
3-9-7: REFUSAL TO CONVEY PASSENGER:
No person licensed as aforesaid when unemployed and his/her legal fare is paid or tendered to him/her, shall, without lawful excuse,
refuse to convey within the City any person, with or without baggage, as aforesaid when applied to for that purpose, or having
undertaken to convey such person, shall omit or neglect to do so, under the penalty herein prescribed. (1997 Code)
3-9-8: FARE PAYMENT IN ADVANCE:
Any person licensed as set forth in this Chapter may demand his/her legal fare to be paid in advance by any person seeking to employ
him/her, and may refuse to convey any person who shall fail to comply with such demand. Any person so licensed shall give to any
person requesting the same his/her name and the number of his/her license. (1997 Code)
3-9-9: PENALTY:
Every person who shall keep, use or operate, or be in charge, possession or control of, or cause to be kept, used or operated upon any
of the streets or public ways of the City any automobile, autocar, cab or other similar vehicle for the conveyance of passengers for hire
or reward which has not been licensed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter or who keeps, uses or operates, or causes to
be kept, used or operated, any such automobile, autocar, or other similar vehicle in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1997 Code)
Chapter 10
SCAVENGERS
3-10-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this Chapter, the following word shall have the meaning ascribed to it in this Section:
SCAVENGER: One who engages in the business or occupation of collecting and hauling for the purpose of disposal or otherwise, any
garbage, refuse, junk or other trash or material. (1997 Code)
3-10-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a scavenger or the collection or disposal of animal or vegetable refuse or
offal without having first secured a license therefor. The annual fee for such license shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00) due May 1
each year. (1997 Code)
3-10-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for such license to operate in the City as a scavenger shall be made to the City Clerk, and shall be referred by the City Clerk
to the City Council. No such license shall be issued except on the order of the City Council. (1997 Code)
3-10-4: LIABILITY COVERAGE:
All applicants shall, when making applications for license hereunder, tender to the City Clerk a certificate of insurance certifying to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 61/251
liability coverage in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each accident and a total aggregate coverage of
three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00). (1997 Code)
3-10-5: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
Any vehicle used by such scavenger in his business shall be watertight, and equipped with airtight covers for such portions as are used
for the transportation of refuse. (1997 Code)
3-10-6: SUNDAYS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven over or through any street in the City during or on Sundays. (1997 Code)
3-10-7: DISPOSAL OF REFUSE:
It shall be unlawful for any scavenger to dispose of or store any refuse any place in the City limits or within one mile thereof without first
securing the written permission of the City Council. (1997 Code)
Chapter 11
GARAGE, YARD SALES
3-11-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this Chapter, the following words or terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section:
YARD, GARAGE OR BASEMENT SALE: The holding out for sale of any new, used or antique household goods, utensils or appliances;
tools; books; papers or magazines; bric-a-brac; curios; clothing; jewelry; toys; sporting goods; cosmetics; or similar household items to
the general public and conducted on or about premises zoned for single or multi-family residential use or used as a private residence.
(1997 Code)
3-11-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; CONDITIONS; FEE:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a yard, garage or basement sale, as hereinbefore defined, on or about
premises zoned for residential use unless such person shall first obtain from the office of the City Clerk a permit for such a yard or
garage sale.
B. Display Of Permit: The permit must be displayed in a prominent place during time of sale.
C. Duration; Fee: No permit shall be granted or issued for more than three (3) consecutive days and shall be issued only upon the
completion and submission of an application form approved by the City Clerk, and upon the payment of a permit fee which the City
Council may from time to time provide. (1997 Code)
3-11-3: LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF SALES:
Yard, garage and basement sales at any one residential location or address shall be limited in number to no more than six (6) such
sales during any one calendar year and a maximum of two (2) such sales during any one calendar month. (1997 Code)
3-11-4: RECORD OF PERMITS:
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the City Clerk to maintain a record of the permits issued and the location for which such permits
are issued. (1997 Code)
3-11-5: PENALTY:
Any person in violation of this Chapter shall be subject penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. Each day a person is in
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 62/251
violation of this Chapter shall constitute a separate violation. (1997 Code)
Chapter 12
KENNELS AND PET SHOPS
3-12-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of buying, selling or dealing in birds, dogs, and other small animals used as household pets and
for domestic purposes without first obtaining a license. (1997 Code)
3-12-2: APPLICATION:
Any person desiring a license required by this Chapter shall make written application to the City Clerk, stating the name and residence
of the applicant and the place at which the applicant intends or desires to carry on the business, giving the street location as well as a
description of the premises. (1997 Code)
3-12-3: LICENSE FEE:
A. Less Than Twenty: Any person desiring a license required by this Chapter, where not less than three (3) and not more than a total of
twenty (20) birds, dogs, cats, and other small animals are held for sale as household pets and for domestic purposes shall pay a
license fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) annually.
B. More Than Twenty: Where more than twenty (20) birds, dogs, cats and other small animals are held for sale as household pets and
for domestic purposes, the license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) annually. (1997 Code)
3-12-4: INVESTIGATION:
Upon the filing of an application for a license required by this Chapter, it shall be the duty of the Building Inspector or other person or
persons designated by the City Council to cause an investigation to be made of the premises named and described in the application for
the purpose of determining the fitness and suitability of the premises for the business from a public health standpoint. The Building
Inspector or other person or persons designated by the City Council shall transmit to the City Council the application, together with
his/her recommendation for or against the issuance of the license. (1997 Code)
3-12-5: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
If the City Council shall be satisfied that the applicant or its chief officers, if applicant is a corporation, is in conformity with the provisions
of this Chapter, the City Clerk, upon payment by the applicant of the license fee prescribed in this Chapter, shall issue a license to the
applicant. (1997 Code)
3-12-6: TERM OF LICENSE:
Each license issued shall expire on April 30 following the date of its issuance. (1997 Code)
Chapter 13
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
(Rep. by Ord. 08-02, 9-9-2002)
Chapter 14
AUTOMOBILE SALES AND DEALERSHIPS
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 63/251
3-14-1: DEFINITION:
"Automobile dealership" is defined as a business engaged in the display of vehicles for sale within the city of Colona which sells four (4)
or more vehicles in any year. Sale of such vehicles need not have occurred on premises. The display of such vehicles resulting in these
sales within a year is to be enough to meet this definition. (Ord. 0-15-014, 9-15-2015)
3-14-2: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
A. All vehicles located on premises for display or sale shall have titles available on the premises for inspection at all times.
B. All such vehicles shall be properly insured and shall meet all state requirements concerning maintenance and display for public sale.
(Ord. 0-15-014, 9-15-2015)
3-14-3: BUSINESS REQUIREMENTS:
A. Any dealership located within the city limits of the city of Colona shall have its own license to do business and transact such
business, and shall be both licensed and registered with the state of Illinois, and such license and registration must be available for
inspection at all times. The license of a dealership shall only be for the designated location within the city of Colona.
B. Any business operating under the authority of a license granted by the state of Illinois by virtue of an exhibition permit for vehicle
dealers shall be required to meet the following obligations in the city of Colona:
1. The maximum concentration of vehicles will be determined for each individual dealership by the zoning officer. In no event shall
there be more than one vehicle for every two hundred (200) square feet of established parking area on exhibitor's property.
2. There shall be an annual license fee payable on May 1 of each year, in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to
the initial fee due upon license issuance. If a license is issued at any time during a year there shall be a proration of the annual
fee. All fees are nontransferable. (Ord. 0-15-014, 9-15-2015)
Chapter 14A
USED MOTOR VEHICLES AND PARTS BUSINESSES
3-14A-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of buying, selling, exchanging or dealing in used or secondhand motor
vehicles and used or secondhand parts of motor vehicles without first having obtained a license from the state. Proof of said license
shall be submitted to the city.
There shall be an annual license fee payable on May 1 of each year in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00), in addition to the
initial fee due upon license issuance. If a license is issued at any time during a year there shall be a proration of the annual fee. All fees
are nontransferable.
Existing used or secondhand dealerships within the city at the time of passage hereof shall be grandfathered for the remainder of the
year of passage and adoption of this chapter. The existing licensed dealerships shall not be transferrable without the permission of such
transfer from the city mayor and council. (Ord. 0-15-015, 9-15-2015)
3-14A-2: SEPARATE LICENSE FOR EACH LOCATION:
A separate license shall be required for each location, place, or premises where a business or occupation regulated by this chapter is
proposed to be carried on. (Ord. 0-15-015, 9-15-2015)
3-14A-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for a license required by this chapter shall be made in writing to the city clerk and shall state the following:
A. The name of the applicant, and if a corporation, the names of the principal officers and the name of one or more persons whom the
corporation shall designate as manager or person in charge;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 64/251
B. The location of the place or premises at or on which it is desired to carry on such business;
C. The length of time which the applicant has resided in the city, or if a corporation or association, the length of time which the manager
or person in charge has resided in the city;
D. What type of shop the applicant maintains in connection with the principal place of business in the city and whether it is equipped to
service and repair the types of makes of cars which the applicant intends to sell; and
E. Such other reasonable and pertinent information as the city council may from time to time require. (Ord. 0-15-015, 9-15-2015)
3-14A-4: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Upon receipt of an application for a license required by this chapter, the city clerk shall refer it to the chief of police, who shall conduct an
investigation to determine whether or not:
A. The applicant is a person of good moral character or, if a partnership, the partners are of good moral character;
B. The applicant is a bona fide resident of the state, and the manager of the applicant's business is a bona fide resident of the city;
C. The applicant proposes to engage in a legitimate used car business; and
D. The proposed business location would constitute a nuisance, fire hazard, or in any way jeopardize the safety of citizens. (Ord. 0-15-
015, 9-15-2015)
3-14A-5: LICENSE ISSUANCE; REJECTION:
When the chief of police has completed the investigation required by section 3-14A-4 of this chapter, the application and findings shall
be referred to the city council for further action. If it shall appear to the council from the investigation by the chief of police that the
license applied for should be issued and the applicable sections of this chapter have been complied with, the council may direct the city
clerk to issue the license; otherwise, it may reject the application. (Ord. 0-15-015, 9-15-2015)
3-14A-6: PERSONS ELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
No license required by this chapter shall be issued to any person unless the business to be licensed is to be operated by and for the
benefit of the person applying for such license. (Ord. 0-15-015, 9-15-2015)
3-14A-7: LICENSEE TO BE OWNER OR BENEFICIARY OF LICENSED BUSINESS:
It shall be unlawful for a person licensed pursuant to this chapter to engage in business, delineated in this chapter unless he is the
owner of such business, or unless the business is conducted for the benefit of such licensee. (Ord. 0-15-015, 9-15-2015)
3-14A-8: LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE OR ASSIGNABLE; EXCEPTIONS:
No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferred or assigned by the licensee. However, if the business licensed under this
chapter descends by the laws of intestacy, or by devise or bequest comes into the ownership of any other person, the license shall
automatically be transferred to the person who so acquires such business, subject to compliance with the terms of sections 3-14A-4 and
3-14A-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 0-15-015, 9-15-2015)
3-14A-9: EXPIRATION DATE OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on March 31 following the issuance of such licenses. (Ord. 0-15-015, 9-15-2015)
3-14A-10: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 65/251
All applications for renewal of licenses required by this chapter shall be referred by the city clerk to the council for its approval or
disapproval. (Ord. 0-15-015, 9-15-2015)
3-14A-11: GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The city council may, at any time, revoke a license issued under this chapter for any of the following reasons:
A. Conviction of the applicant or license holder of the violation of any section of this chapter or any section of this code which is related
to the licensee's business or any other violation of a statute applicable to the licensee's business or that would render the licensee an
unfit person to conduct such business;
B. The obtaining of or an attempt to obtain a license by fraudulent misrepresentation;
C. Fraud or dishonesty in any transaction relating to such business;
D. Failure to keep authentic records of business transaction relating to such business;
E. Failure to maintain a shop in connection with the applicant's principal place of business in the city tooled and equipped satisfactorily
to service or repair, in accordance with the standards set by the council, the makes and types of cars sold by the licensee. (Ord. 0-
15-015, 9-15-2015)
3-14A-12: PARENTAL CONSENT REQUIRED TO DEAL WITH MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed pursuant to this chapter to purchase or receive property from a minor without the written
consent of the minor's parent or guardian. (Ord. 0-15-015, 9-15-2015)
Chapter 15
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
3-15-1: IMPOSED:
A tax of five percent (5%) is imposed upon the gross rent charged for the privilege of renting and using a hotel or motel room within the
city of Colona for each twenty four (24) hour period or any portion of a twenty four (24) hour period. The tax shall not be levied and
imposed upon any person who rents a hotel or motel room for more than thirty (30) consecutive days or to a person who works and lives
in the same hotel or motel. (Ord. 01-06, 1-23-2006)
3-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
HOTEL/MOTEL ROOM: A room in a structure offered for rental on a daily basis, excluding permanent residents who occupy a room in
excess of thirty (30) consecutive days. One room offered for rent with or without an adjoining bath shall be considered a single
hotel/motel room. The number of hotel/motel rooms within a suite shall be computed on the basis of those rooms used for sleeping
purposes.
OWNER: Any person possessing an ownership interest in or conducting or operating a hotel or motel room or otherwise receiving cash
consideration for the rental of hotel or motel rooms.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, public or private corporation,
limited liability company or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court. (Ord. 01-06,
1-23-2006)
3-15-3: COLLECTION:
A. The ultimate incidence of liability for payment of the tax is the person who seeks the privilege of occupying the hotel or motel room,
referred to as the "renter".
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 66/251
B. The tax shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes and charges. The owner of every hotel or motel shall secure payment of
the tax from the renter of the hotel or motel room.
C. The owner shall pay over to the accounts and finance representatives of the city of Colona the tax under procedures prescribed by
the city of Colona or as otherwise specified in this chapter.
D. Every person required to collect the tax shall secure receipt of payment of the tax from the renter at the time the person who collects
the rental payment for use of the hotel/motel room. (Ord. 01-06, 1-23-2006)
3-15-4: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
The city of Colona accounts and finance department representatives may enter the premises of any hotel or motel for the inspection and
examination of records in order to assure the proper administration of this chapter, and to assure the enforcement and collection of the
tax. No person shall prevent, hinder, or interfere with the city of Colona accounts and finance representatives in the discharge of duties
authorized or prescribed under this chapter. Every owner shall keep accurate and complete books and records, available for inspection
at all reasonable times by the city of Colona, including a daily sheet showing the number of hotel or motel rooms rented during a twenty
four (24) hour period, including multiple rentals of the same hotel or motel rooms, and the actual hotel or motel tax receipts collected by
date. (Ord. 01-06, 1-23-2006)
3-15-5: PAYMENT:
A. Commencing on March 1, 2006, the owner or owners of each hotel or motel room within the city of Colona shall file a tax return,
showing tax receipts received with respect to each hotel or motel room during each month, commencing on or after February 1,
2006. The return shall be due on or before the last day of each succeeding calendar month and the return shall indicate the monthly
return period. For example a return filed on or before the last day of February shall indicate tax receipts for the preceding period of
January 1 through January 31. If the owner's average monthly tax receipts do not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) when using
as a minimum the last six (6) consecutive months as a database, the accounts and finance representatives of the city of Colona may
authorize the owner to file a return on a quarterly basis, with returns for January, February, and March due on or before April 30 of
each year, with the return for April, May, and June due on or before July 31, with the return for July, August, and September due on
or before October 31, and the return for October, November, and December due on or before January 31.
B. If the tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the rate of one and one-half percent (11/2%) for a thirty (30) day period, or a prorated
portion, from the date of delinquency shall be added to the tax and collected.
C. The amounts collected by the city of Colona pursuant to this chapter shall be expended solely to promote tourism and conventions
and to attract nonresident overnight visitors to the city. (Ord. 01-06, 1-23-2006)
3-15-6: PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of failing to pay, collect, report, or transmit the hotel/motel tax to the city of Colona, pursuant to the terms of this
chapter, shall be guilty of a municipal offense. Upon the first conviction of a municipal offense within a two (2) year calendar period, the
fine shall be no less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than two hundred ninety nine dollars ($299.00). A second or third
conviction within a two (2) year calendar period shall be no less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) and no more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00). A separate and distinct municipal offense shall be committed each day when any person shall continue a violation
of this chapter, or otherwise permit a continuing violation after notification. (Ord. 01-06, 1-23-2006)
Chapter 16
VENDOR MERCHANT
3-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation of this chapter:
MOBILE/VENDOR MERCHANT: Any person, the nature of whose business activity indicates retail sales from a mobile unit and the
intent to remain in business in the city for less than one year, and hereinafter referred to as "vendor". (Ord. 02-06, 2-13-2006)
3-16-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 67/251
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a vendor merchant in the city without first obtaining a license as
provided in this section, excepting as hereinafter provided in section 3-16-3 of this chapter.
B. An applicant for vendor merchant license shall give the following information:
1. The name or names of the person having the management or supervision of applicant's business during the time that it is
proposed it will be carried on in the city and the local address or addresses of such person while engaged in such business.
2. The permanent address or addresses of such person; whether such person will act as proprietor, agent, consignee or employee
and the credentials establishing such relationship; the name and address of the person for whose account the business will be
carried on, if any; and if a corporation, under the laws of what state the same is incorporated.
3. The place or places in the city where it is proposed to carry on applicant's business and the length of time during which it is
proposed that said business shall be conducted.
4. The place or places other than the permanent place of business of the applicant, where applicant within three (3) years next
preceding the date of said application conducted a vendor business, stating the nature thereof and giving the post office box
number and street address of any building or office in which said business was conducted.
5. A statement of the nature and character of the tangible personal property or service to be sold or offered for sale by the applicant
in the city; whether the goods are new, damaged or rejects; whether the same are proposed to be sold from stock in possession or
by sample; where the goods or products are located at the time said application is filed.
6. Whether or not the person having management or supervision of the applicant's business has been convicted of a felony within
the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of said application or of the violation of any law or ordinance relating to the same
or similar business to be conducted by applicant, the nature of such offense and the punishment therefor.
7. Whether the applicant has ever applied for a license under this chapter, which has been denied or revoked by another authority in
the state of Illinois.
8. A copy of the taxpayer's current state sales tax number and a copy of any county or state license is required.
9. A certificate of insurance for all vehicles used in the operation of the business is required.
10. Copies of any written agreements between the vendor and the owner of the location where the vendor conducts his business
must be on file with the city. (Ord. 02-06, 2-13-2006)
3-16-3: EXEMPTIONS:
Persons engaged in the following described activities are exempt from the duty of applying for a vendor merchant license:
A. Persons selling at wholesale to merchants for the purpose of the resale.
B. Persons selling or distributing newspapers.
C. Persons selling tangible personal property or services to business enterprises.
D. Persons who sell, at their permanent residence in the city, works of art or crafts made or created by such person or a member of such
person's immediate family.
E. Persons licensed by the state to sell real estate or insurance.
F. Persons selling or delivering tangible personal property or services through a permanent business licensed by the city.
G. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to events that are regulated by the city. (Ord. 02-06, 2-13-2006)
3-16-4: ISSUANCE; FEES; DISPLAY:
A. If an application for a one week license under this chapter contains a complete statement of the information required and all material
required to be submitted therewith is filed with the city clerk, the clerk shall issue the license. All other licenses for five (5) days and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 68/251
beyond require city council approval. The license issued hereunder shall not be transferable. There shall be no refund of the license
fee.
B. Before a license shall be issued, applicant shall pay to the city clerk a license fee according to the following schedule:
1. For one week, fifty dollars ($50.00) Monday through Friday only. Holidays are not included.
2. For one month, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
3. For six (6) months, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
4. For one year, four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00).
5. Duplicate licenses, five dollars ($5.00).
C. Each vendor merchant shall at all times while doing business in the city keep in the possession of such person the license required
by this chapter and shall display the license as evidence of compliance with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 02-06, 2-13-
2006)
3-16-5: DENIAL; REVOCATION:
A. The city council may deny a license to any applicant under this chapter for the following reasons:
1. Held a license under this chapter that has been revoked within two (2) years of the date of the present application.
2. Failed to make a complete application.
3. During the past two (2) years has a history of:
a. Fraudulent applications for similar licenses.
b. Misrepresentation of the quality of merchandise or services offered for sale.
c. Crimes involving personal injury.
B. The city council may revoke any license issued under the provisions of this chapter by sending a notice of revocation by certified mail
to the license holder at his last known address, return receipt requested, or by personal service on the license holder or its officers
for any of the following causes:
1. Information showing that the license was erroneously issued initially.
2. For any violation of the provisions of this chapter.
3. For any violation of any city or state law regulating the sales activities of the license holder.
C. The license shall stand denied or revoked unless within five (5) days after denial or receipt of the notice of revocation from the chief
of police the applicant or holder files a written request for a public hearing on the police chief's action. A public hearing shall be
conducted before the city council on whether a license should be denied, reinstated or revoked, as the case may be. The city council
may order the license issued or reinstated either conditionally or unconditionally, or revoke the license. Thirty (30) days' notice of the
time and place of the public hearing shall be given to the license holder, who shall have an opportunity to appear before the city
council and present any evidence or arguments he may have why the action taken by the chief of police should not be approved by
the city council. (Ord. 02-06, 2-13-2006)
3-16-6: FIXED LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. No vendor merchant shall engage in business at a fixed location without the written permission, by lease or otherwise, of the owner
or person in control of the property. This written agreement shall be signed by the parties and shall include the dates the vendor
merchant shall be conducting business. This agreement shall be submitted as part of the application.
B. A vendor merchant doing business at a fixed location shall provide sufficient off street parking space for his employees and
customers.
C. Any display of tangible personal property, or signs or advertisements therefor, shall be at least ten feet (10') from the city's right of
way. All signs and advertisements used in connection with the business licensed in this chapter shall comply with the provisions of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 69/251
the zoning code of the city of Colona.
D. A vendor merchant doing business at a fixed location shall do so only in areas properly zoned for business activity. A vendor
merchant selling food items shall comply with all applicable provisions of the health rules and regulations of Henry County. (Ord. 02-
06, 2-13-2006)
3-16-7: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
A. No person shall engage in activities regulated under this chapter on public property without first procuring special authorization from
the city council. (Ord. 02-06, 2-13-2006)
3-16-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.00). Each sale or solicitation of a sale made without a license or bond in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 02-06, 2-13-2006)
Chapter 17
FIREWORKS
3-17-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A pyrotechnic display permit must be obtained from the city clerk of Colona in order to qualify for such displays and all applicants must
be adults. (Ord. 11-06, 5-22-2006)
3-17-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
A. General: The application for such display may be obtained from the offices of the city clerk of Colona.
B. Requirements: The minimum requirements each adult applicant must meet in order to qualify for issuance of a permit are as follows:
1. Applicant must submit a written application for a permit at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date of the pyrotechnic display.
2. The pyrotechnic display service must be provided by a licensed pyrotechnic distributor, and the display must be conducted by a
licensed pyrotechnic distributor, and the display must be conducted by a licensed lead pyrotechnic operator.
3. Applicant must show proof of liability insurance in a sum not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) with an insurance
company authorized to do business in Illinois.
4. The fire chief or his designee for the local fire district must inspect the display site and ensure the display can be performed in full
compliance with the NFPA standards adopted and amended by the OSFM rules, part 235, for the type of pyrotechnic display to be
performed. Further, the chief of the fire department providing fire protection must sign the display permit. (Ord. 11-06, 5-22-2006)
3-17-3: REGULATIONS:
The permit once issued is not transferable to another person or entity and the sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for
display are lawful only for the purposes given by the permit. (Ord. 11-06, 5-22-2006)
3-17-4: FEES:
The permit fees for department approved fireworks display/pyrotechnic firing shall be as follows:
Pyrotechnic firing fees:
1 - 25 devices $ 50.00
26 - 100 devices 150.00
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 70/251
101 - 200 devices 250.00
201 plus 350.00
(Ord. 11-06, 5-22-2006)
Chapter 18
NONHOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX AND
NONHOME RULE MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
3-18-1: TAX IMPOSED:
Effective January 1, 2008, there shall be a nonhome rule municipal retailers' occupation tax and nonhome rule municipal service
occupation tax imposed:
A. Upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property which
is titled and registered by an agency of this state's government, at retail in the municipality at the rate of 0.5 percent of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this chapter is in effect for the purpose of property tax relief to
avoid an increase in the levy of real estate taxes; and
B. Upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the business of making sales of service, at the rate of 0.5 percent of the selling price
of all tangible personal property transferred by such servicemen in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate
as an incident to a sale of service, for the purpose of property tax relief to avoid an increase in the levy of real estate taxes. (Ord. 09-
07, 9-10-2007)
3-18-2: EXEMPTIONS:
Said tax may not be imposed on the sale of food for human consumption that is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other
than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and
nonprescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances, and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes, and needles used by diabetics.
(Ord. 09-07, 9-10-2007)
Chapter 19
RAFFLES AND POKER RUNS
3-19-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the CITY OF COLONA RAFFLE AND POKER RUN ORDINANCE. (Ord. 0-18-09,
4-9-2018)
3-19-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the conduct of raffles and poker runs within the City of Colona, Henry County,
Illinois. (Ord. 0-18-09, 4-9-2018)
3-19-3: DEFINITIONS:
In the construction of this chapter, the definitions hereunder shall be observed and applied:
BUSINESS: Is a voluntary organization composed of individuals and/or businesses who have joined together to advance the
commercial, financial, industrial and civic interest of a community.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: Is an organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public.
The service rendered to those eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit upon the public.
EDUCATIONAL ORGANIZATION: Is an organization or institution organized and operated to provide systematic instruction in useful
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 71/251
branches of learning by methods common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and intensity
with the course of study presented in tax-supported schools.
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION: Is an organization of persons having a common interest, the primary interest of which is to both promote
the welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of government by
caring for those who otherwise would be cared for by the government.
HARDSHIP: Is a situation in which an organization that has not been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately
before making application for a license organizes for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an identified individual or
group of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster.
LABOR ORGANIZATION: Is an organization composed of workers organized with the objective of betterment of the conditions of those
engaged in such pursuit in the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
LICENSEE: Is an organization which has been issued a license to operate a raffle or poker run.
NET PROCEEDS: Means the gross receipts from the conduct of raffles or poker runs, less sums expended for prizes, local license fees
and other reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle or poker run.
NON-PROFIT: Means organized, operated and conducted on a not-for-profit basis without personal profit to individual(s) or the
organization.
PERSON: Means an individual, firm, organization, public or private corporation, government, partnership or unincorporated association.
POKER RUN: Is an event in which participants travel to multiple predetermined locations, including a key location, to draw a playing
card or equivalent item at each location in order to assemble a facsimile of a poker hand or other numeric score. "Poker run" includes
dice runs, marble runs or other events where the objective is to build the best hand or highest score by obtaining an item at each
location.
RAFFLE: Means a form of lottery, as defined in section 28-2(b) of the Criminal Code of 2012, conducted by an organization licensed
under 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 15/ (Raffles and Poker Runs Act), in which:
A. The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a
combination of numbers or by some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated as the winning chance;
B. The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or
set of acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning chance shall not be determined
by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting contest.
RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION: Is any church, congregation, society or organization founded for the purpose of religious worship.
VETERANS ORGANIZATION: Is any association comprised of members of which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or
spouses, widows or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its members and to provide
assistance to the general public in such a way as to confer a public benefit. (Ord. 0-18-09, 4-9-2018)
3-19-4: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
Any person seeking to conduct or operate a raffle or poker run as outlined in this chapter shall submit a Raffle/Poker Run Application
using the form provided by the City Clerk. Applications must be submitted to the City Clerk at least five (5) days prior to conducting a
raffle or poker run, and prior to selling tickets or chances for a raffle. The fee for the license application is twenty five dollars ($25.00) for
all license classes. Completion of an application does not guarantee approval or issuance of a raffle/poker run license.
An organization may appeal license decisions in writing within ten (10) business days of decision by submitting notice of appeal to the
County Board Office.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, business, corporation, organization or other entity to conduct or operate a poker run, conduct or
operate a raffle or to sell, offer for sale, convey, issue or otherwise transfer for value, tickets or a chance on a raffle unless conducted
pursuant to terms outlined on a raffle or poker run license duly issued by the City of Colona and in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and the Raffles and Poker Runs Act1. A raffle or poker run license shall be valid for the period outlined on the license and shall
not be valid for more than twelve (12) months.
Raffle and poker run licenses shall be issued only to bona fide business, religious, charitable, labor, fraternal, educational or veterans
organizations that operate without profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years or
more immediately before applying for a license and which have had during that entire five (5) year period, a bona fide membership
engaged in carrying out their objectives, or to an organization that the City Clerk determines is organized for the sole purpose of
providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as a result of an
illness, disability, accident, or disaster. The City Clerk may waive the five (5) year requirement for bona fide business, religious,
charitable, labor, fraternal, educational or veterans organizations that apply for a license to conduct a raffle or poker run if the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 72/251
organization has identified and maintains a valid non-profit certification from the Internal Revenue Service, or if the organization is a
local organization that is affiliated with and chartered by a national or State organization that meets the five (5) year requirement. A
current copy of the organization's constitution, by-laws or other documentation must be included with the Raffle/Poker Run Application
at the time of submission. The following groups or individuals are ineligible for any license under this chapter:
A. Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
B. Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter;
C. Any person who is not of good moral character;
D. Any firm or organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B, or C of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit
interest, or in which such a person is active or employed;
E. Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B, or C of this section is an officer, director, or employee, whether
compensated or not; and
F. Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B, or C of this section is to participate in the management or operation
of a raffle or poker run as defined in this chapter.
Political committees must include documentation of raffle approval from the State Board of Elections when applying for a raffle license
with the City Clerk. Raffle licenses for political committees will be issued in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter.
All operation and conduct of raffles and poker runs shall be under the supervision of a single manager designated by the licensee. A
fidelity bond must be obtained by an organization conducting a raffle or poker run and the bond must be submitted with each
Raffle/Poker Run Application. A personal surety bond may be obtained from the raffle/poker manager in lieu of a fidelity bond for
organizations conducting a raffle/poker run in which the total retail value of all prizes and merchandise awarded is less than five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
Organizations may request a bond waiver from the City Clerk following a unanimous vote in support of the waiver by members of the
organization conducting the raffle or poker run. (Ord. 0-18-09, 4-9-2018)
3-19-5: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
The City Clerk shall review all raffle and poker run applications and shall, within thirty (30) days from the date of application, approve or
deny the request for license. If the application is approved, the City Clerk shall issue the raffle or poker run license according to the
following classification structure:
A. Class A - General Raffle License: A general raffle license shall permit an organization the ability to conduct a raffle. Multiple drawings
may be held to award the prizes, but all drawings must occur on the same day and at the same location.
B. Class B - One Ticket, Multiple Raffles License: The license allows up to four (4) raffles to be conducted with the same raffle tickets.
Each ticket shall specify the dates of ticket sales and the dates of each drawing. Each drawing date shall be considered a separate
raffle and will require a separate license. Each license will allow one drawing event for the prizes awarded.
C. Class C - One-Time Hardship Raffle License: This license allows a not-for-profit fund-raising organization or group organized for the
sole purpose of providing emergency financial assistance to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering severe financial
hardship as a result of an injury, disability, accident, or disaster to conduct one raffle for that purpose.
D. Class D - Twelve-Month Raffle License: A twelve-month license shall permit the conduct of a raffle or raffles. Class D licenses shall
be licensed annually for a twelve (12) consecutive month period commencing on the day the license is approved.
E. Class E - Limited Annual Raffle License: This license permits an organization to regularly conduct raffles among its own membership
at regularly scheduled organizations meetings. Drawing may only be held and chances for these raffles may only be sold on the day
of the meeting. Class E raffles shall be licensed annually on a calendar year basis. Renewal applications shall be made on or before
November 1st for the following calendar year.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 73/251
F. Class F - Poker Run License: A Class F license allows an organization to conduct a single poker run, dice run, marble run, or other
event where the objective is to build the best hand or highest score by obtaining an item or playing a randomized game. A Class F
license shall only be issued to provide financial assistance to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme
financial hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident, or disaster or to maintain the financial stability of the organization.
(Ord. 0-18-09, 4-9-2018)
3-19-6: OPERATION AND CONDUCT:
A. The operation and conduct of a raffle or poker run shall be under the supervision of at least one raffle or poker run manager
designated by the licensee.
B. The entire net proceeds of any raffle or poker run must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purpose of the license.
C. No person except a bona fide member of the licensee may participate in the management or operation of the raffle or poker run.
D. No person may receive remuneration or profit for participating in the management or operation of the raffle or poker run.
E. A licensee may rent the premises on which to determine the winning chance or chances in a raffle or poker run only from an
organization which is also licensed under this chapter.
F. Raffle chances and poker run entrance fees may be sold, offered for sale, conveyed, issued or otherwise transferred for the value
only within the area(s) stated and for the time period(s) outlined on the license. The winning chances may be determined only at the
location(s) specified on the license.
G. If a raffle drawing or poker run is unable to be held as documented on the license due to an extreme emergency or natural disaster,
the licensee must seek approval of the City Clerk before the drawing or poker run can be held on a different date. If a drawing or
poker run is cancelled due to inadequate sale of entries or raffle tickets or due to some reason other than an extreme emergency or
natural disaster, the licensee must notify all participants or ticket purchasers, refund all monies and return all prizes within thirty (30)
days. Such cancellation will be reported to the City Clerk within ten (10) days of that decision with a full explanation as to the reason.
H. The maximum price which may be charged for each entry or raffle chance sold, offered for sale, conveyed, issued or otherwise
transferred for value shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
I. Each entry or raffle chance shall have printed thereon the cost of the entry chance, the aggregate retail value of all prizes to be
awarded in the raffle or poker run, and the maximum number of raffle chances or entries to be issued, except as provided below:
1. When raffle chances or entries are sold, conveyed, issued, or otherwise transferred only at the time and location at which winning
chances will be determined and only to persons then in attendance.
2. When the raffle chance is also a ticket to an event and a portion of the cost of the ticket is designated for a dinner, golf or other
item of value to be consumed or used by the purchaser at the event.
J. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the conducting of raffles or poker runs only with written permission
of a parent or guardian. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may be within the area where winning chances in a raffle or
winning hands or scores in a poker run are being determined only when accompanied by his or her parent or guardian. (Ord. 0-18-
09, 4-9-2018)
3-19-7: DOCUMENTATION AND RECORDKEEPING:
Each licensee shall report to the City Clerk its gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds from raffles and poker runs, including the
payee, purpose, amount and date of payment. Reporting shall occur within thirty (30) days of each raffle drawing or poker run. No new
raffle or poker run licenses will be issued to an organization until all reports from the organization's previous raffles or poker runs have
been completed and submitted to the City Clerk. (Ord. 0-18-09, 4-9-2018)
3-19-8: ENFORCEMENT:
A. Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall constitute a violation. Any person, upon conviction thereof, shall
be fined not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 74/251
offense.
B. The imposition of the penalties as described in this section shall not preclude the State's Attorney from instituting appropriate action
to prevent unlawful raffle or poker runs, or to restrain, correct or abate a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 0-18-09, 4-9-2018)
Title 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1
NUISANCES1
4-1-1: NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
The following acts and conditions are declared to be nuisances:
A. Unlawful Act: It shall be unlawful to permit or do any act which endangers the public health or results in annoyance or discomfort to
the public. [65 ILCS 5/11-20-5]
B. Depositing Substances In Canal, Public Ways:
1. No person shall throw, place or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited, any dung, carrion, dead animal, offal, putrid or
unwholesome substance, or the contents of any privy into the canal within the limits of the City or upon any street, alley or public
grounds, and upon any lot within the limits of the City.
2. It shall be unlawful to throw, place or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited, any unsightly substances on any public property
of the City. [65 ILCS 5/11-20-4, 740 ILCS 55/221 subd. 1, and 55/221b]
C. Garbage And Refuse:
1. Burning Refuse: It shall be unlawful to burn any incombustible or other organic refuse outside a lawfully constructed incinerator, so
as to permit said refuse to be blown away by the wind. No person shall cause to be burned any refuse at the front of a lot or near
public streets. [415 ILCS 5/9(d)]
2. Disposal Of Garbage: It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain within the City any garbage or other materials subject to
decay, excepting in tight containers with tight-fitting lids not in excess of thirty three and one-half (331/2) gallons. It shall be
unlawful to permit to fall from any vehicle any garbage, refuse or ashes on any public street in the City; provided, that this
subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting the placing of garbage, refuse or ashes in a container complying with the
provisions of this Title for the purpose of having such matter collected and disposed of2. [740 ILCS 55/221a]
3. Place Refuse For Collection: It shall be unlawful for any resident within the City to place for more than twenty four (24) hours any
refuse or garbage intended for disposal collection on or along or next to City streets, alleyways, and other travelled areas where
refuse collection is made.
D. Sale Of Unwholesome Food And Drink: It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any unwholesome or polluted food or drink of any
kind in the City. [65 ILCS 5/11-20-2]
E. Pollution Of City Water Supply: It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to obstruct or pollute any watercourse or source of
water supply in the City. [740 ILCS 55/221 subd. 3]
F. Stagnant Pools Of Water: Any stagnant pool of water in the City is hereby declared to be a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any
person to permit any such nuisance to remain or exist on any property under his or her control. [65 ILCS 5/11-20-4]
G. Discharging Polluting Substances: It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or cause to be connected, any drain carrying or to
carry any toilet, sink, basement, septic tank, cesspool, industrial waste, or any fixture or device discharging polluting substances to
any storm water drain in the City. [605 ILCS 5/9-123]
H. Smoke Emission: It shall be unlawful to cause or permit the emission of dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or
other agent in the City so as to cause annoyance or discomfort to the residents thereof. For the purpose of testing and grading the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 75/251
density of smoke, the Ringelmann Smoke Chart as published and used by the United State Geological Survey shall be and is hereby
adopted as a standard for such grading and the smoke shall be and is hereby defined as declared to be "dense" when it is of a
degree of density of number 3 of said chart, or greater, for more than six (6) minutes in any one hour whether such period of time is
consecutive or not. [65 ILCS 5/11-19.1-11]
I. Swimming In Canal: There shall be no swimming within the limits of the City except adjacent to places where there are available
showers and suitable places for changing of clothes. No person, regardless of the facilities, shall swim in the canal.
J. Deposits In Ditches: It shall be the responsibility of landowners to maintain ditches abutting such owner's property free from debris,
trash and other nonindigenous objects which may constitute a health or safety hazard. Any owner who fails or refuses to maintain
abutting ditches free of debris, trash and other nonindigenous objects after proper notice to such owner by the City shall be subject
to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code.
K. Firewood Stacks: Firewood shall be stacked in a neat and orderly manner in the side or rear yard of a residence. Residents shall be
allowed two (2) weeks from the date the wood is obtained to comply with this Chapter. Failure to comply with this regulation is hereby
declared a nuisance and is unlawful. [65 ILCS 5/11-53-1]
L. Cluttered, Discarded Or Abandoned Items: It is hereby declared a nuisance and unlawful to maintain premises cluttered with
discarded or abandoned items of personal property or with tools or personal property used in a business or trade or to leave such
objects haphazardly upon such premises.
M. Landscape Waste: It is hereby declared a nuisance and unlawful to allow piles of brush and/or fallen or cut tree limbs to remain on
the premises from which it was grown. No piles of brush, tree limbs or grass clippings shall be allowed to be brought from a premises
from which it was grown to another premises unless it is a landfill or compost site approved by the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency. [65 ILCS 5/11-42-14] (1997 Code)
4-1-2: ABATEMENT REQUIRED:
The existence of any violation of the provisions of Section 4-1-1 of this Chapter or of any provisions of this Title shall be deemed a
nuisance and shall be abated as hereinafter provided. (1997 Code)
4-1-3: INVESTIGATION BY CITY; POWER OF ENTRY:
A. Duty To Investigate: For the purpose of discovering nuisances, it shall be the duty of the police, fire, and building officers and
inspectors to investigate, confirm and report any nuisances coming to their attention.
B. Proper Identification; Entry On Premises: In order to investigate, confirm and report nuisances, said officers and inspectors shall,
upon proper identification, be permitted at any reasonable hour and in a reasonable manner, to visit and enter into or upon any
premises or property within the City to make an investigation thereof, if they shall have reasonable grounds to believe that a
nuisance exists. (1997 Code)
4-1-4: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
A. Nuisance Determined: Whenever any nuisance shall be reported to or investigated and determined by the police, fire, or building
officers or inspectors, notice shall be given to the owner or person in control of the property or premises involved and to the
appropriate City officials whose functions include the abatement of such nuisances.
B. Notice To Abate:
1. Whenever any building official or inspector or any police or fire officer determines that a nuisance exists on any private property or
premises, the proper City official shall cause a written notice to be served upon the owner or person in control of such property or
premises who is causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance, which notice shall give the person served ten (10) days from
the date of service of the notice to abate the nuisance. Such notice shall be a means of personal service of a copy of the complaint
or by certified or registered mail of a copy of the complaint. Personal service shall be by any authorized inspector from the City or
by any police officer of the Police Department or any person authorized by law to make personal service.
2. Such notice shall fairly apprise such person of the nature of the nuisance, his/her duty to abate or remove the nuisance within the
time provided therein, the penalty for failure to abate the same and shall state that, if said nuisance is abated by the City, liability
for necessary expenses to be incurred shall accrue as provided in Section 4-1-5 of this Chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 76/251
C. Time Limits: It is hereby declared the duty of any person determined to have created, caused, erected, maintained or permitted a
nuisance to exist within the City to discontinue and abate such nuisance within ten (10) days, or such other time period as may be
specified in the notice, from the time he/she receives written notice thereof.
D. Abatement By City: Whenever any nuisance is not abated by the owner, lessee or person in control of the premises or property
affected within the time provided by notice, the proper City officer shall cause the abatement or removal of such nuisance.
E. Summary Abatement By City: Whenever any nuisance: 1) constitutes or is deemed to be an imminent or immediate danger to the
public health or safety, or 2) exists on public property, the proper City officer shall cause such nuisance to be summarily and
immediately abated and removed, regardless of any ten (10) day or other time period specified by notice to the person responsible
therefor; provided, however that in situation 1) above, such officer shall have first applied for and obtained the written permission of
the Mayor for such summary abatement. (1997 Code)
4-1-5: COSTS ASSESSED; LIEN:
A. Lien: Any costs or expenses of abatement reasonably incurred by the City pursuant to the provisions of subsection 4-1-4D of this
Chapter shall be deemed a debt to the City by the owner, lessee or person in control of premises upon which such nuisance existed;
provided, that where specifically provided in this Code or by statute3, such costs and expenses shall become a lien upon the real
estate affected, superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens.
B. Civil Action: It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to enforce by civil action any and all such debts or liens as provided in subsection
A of this Section. (1997 Code)
4-1-6: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
A. General Penalty: Whenever in this Chapter any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or a nuisance, or whenever the
doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, when no specific penalty is provided therefor, any
person violating such provision shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code.
B. Failure To Abate:
1. Separate Offense: It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Chapter for any person to neglect, refuse or otherwise fail to remove
or abate any nuisance after expiration of the ten (10) days or other specified time period provided by notice thereof, and each
twenty four (24) hours or fraction thereof during which such nuisance continues or exists shall be deemed a separate offense.
2. Penalty: Any person who shall cause, permit or allow a nuisance to continue or exist as provided for in subsection B1 above shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code)
Chapter 2
WEEDS AND GRASS1
4-2-1: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
It shall be the duty of the owner or person in possession of premises situated within the city to cut weeds and grass growing on their
respective premises whenever the same shall be in need of cutting. In no event shall such weeds and grass be allowed to grow in
excess of eight inches (8"). (1997 Code)
4-2-2: ABUTTING DITCHES:
It shall be the duty of the owner of premises situated in the city to maintain abutting ditches by cutting grass, weeds and other
indigenous growth when needed. In no event shall the grass, weeds or other indigenous growth be in excess of eight inches (8"). (1997
Code)
4-2-3: ABATEMENT BY CITY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 77/251
A. Cutting By City: If the owner or person in possession shall allow weeds and grass to grow to a height of eight inches (8") or more, the
city shall be authorized to cut said weeds and grass and maintain the premises in accordance with this chapter.
B. Cost Of Abatement: The city shall have recourse against the owner and/or party in possession for the recovery of such expenses
related to this chapter by first billing the owner and requesting payment within a specified time.
C. Nonpayment Of Costs; Lien: If the bill is not paid, the city may file a lien against the premises in the office of the recorder of deeds of
Henry County.
D. Redemption Of Lien: Redemption of the lien shall include any attorney fees, recording costs and any other expenses incurred. This
recourse is not exclusive as the city may take any other action as permitted by law. (1997 Code)
E. Notice To Property Owners: If the city of Colona by necessity has to give notice of violations of weed and grass height limitations, it
shall be sufficient that such notice may be given only once to a property owner during any calendar year. Such notice may be sent by
regular mail addressed to the address of property owner as shown on the tax assessment records. Such mailing shall be sufficient
notice to such property owner for any calendar year. (Ord. 0-13-12, 10-22-2012)
4-2-4: FEES FOR MOWING:
Fees for mowing shall be set from time to time as the city council shall determine. (1997 Code)
A. Mowing expenses per mowing is:
1. One hundred dollars ($100.00) up to ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
2. Two hundred dollars ($200.00) up to one acre (43,560 square feet).
3. One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per part or whole acre in excess of first acre mowed.
B. That each time a mowing takes place there shall be in addition to the mowing charge an administration charge of one hundred dollars
($100.00) added each time a mowing occurs. (Ord. 0-02-13, 6-10-2013)
Chapter 3
GARBAGE COLLECTION1
4-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a safe, sanitary and efficient method for the collection and disposal of all residential solid
waste and yard waste to safeguard the citizens of the City from hazards to their health, safety, and welfare that result from the
uncontrolled collection and disposal of solid waste. (1997 Code)
4-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms are defined:
BULKY RUBBISH: Rubbish either too large or heavy to be loaded in solid waste collection vehicles with safety and convenience by solid
waste collectors with the equipment available therefor.
CITY: The City of Colona, Illinois.
COMMERCIAL UNITS: Any business or multiple-family dwelling larger than a duplex and mobile home parks.
COMMERCIAL USER: Income-producing establishments; churches, schools and multiple-family dwellings (more than 2 residential
units) and any other entity not considered single-family residences or residential duplexes which elect to use dumpsters.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: Solid waste material including but not limited to, explosives, rags or other waste soaked in volatile and
inflammable materials, drugs, poisons, radioactive materials, hot ashes, wastes contaminated by infection or contagious diseases,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 78/251
highly combustible materials and other materials which may present a special hazard to collection or disposal personnel, equipment or
to the public.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE: Petroleum distillate-based solvents, oil-based liquid paint, paint strippers, and pesticides.
OWNER: The owner of that particular real estate.
PACKER UNITS: A garbage truck used to compact and then haul garbage and rubbish.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
REFUSE: Garbage and rubbish.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT: Any building or buildings used solely for home occupancy and includes single-family dwellings and
duplexes.
RESIDENTIAL GARBAGE: Garbage produced at residential dwelling units.
RESIDENTIAL RUBBISH: Rubbish resulting from the maintenance and operation of residential dwelling units.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes.
SOLID WASTE: Unwanted or discarded garbage or rubbish.
SOLID WASTE CONTAINERS: A water-resistant receptacle, nondisposable, designed for the temporary storage of solid waste.
SUPERINTENDENT: The superintendent of public works of the city.
USER: The owner, tenant or occupant of the property entitled to use the services provided by this contract.
WHITE GOODS: Appliances that contain freon such as refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners, as well as nonfreon items such as large
household appliances, including washers, dryers and hot water heaters.
YARD WASTE: Organic debris (grass clippings, leaves, flowers, tree branches and limbs, etc.) which is produced as part of yard and
garden development and maintenance.
In any dispute as to other definitions of terms, Webster's dictionary shall control. (1997 Code)
4-3-3: COLLECTION:
A. Use Of City Contractor Required: All residents of the city shall exclusively use the contractor selected by the city for the collection of
residential solid waste and yard waste in a manner and degree of frequency to be determined by motion of the city council, but not
less frequently than once a week.
B. Collection Not Provided By City: The city shall not provide for the collection of commercial solid waste, hazardous materials or any
residential solid waste or yard waste not prepared for disposal pursuant to this chapter.
C. Bulky Waste: Bulky rubbish will be collected by special pickup procedures as determined by motion of the city council.
D. Written Procedures: A copy of any and all procedures under the provisions hereof shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall
be available for public inspection. (1997 Code)
4-3-4: NONDISPOSABLE CONTAINERS:
Solid waste shall be placed in suitable containers. Solid waste containers shall not be more than thirty three and one-half (331/2)
gallons. Containers shall be waterproof and fitted with tight-fitting lids. The containers shall have handles, bails or other suitable lifting
devices. The containers shall be of a type originally manufactured for solid waste, with tapered sides for easy emptying. They shall be of
light weight and sturdy construction. The weight of any individual container and contents shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds. Galvanized
iron and similar metal containers, rubber or fiberglass containers and plastic containers which do not become brittle in cold weather may
be used. Oil or grease drums, paint cans and similar containers shall not be acceptable for use as containers. (1997 Code)
4-3-5: YARD WASTE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 79/251
A. Separation Required: All yard waste shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all other garbage and refuse accumulated on
the premises and shall be composted on the premises or placed in approved degradable bags and put out for collection.
B. Containers: Persons choosing not to compost yard waste on their own property may place yard waste in specially marked degradable
bags for collection. Only bags sold or specifically authorized by the city and identified as such may be used. The city, by motion, will
establish the size, use and cost of the yard waste bags and where the bags will be available for purchase. Yard waste bags
containing material other than yard waste shall not be collected. Yard waste bags, when used, may not exceed fifty (50) pounds in
weight. (1997 Code)
4-3-6: WHITE GOODS:
A. Sticker Required: Residential dwelling units may have white goods picked up for disposal. If the city or city provider is to pick up the
white goods, the owner of the white goods must purchase a city or city provider approved sticker and place it on the white goods to
be picked up. Cost of such sticker shall be as determined from time to time by agreement between City and/or City provider.
B. Independent Disposal Service: Nothing in this section shall prohibit the owner of the white goods from contracting directly with a
disposal service to remove the white goods. (Ord. 07-01, 5-14-2001)
4-3-7: SOLID WASTE VEHICLES:
Each truck or vehicle used in the collection of solid waste shall be equipped with either an all metal watertight box or with a box with a
metal lining so that there shall be no escape of liquid contents from the box onto the ground or street. All vehicles used for the collection
of solid waste shall be kept closed at all times except when stopped to receive solid waste. Any truck, trailer or other vehicle transporting
solid waste on the streets of the City shall be covered with a canvas or other effective means to prevent the same from falling or blowing
onto the streets of the City. (1997 Code)
4-3-8: FEE COLLECTION PROCEDURES:
There is hereby established and the City shall impose, collect and enforce a schedule of mandatory fees for solid waste collection
services as follows:
A. Residential Dwelling Units: Residential dwelling units will be charged as a single-family rate per dwelling unit per month.
B. Deposit: There shall be no customer deposit to renters that have the service in their name.
C. Statements: Charges for garbage disposal service shall be billed, dated and sent out on the water-sewer bills, but shall be
maintained in a separate account. Billing for garbage disposal service shall be on the water-sewer bill issued immediately prior to
that month's disposal service. (1997 Code)
D. Delinquent Accounts: Bills for service shall be rendered monthly and shall be considered delinquent twenty (20) days after their
rendition. In the event of failure to pay the bills within the twenty (20) day period, an additional charge of ten percent (10%) of the
present bill shall be added as a late payment penalty to arrive at the total bill for refuse with delinquency charges. (Ord. 0-15-23, 11-
23-2015)
1. Collection; Lien: If an account is delinquent for sixty (60) days, the City Clerk shall be authorized and directed to institute legal
proceedings, in the name of the City, to collect the delinquent account or place a lien against the premises for nonpayment of
services or effectuate any other remedy provided by law to collect any such delinquencies.
2. Costs Of Collection: Users of the service and the owner of the subject real estate shall be liable for all costs associated with the
collection action including reasonable attorney fees.
3. Notice To Owner: Failure of the City Clerk or Collector to mail the notice to the owner of the premises, if the owner is different than
the occupant or user of the garbage collection service, or the failure of the owner to receive the notice shall not affect the right to
foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in the foregoing subsections.
4. Release Of Lien: If the City shall have filed the statement of lien claim with the County Recorder of Deeds, then before the City will
execute and file a release of the lien claim with the County Recorder of Deeds, there shall be paid to the City Collector or Clerk all
outstanding amounts plus eighteen percent (18%) per year interest on the principal amount due to the City plus a sum sufficient to
cover the City's expenses in recording and releasing the lien claim and payment of the City's attorney fees, if any.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 80/251
E. Termination Of Service:
1. Notice Of Termination: Any user requesting a termination of service shall give written notice to the City ten (10) days prior to the
time such termination of service is desired. (1997 Code)
2. Temporary Discontinuation: If the dwelling is vacant more than ninety (90) days and will continue to be vacant, a temporary vacant
discontinuation of service may be applied for by submitting the proper form to the City Clerk or Collector. If any usage of sewer or
water is found on the account during that time, discontinuation will cease and service will be charged beginning with the month
usage begins. If a property will be vacant from three (3) months to six (6) months and the property owner(s) reside at that property,
a property owner may apply for temporary vacation discontinuation of service during this time on the form supplied by City Hall,
and it will be submitted for approval to the City Clerk. If any usage of sewer or water is found on the account during that time,
discontinuation will cease and service will be charged for each month that was suspended. Discontinuation of service less than
three (3) consecutive months and more than six (6) consecutive months is not allowed under the vacation rate. (Ord. 0-17-12, 7-
24-2017)
3. Responsibility For Payment: Responsibility for payment of services prior to the date of termination shall be with the owner of the
premises. No penalty or past due bills shall be charged for transferring the service to subsequent users.
F. Refunds: The City Collector or Clerk is authorized and directed to refund the unused portion of a fee paid in advance.
G. Separate Account: The City Clerk is authorized to establish a separate account to receive funds herein and to pay the proper and
authorized contractor pursuant to contract as entered into by the City.
H. Rate; Administration Fee: The rate charged each unit shall be set from time to time by the Council, over and above the per unit
charge by the contractor. Such fee is to cover costs of administering the accounts by the City. (1997 Code)
4-3-9: AUDIT:
The City may conduct an audit annually to ensure proper payment and to prevent fraudulent usage. (1997 Code)
4-3-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each separate violation of this chapter in addition to any other civil or criminal penalties the City may choose to
pursue according to law. (1997 Code)
Title 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT1
5-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created a police department for the city which shall consist of the chief of police, who shall be the ex officiate
superintendent of police. (Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-2015)
5-1-2: POLICE COMMISSION:
It shall be the duty of the police commission to take applications on a form prescribed by the city council, and upon receiving said
applications, conduct an investigation as to the fitness of the applicant. It shall also be the duty of the police commission to recommend
to the council the promotion of police officers. The corporate authorities reserve the right to accept or reject the recommendation of the
police commission where promotion of police officers are concerned and may consider previous background checks and service records
in their deliberation of such recommendations. (Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-2015)
5-1-3: CHIEF OF POLICE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 81/251
A. Head Of Department: The chief of police shall be the head of the department and have supervision over all officers and members
thereof. The chief of police shall be allowed to flex his/her daily schedule to attend required meetings of the corporate authorities.
The chief of police shall be under the direction of the collective corporate authorities. No one member of the corporate authorities
has the authority to act alone to direct the chief of police. If there arises a public safety emergency situation, the mayor, in the
absence and consent of the aldermanic council, shall have the authority to direct the chief of police in the time of a public safety
emergency.
B. Mayor To Appoint: Mayor is hereby empowered to make appointments to the police department of the city by and with the advice and
consent of the city council, and shall have power to make necessary rules setting forth the qualifications necessary for appointment
to the said department.
C. Responsibilities: The chief of police shall keep such records and make such reports concerning the activities of the police department
as may be required by statute, by ordinance or by the city council. The chief shall be responsible for the performance by the police
department of its functions. All persons who are members of the police department shall serve subject to the orders of the chief of
police.
D. Chain Of Command: Shall there arise a matter within the police department where there may be a grievance of the subordinate
members of the police department with the chief of police, the chain of command will be followed as prescribed by the current
internal policies and/or by the prescription of remedies mutually agreed to in the current bargaining agreement.
E. Chief Of Police Compensation: The compensation provided for the police chief shall be as fixed by the council from time to time.
F. Duties: It shall be the duty of the chief of police to see to the enforcement of all of the provisions of the bargaining agreement, all other
written city policies or ordinances in effect that do not conflict with the FOP bargaining agreement, shall be enforced.
G. Authority To Alter Bargaining Agreements, City Code, And All Other Written City Policies: The chief of police does not have the
authority to supersede or alter any provisions agreed to in writing within the bargaining agreement during its prescribed term at any
time as a temporary or permanent verbal agreement. The chief of police must have the permission of the corporate authorities to
supersede or alter all other written city policies or ordinances. The corporate authorities do not have the authority to supersede or
alter any provisions agreed to in writing within a bargaining agreement during its prescribed term, after acceptance of said
agreement, unless both the city and the bargaining unit agree to mutually open the contract with the intent to bargain the existing
language during its prescribed term. (Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-2015)
5-1-4: MEMBERSHIP2:
A. Bargaining Unit Members And Agreement: The city has entered into a bargaining unit agreement with the members of the Colona
bargaining members of the Colona police department. All other written policies and ordinances of the city shall apply to all members
of the police department that do not conflict with the terms of agreement of the current bargaining agreement during its prescribed
term.
B. Conduct: It shall be the duty of every member of the police department to conduct him/herself in a proper and law abiding manner at
all times, and to avoid the use of unnecessary force. The current bargaining agreement shall supersede this section if this section
conflicts therein. Each member of the department shall obey the orders and directions of his/her superior in the chain of command,
with the chief of police being the head of the chain of command. (Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-2015)
5-1-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The chief of police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations that do not conflict with the current bargaining unit agreement, all
other written city policies, and ordinances as the chief shall deem advisable. Such rules must be approved by the city council prior to
execution and shall be bonding on all such members of the police department. Such rules and regulations may cover, besides the
conduct of the members, rules for the better efficiency of the department. (Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-2015)
5-1-6: STOLEN, ABANDONED, OR LOST PROPERTY3:
The chief of police shall have care and control of all lost, abandoned or stolen property recovered in the city. If the stolen, abandoned or
lost property is not claimed after six (6) months from the date said property was recorded as received, the city may hold a public auction
of said property as prescribed by drafting an ordinance to do so. (Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-2015)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 82/251
5-1-7: REWARDS:
The chief of police, for meritorious service rendered by any member of the police department and the due discharge of his or her duties,
may permit such member to retain for his or her own benefit, so far as may be permitted by law, any reward or present tendered
therefor, and it shall be cause of removal for any member of the force to receive any such reward or present without notice thereof to the
chief of police and without permission of the chief of police. (Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-2015)
5-1-8: RESERVED:
(Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-2015)
5-1-9: PART TIME POLICE OFFICERS:
A. Training: All police officers, other than those officers who shall be employed on a full time basis, shall be qualified to enter and
successfully complete any training mandated by the Illinois law enforcement training standards board.
B. Hiring Standards: Any person employed as a part time police officer must meet the following standards:
1. Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health, and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.
2. Be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
3. Pass a medical examination.
4. Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
5. Possess a valid state of Illinois driver's license.
6. Possess no prior felony convictions.
7. Any individual who has served in the U.S. military must have been honorably discharged.
C. Submittal To Law Enforcement Training Standards Board: The aforesaid hiring standard, particularly with respect to part time police
officers employed by the city of Colona, Illinois, shall be submitted to the Illinois law enforcement training standards board, as
required by statute.
D. Maximum Hours: Part time officers will work no more than one thousand five hundred sixty (1,560) hours in a calendar year. (Ord. 0-
15-001, 3-24-2015)
5-1-10: REPEALER:
That all ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. (Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-2015)
5-1-11: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from after its passage, approval and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-
2015)
Chapter 2
GENERAL OFFENSES1
5-2-1: OFFENSES RELATING TO THE PERSON:
5-2-1-1: FRAUD, CONCEALMENT AND FALSE ACTIVITIES:
A. Admission Fees, Fraudulently Avoiding Payment Of: It shall be unlawful for any person to fraudulently enter, without payment of the
proper admission fee, any theater, ballroom, lecture, concert or other place where admission fees are charged; provided, however,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 83/251
that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit or restrict the free admission of police officers engaged in the performance
of police duties to any place of public entertainment or amusement. [65 ILCS 5/11-5-1]
B. Concealing Knowledge: It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal knowledge of the commission of any offense or to conceal
knowledge of any unlawful act as defined in this code. [720 ILCS 5/31-3]
C. False Alarm: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly start or spread any false alarm of fire in the city. [720 ILCS 5/26-1(a)(2)]
D. False Pretenses: It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain any food, drink, goods, wares or merchandise under false pretenses, or
to enter any public place and call for refreshments or other articles and receive and refuse to pay for same, or depart without paying
for or satisfying the person from whom he or she received the food, goods, wares and merchandise. [65 ILCS 5/11-5-1, 720 ILCS
5/17-1]
E. Swindling: It shall be unlawful for any person, who by color, or aid of any trick or sleight of hand performance, or by fraud or by
fraudulent scheme, cards, dice or device, to win for himself/herself or for another any money or property or a representative of either.
[65 ILCS 5/11-5-1, 720 ILCS 5/28-1] (1997 Code)
5-2-1-2: ASSAULT OR BATTERY; FIGHTING:
A. Assault: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit "assault" which is hereby defined as any conduct which places another in
reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery. [720 ILCS 5/12-1]
B. Battery: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit "battery". A person commits battery if he/she intentionally or knowingly, without
legal justification and by any means, causes bodily harm to an individual or makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking
nature with an individual. [720 ILCS 5/12-2]
C. Fighting: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly start a fight, or to fight, or to commit any assault or battery in any public
place in the city. [65 ILCS 5/12-3.2] (1997 Code)
5-2-1-3: CRUELTY TO PERSONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cruelly or inhumanely whip, injure, beat or mistreat his or her own spouse, child, stepchild or
apprentice, or other child under his or her care. [720 ILCS 5/12-3.2] (1997 Code)
5-2-1-4: ENCOURAGING DELINQUENCY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, by any act or neglect, to encourage, aid or cause a child to come within the purview of the juvenile
authorities; and it shall likewise be unlawful for any person, after notice that a driver's license of any child has been suspended or
revoked, to permit such child to operate a motor vehicle during the period that such driver's license is suspended. [720 ILCS 130/2]
(1997 Code)
5-2-1-5: ESCAPES:
A. Attempt: It shall be unlawful for any person convicted of any offense or in lawful custody to escape or attempt to escape from custody.
[720 ILCS 5/31-6]
B. Aid In: It shall be unlawful for any person to aid or assist any person to escape from lawful confinement or to assist any person to
escape from the custody of any peace officer. [720 ILCS 5/31-7] (1997 Code)
5-2-1-6: THEFT AND RELATED OFFENSES:
A. Petit Theft: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit "petit theft" which is hereby defined as a theft when the property taken is of
value of less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), with the intent to permanently deprive the owner of use or possession of the
property. [720 ILCS 5/16-1]
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 84/251
B. Possession Of Burglar Tools: It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his/her possession any nippers of any description known
as burglar's nippers, picklock, skeleton key, jimmy or other burglar's instrument or tool of any description, unless it be shown that the
possession is innocent or for a lawful purpose. [720 ILCS 5/19-2] (1997 Code)
5-2-1-7: GAMBLING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Gamble or attend any gambling resort or to make any bet, lottery or gambling hazard or to buy or sell any chances or tickets in any
gambling game, arrangement or devices.
B. Possess any gambling device or paraphernalia with the intent to use the same for an unlawful purpose, and any such device or
paraphernalia kept with such intent may be confiscated by any member of the police department.
C. Advertise any gambling house or resort in any street, alley or other public place within the city. [65 ILCS 5/11-5-1, 720 ILCS 5/28-1]
(1997 Code)
The above prohibition of gambling, and possession of gambling devices or paraphernalia, shall not apply to video gaming devices,
as authorized by the Illinois legislature, and as licensed by the Illinois gaming board, which shall be allowed. (Ord. 0-09-12, 8-27-
2012)
5-2-1-8: GAMING HOUSE:
No person shall keep or maintain any gaming house or room, or any place where gaming or betting of any kind is done or going on, or
shall procure or permit any persons to come together in any house, rooms or place occupied or owned by him/her, or under his/her
control, for the purpose of playing at any game for money or other valuable thing, or anything representing or intended to represent
money or other thing of value, or shall permit any such persons to play at any such game when they have come together in any such
room, house or place. [65 ILCS 5/11-5-1] (1997 Code)
5-2-1-9: INTOXICATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be in an intoxicated condition in or on any street, alley or other public place in the City. [65 ILCS
5/11-5-3] (1997 Code)
5-2-1-10: VAGRANCY:
It shall be unlawful:
A. For any person without visible means of support and the physical ability to work not to seek employment or labor, or to refuse to work
when employment is offered him/her.
B. For any person to seek alms as a business.
C. For any person to roam about from place to place without any lawful business.
D. For any idle or dissolute person or associate of known thieves to wander about the streets at a late and unusual hour of the night, or
to lodge in any other place than is kept for lodging purposes without the permission of the owner of the property or the person in
possession thereof.
E. For any person to consort habitually with common prostitutes, habitual drunkards or any user of narcotics. [65 ILCS 5/11-5-4] (1997
Code)
5-2-1-11: OFFENSES RELATING TO CITY OFFICIALS:
A. False Representation: It shall be unlawful for any person to represent falsely himself/herself to be an officer of the City or to attempt
to impersonate any such officer or, without authority, perform any official act therein on behalf of an officer. [720 ILCS 5/17-2]
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 85/251
B. Resisting An Officer: It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere wilfully with, resist, delay, obstruct, molest or threaten to molest
any officer of the City in the exercise of his/her official duties. [720 ILCS 5/31-1]
C. Refuse To Assist Police Officers: It shall be unlawful for any male citizen over the age of eighteen (18) years to refuse or neglect to
render assistance to any police officer when called upon for such assistance or aid in the suppression of riot or other unlawful
assemblage or in the arrest of any person who has committed an offense. [720 ILCS 5/31-8] (1997 Code)
5-2-2: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER:
5-2-2-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of disorderly conduct or of any conduct tending toward a breach of the peace. The
causing or making of any unnecessary loud noise or shouting or yelling shall be considered disorderly conduct. [720 ILCS 5/26] (1997
Code)
5-2-2-2: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
A. Definitions: As used in this Section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
LOUD, UNUSUAL NOISES: The playing of music at such volume that the activities of another are being disturbed; or shouting,
screaming such that the activities of another are being disturbed; or in any manner creating such volume of noise not pertaining to
the maintenance or utility of the premises that disturbs the activities of another.
PRINCIPAL ADULT OCCUPANTS: The owner or lessor or the premises or the person or persons who maintain the premises and
reside at such premises.
B. It shall be unlawful for the principal adult occupants of any residence to allow their premises to be used by any person, whether a
resident of the premises or a guest or visitor; to wilfully, maliciously and intentionally disturb the peace and quiet of another or of a
neighbor or family or religious congregation or other assembly by loud, unusual noises.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully, maliciously and intentionally disturb the peace and quiet of another or of any neighbor,
family, religious congregation or other assembly by indecent behavior or by offensive or unbecoming conduct to threaten, quarrel,
fight, provoke an assault or battery, or to curse, swear or utter obscene, vulgar, or indecent language offensive to another in their
presence when they are lawfully upon their property or upon a public place. [720 ILCS 5/26-1a1] (1997 Code)
5-2-2-3: GENERAL OFFENSE; AID TO AN OFFENSE:
A. General Offense: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act or fail to perform any requirement which is prohibited or
required by State law, insofar as such laws are applicable to Municipal government.
B. Aid To An Offense: It shall be unlawful for any person, in any way or manner, to aid, abet, counsel, advise or encourage any other
person in the commission of any of the acts mentioned herein or in any manner encourage the commission of such offense hereby
defined. [720 ILCS 5/5-1 et seq.] (1997 Code)
5-2-2-4: ASSEMBLAGES, CROWDS:
A. Unlawful Assemblages: It shall be unlawful to collect, gather or be a member of any disorderly crowd, or any crowd gathered for any
unlawful purposes.
B. Disturbing Assemblages: It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any lawful assemblage or gathering in the City.
C. Collecting Crowds: It shall be unlawful for any person to collect within the City a crowd of people to the annoyance of the citizens
thereof or to the annoyance or injury of the police.
D. Public Picnics; Open Air Dances: It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, use or allow to be used, any yard, ground or grave or
other real estate within the City for public picnics or open air dances to be conducted in such manner as to be an annoyance or injury
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 86/251
to the public.
E. Riot: It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse immediately to disperse upon an order to do so by a police officer, when two
(2) or more persons are assembled for the purpose of disturbing the peace or for the purpose of committing any unlawful act. [20
ILCS 1815/40, 65 ILCS 5/11-5-2, 720 ILCS 5/25-2] (1997 Code)
5-2-3: OFFENSES CONCERNING MORALS AND DECENCY:
5-2-3-1: INDECENT CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Commit any indecent or immoral act; or to appear in any public place not properly or decently garbed.
B. Present, exhibit, conduct or take part in any indecent, lascivious or obscene show, play, theatrical, exhibition or other form of
entertainment.
C. Present or exhibit sexual parts of the body in any place where such conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others for
the purpose or intent to arouse or satisfy sexual desire of the person or to void bodily wastes. [720 ILCS 5/11-9, 5/11-20] (1997
Code)
5-2-3-2: PROFANITY:
It shall be unlawful to use profanity on any street, alley or other public place in the City. (1997 Code)
5-2-3-3: PROSTITUTION:
A. Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to pursue or advertise in any manner his/her vocation as a prostitute or for any person
to advertise the profession of a prostitute or solicit for a prostitute. [65 ILCS 5/11-5-1, 720 ILCS 5/11-14]
B. House Of Prostitution: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or assist in the keeping of a house of ill fame or prostitution or
knowingly to reside therein or knowingly to rent, lease or permit any person to occupy any house or room owned, leased or
controlled by him/her for such purpose. [65 ILCS 5/11-5-1, 720 ILCS 5/11-17] (1997 Code)
5-2-3-4: SALE OR DISTRIBUTION OF INDECENT LITERATURE, CONTRACEPTIVES OR VIDEOS:
A. Indecent Publications: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or expose to minors any of the following:
1. Sell or offer for sale, or to circulate, pass from one person to another or expose in any public place any where in view of a store or
place frequented by the public, any immoral, indecent or obscene publications, printed or written matter or pictures or other
representations.
2. Keep any such publication, printed or written matter, picture or other representation in any place frequented by or where it may
come into the possession of minors or to disclose or expose any such material to a minor. [65 ILCS 5/11-5-1, 720 ILCS 5/11-20,
720 ILCS 670]
B. Literature Concerning Venereal Diseases:
1. No person shall offer to sell, or give away, distribute or have in his/her possession, with intent to give away, sell or distribute, any
book, pamphlet, circular, handbill, or advertisement of any kind purporting to treat diseases known as "venereal diseases",
describing or explaining the genital organs, giving the nature and remedies of diseases peculiar to females, or the nature or
causes of nervous debility, impotency, sterility or barrenness, gonorrhea, gleet, stricture, syphilis, infection of the prostate gland or
the remedies therefor, or the cause or remedies for abortion or miscarriage, or articles or means of preventing conception.
2. No person shall sell, give, distribute or have in his/her possession, with intent to give away, sell or distribute any book, pamphlet,
circular, handbill, advertisement or notice of any kind, giving or purporting to give information from whom or where medicine or
anything whatever may be obtained for the cure, prevention or treatment of uterine diseases, or diseases peculiar to females,
venereal diseases, or diseases of the genital organs, or nervous debility, impotency, sterility or barrenness, gonorrhea, gleet,
stricture, syphilis, infection of the prostate gland, abortion or miscarriage, or articles or means of preventing conception.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 87/251
C. Sale of Contraceptives: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Vend, sell, distribute or give away in any manner whatsoever any article, drug or medicinal preparation, manufactured, produced
or intended for use, or which may be used as a contraceptive; provided, however, that the provisions hereof shall not apply to
regularly licensed practitioners of medicine, or drug stores employing a registered pharmacist, or any licensed retail business
within the City.
2. Vend, sell, give away or distribute any such articles, drugs or medicines for use as, or possible for use as, contraceptives, by
means of machines or peddling or canvassing within the City. The proprietor of any premises wherein any such drugs, medicines,
or articles are kept, contrary to the provisions of this subsection shall be presumed to be the vendor or distributor of the medicines,
drugs or articles. (1997 Code)
5-2-4: OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY:
5-2-4-1: DAMAGE OR INJURY TO PROPERTY:
A. Injury To Public Property: It shall be unlawful for anyone to injure, deface or interfere with any property belonging to the City without
proper authority from the Council.
B. Damage To City Property: It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully, deliberately or maliciously damage, deface, or in any way
render inoperative, any property owned or under the control and operation of the City. The word "property" as used hereinabove
means both real and personal property, including any locks, fences, gates, chains, padlocks or other devices or fixtures whatsoever
that may be installed upon or used in connection with property owned or operated by the City.
C. Malicious Injury To Property: It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully and maliciously injure, deface, mutilate, remove, pull down,
break or in any manner interfere with or molest or secrete or destroy any real or personal property belonging to or under the control
of any person or of the City. [720 ILCS 5/21-1] (1997 Code)
5-2-4-2: OBSTRUCTION OF ANY SIDEWALK:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or to leave any objects of any nature upon a sidewalk in the city or otherwise obstruct a
sidewalk. [65 ILCS 5/11-80-13] (1997 Code)
5-2-4-3: SNOW REMOVAL ON SIDEWALKS:
It shall be the duty of the owner or resident of premises adjoining any sidewalk in the city to remove any snow or ice from each sidewalk
within twenty four (24) hours after accumulation of such snow or ice. [65 ILCS 5/11-80-13] (1997 Code)
5-2-4-4: DEPOSITS OF REFUSE ON PUBLIC WAYS:
A. Deposits On Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Throw or deposit any glass, tacks, nails or other similar articles on any street, alley or sidewalk or other public place in the city.
2. Deposit, place or allow to remain in or upon any public thoroughfare any material or substance injurious to person or property.
3. Dump or deposit or cause to be dumped or deposited any grass, leaves, branches, or any other things in the roadway or gutter of
any public street in the city.
B. Windblown Refuse: It shall be unlawful to deposit or leave any refuse or material in such a place or condition that it can be blown by
the wind so as to be scattered or cause clouds of dust or particles; and it shall be unlawful to permit the escape of soot, ashes or
other solid products or results of combustion so as to be windblown or scattered. [65 ILCS 5/11-80-10, 605 ILCS 5/9-121, 625 ILCS
5/11-1413] (1997 Code)
5-2-4-5: FIRES; BURNING RESTRICTIONS:
A. Burning Leaves, Refuse, Garbage: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 88/251
1. Burn leaves, tree branches, paper excelsior or other materials on Sunday, Monday, Wednesday and Friday. (Ord. 0-20-04, 12-27-
2004)
2. Burn any garbage, or other organic refuse, outside of any building at any time in the city.
3. Burn paper, excelsior or other material which may be blown about by the wind anywhere in the city unless the same is burned in a
stove, fireplace or furnace or in an incinerator with a screen sufficiently fine to prevent the escape of ignited particles.
4. Burn leaves, tree branches, paper, excelsior or other materials except between the hours of sunrise and sunset on the days
burning is permitted.
5. Start a fire that will not be constantly attended until it is completely extinguished. Fire control and extinguishing equipment must be
available to the person attending the fire.
6. Burn green grass and/or evergreen clippings.
B. Storage Of Combustible Refuse: It shall be unlawful to store or permit the storage of combustible refuse in such a way as to create a
fire hazard or to store or throw away any refuse of any kind in an alley, street, or public way in the city. [65 ILCS 5/11-8-4, 5/11-8-5]
C. Lighting Bonfires: It shall be unlawful to build or light any bonfire close to any building or structure, or on any asphalt street or
sidewalk pavement. [65 ILCS 5/11-80-2, 5/11-80-13] (1997 Code)
5-2-4-6: KEEPING JUNK RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Store or keep any old articles or materials which may be classified as junk adjacent to or in close proximity to any schoolhouse,
church, public parks, public grounds, business buildings or residences without first providing proper and tight buildings for the
storage of the same. (1997 Code)
B. Keep a yard cluttered with abandoned junk or unused furniture, any white goods or appliances, car parts or junk piles, thereby
creating an unsightly nuisance in the neighborhood. (Ord. 98-09, 10-26-1998)
5-2-4-7: TRESPASSING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to take down any fence or to let down any bars or to open any gate in or on the property of another
without the consent of the owner, occupant or person in charge thereof. [720 ILCS 5/21-3] (1997 Code)
5-2-4-8: LETTING PREMISES FOR UNLAWFUL PURPOSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, use or allow to be used any building or property owned by such person for any purpose
whereby riotous or disorderly persons are gathered. (1997 Code)
5-2-4-9: BARBED WIRE, ELECTRIC FENCES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any electric fence or any fence constructed in whole or in part of barbed wire or to
use barbed wire as a guard to any parking lot, stairway, entrance to a building or parcel of land. [65 ILCS 5/11-30-1] (1997 Code)
5-2-4-10: EXPECTORATING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate or spit upon any sidewalk or upon the floor of any public building or room used for
public assemblies. [65 ILCS 5/11-80-10] (1997 Code)
5-2-4-11: ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS:
It shall be unlawful to abandon any refrigerator, freezer or icebox or other device having an automatic lock on a compartment large
enough to enclose a human being in any place accessible to children without first removing the doors of such refrigerator, freezer or
icebox. [720 ILCS 505/1] (1997 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 89/251
5-2-4-12: PLACEMENT OF OBJECTS ABOVE STREETS:
A. Scaffolds: Any scaffold or ladder placed in such a way that they overhang or could fall onto any public street, alley or other public
place in the City shall be firmly constructed and safeguarded; and it shall be unlawful to place or leave any tools or articles on any
such place in such a manner that the same could fall onto any such street, sidewalk, alley or other public place from a height greater
than four feet (4'). [740 ILCS 150/1]
B. Articles On Window Sills: It shall be unlawful for any person to place or keep on any window sill, porch or other projection above the
first story of any building abutting on any sidewalk any article which might do injury by falling upon any person on the sidewalk in
front of such building, unless said article be securely fastened or protected by screens. (1997 Code)
5-2-4-13: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES IN STREETS:
A. Throwing Missiles: It shall be unlawful to cast, throw, or propel any missile on any street, alley or other public place.
B. Playing Ball, Other Games: It shall be unlawful for any person:
1. To play ball or throw any ball to and fro upon any public thoroughfare in the City.
2. To play any games upon any street, alley or sidewalk or other public place where such games cause unnecessary noise or
interfere with traffic or pedestrians. [65 ILCS 5/11-80-9]
C. Water Flowing Upon Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any water to flow into or upon any public thoroughfare. [65
ILCS 5/11-80-2] (1997 Code)
5-2-5: MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES:
5-2-5-1: ADVERTISING, BILL POSTING RESTRICTIONS:
A. Unlawful Advertising; Injure Lawful Advertisements: It shall be unlawful to advertise any unlawful business or article in the City, and it
shall be unlawful to injure or deface any lawful advertisement or notice. [720 ILCS 295/1]
B. Advertising Matter In Motor Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person, whether a licensed bill poster or not, to distribute handbills,
circulars, dodgers, pamphlets, cards, pictures or any advertising matter of any kind whatsoever, by placing the same in or upon any
motor vehicle standing or parked in the public streets of the City.
C. Posting Bills: It shall be unlawful for any person to post any bills or advertisements on any public property without the authority of the
City; and it shall be unlawful to post any bill or advertisement on any property without the written consent of the owner thereof. [65
ILCS 5/11-80-14] (1997 Code)
5-2-5-2: BUSINESSES; PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Junked Vehicles; Junk Shops Prohibited:
1. Junked Vehicle: It shall be unlawful for any individual, partnership, corporation or other business entity to carry on any business of
junking vehicles in the city. [65 ILCS 5/11-42-3]
2. Junk Shops: It shall be unlawful to operate or carry on the business of junking, junk dealing, or to keep any junk shop, store or
place for the purchase or sale of junk, rags, old rope, paper or bagging, old iron, brass, copper, or empty bottles. [65 ILCS 5/11-42-
3]
B. Unwholesome Business: It shall be unlawful to establish or conduct any packing plant, slaughterhouse, rendery, tallow chandlery,
soap factory, glue factory, tannery, or any offensive or unwholesome business within the city or within one mile of the limits thereof.
[65 ILCS 5/11-42-7, 5/11-42-9, 5/11-42-10; 740 ILCS 55/221 subdivisions 8 and 17]
C. Picketing: It shall be unlawful for any person, not an employee, past, present or expectant, of the owner or proprietor of the business
attempted to be picketed and who has no personal dispute with the owner or proprietor concerning terms and conditions of
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 90/251
employment to stand, sit or walk on any street or sidewalk in the city with the intent and purpose of dissuading or discouraging any
person from patronizing the place of business. (1997 Code)
5-2-5-3: PARKING OF CAMPERS; OWNERSHIP:
It shall be unlawful to park campers, trailers, etc., unless the person in possession of said camper or trailer can show proper title,
ownership or registration of such camper or trailer. (1997 Code)
5-2-5-4: HITCHHIKING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or loiter upon any sidewalk, street, avenue, alley or public highway or grounds within the
limits of the city for the purpose of "thumbing", requesting, asking, or soliciting a ride from the operator of any motor vehicle. [625 ILCS
5/11-1006] (1997 Code)
5-2-5-5: WEAPONS OFFENSES:
A. Discharge: It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm or air gun, BB gun, bow and arrow, or any toy gun projecting lead or any
missiles excepting in a regularly established shooting gallery; provided, that this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit any
officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his/her duty. [720 ILCS 535/3]
B. Concealed: It shall be unlawful to carry any concealed weapon in the city in violation of the laws of this state.
C. Furnishing To Prisoners: It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish or attempt to furnish or take into jail or to deliver or attempt to
deliver to any prisoner therein confined or in the custody of any officer, any weapon, tool, intoxicating liquors, drug or other article
without the consent of the officer in charge. [720 ILCS 5/31-6] (1997 Code)
5-2-5-6: LOUDSPEAKERS OR SOUND TRUCKS:
It shall be unlawful to play, operate, or use any device known as a sound truck, loudspeaker or sound amplifier, radio or phonograph,
tape deck or CD player, with loudspeaker or sound amplifier or any instrument of any kind or character which emits loud and raucous
noises and is attached to and upon any vehicle unless such person is in charge of such vehicle shall have first applied to and received
permission from the chief of police to operate any such vehicle so equipped. [65 ILCS 5/11-5-2] (1997 Code)
5-2-5-7: INJURY TO BIRDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or wound, or attempt to kill or wound, by use of a firearm, slingshot, bow and arrow or
otherwise, any bird other than English sparrows, or to take the eggs or young of any bird. (1997 Code)
5-2-5-8: JAYWALKING:
"Jaywalking" is defined as proceeding diagonally across a street intersection, or crossing a street between intersections, or at a place
other than a crosswalk. It shall be unlawful to jaywalk across Route 84 in the city of Colona, Illinois within the boundaries designated as
school zones by existing signs for such purposes. Enforcement of this section shall be strictly applied from thirty (30) minutes before the
school day commences and for thirty (30) minutes after school begins, and for thirty (30) minutes prior to the end of the school day and
for thirty (30) minutes after school shall have been dismissed. (Ord. 0-22-10, 12-27-2010)
5-2-6: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA2:
5-2-6-1: DEFINITION:
A. Definition: As used in this section, the following term shall have the meaning ascribed to it in this subsection:
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used or intended for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing,
analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 91/251
human body a controlled substance in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., and 570/100 et seq. It includes but is
not limited to:
1. Kits used, intended for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled
substances;
2. Isomerization devices used or intended for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;
3. Testing equipment used or intended for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances;
4. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used or intended for use, in
cutting controlled substances;
5. Separation gins and sifters used or intended for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marijuana;
6. Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used or intended for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the
human body;
7. Objects used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into
the human body, such as:
a. Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or
punctured metal bowls;
b. Carburetion tubes and devices;
c. Water pipes;
d. Smoking and carburetion masks;
e. Roach clips; meaning paper clips, alligator clips, hairpins, or other similar objects that have been altered so that there exists a
handle attached to said object at an angle between forty five degrees (45) and one hundred thirty five degrees (135) so that
the alteration would facilitate a person's hold of burning materials such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or
too short to be held by the fingers and so that the alteration prohibits the use of said object for its normal function;
f. Cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials;
g. Chamber pipes;
h. Carburetor pipes;
i. Electric pipes;
j. Air-driven pipes;
k. Chillums;
l. Bongs;
m. Ice pipes or chillers.
B. Additional Considerations: In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in
addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following:
1. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use;
2. Prior convictions, it any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any State or Federal law relating to any controlled
substance;
3. The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation, by the object's owner or person in control of the object, of 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., and 570/100 et seq.;
4. The proximity of the object to controlled substances owned by the object's owner or person in control of the object;
5. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
6. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom
he/she knows intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., and 570/100 et seq.;
the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et
seq., and 570/100 et seq., shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
7. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 92/251
8. Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use;
9. National and local advertising concerning its use;
10. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
11. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the objects to the total sales of the business enterprise; and
12. Expert testimony concerning its use. (1997 Code)
5-2-6-2: POSSESSION:
It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale,
or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., and
570/100 et seq. (1997 Code)
5-2-6-3: MANUFACTURE OR DELIVERY:
It is unlawful for any person to deliver or possess with intent to deliver drug paraphernalia, knowing that it will be used to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store,
contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., and 570/100 et seq. (1997 Code)
5-2-6-4: ADVERTISEMENT:
It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication offered for sale within the City, any
advertisement, knowing that the purpose of the advertisement is to promote the sale within the City of objects designed or intended for
use as drug paraphernalia. (1997 Code)
5-2-6-5: PENALTY:
A. Individual: Any person who keeps for sale, offers for sale, sells, or delivers for any commercial consideration any item which that
person knows, or under all of the circumstances reasonably should have known, to be drug paraphernalia, commits a business
offense shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code.
B. Business: Any store, place, or premises from which or in which any item of drug paraphernalia is kept for sale, offered for sale, sold,
or delivered for any commercial consideration is declared to be a public nuisance and the City Attorney may commence an action in
the Circuit Court, in the name of the People of the City of Colona, to abate a public nuisance as described in this subsection B, and
request that the Court enter: 1) temporary and permanent restraining orders to enjoin any defendant from maintaining such
nuisance, and 2) preliminary and permanent injunctions restraining any defendant from removing or interfering with any property
used in connection with the public nuisance.
C. Forfeiture: All drug paraphernalia is subject to forfeiture.
D. Seizure: Property subject to forfeiture under this Section may be seized by any peace officer and may be made without process:
1. If there is probable cause to believe that the property is directly dangerous to health or safety and existing circumstances do not
allow reasonable time for the office to obtain lawful process; or
2. In accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended.
The presence of items which are deemed violative of this Chapter or are otherwise subject to its forfeiture provisions in an
inventory shall not subject the entire inventory to seizure or forfeiture. (1997 Code)
5-2-7: DRUGS:
A. Cannabis: It shall be unlawful to use, or be under the influence of, cannabis or possess 2.5 grams or more of cannabis.
1. It shall be unlawful to possess less than 2.5 grams of cannabis.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 93/251
2. Anyone violating this Section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord.
98-05, 7-13-1998)
Chapter 3
MINORS
5-3-1: CURFEW1:
A. Age And Hour Restrictions: It is hereby declared unlawful for a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to be present at or upon
any public assembly, building, place, street or highway at the following times unless accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal
guardian or other responsible companion at least eighteen (18) years of age and approved by a parent or legal guardian or unless
engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of Illinois authorize a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to perform:
1. Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. Friday and Saturday.
2. Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day.
Any person violating any provision of this subsection shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of
this code.
B. Parent, Guardian Responsible: It is hereby declared unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to knowingly permit a
person in his or her custody or control to violate any provision of subsection A of this section. Any parent, legal guardian or other
person violating the provision of subsection A of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1
of this code. (1997 Code)
5-3-2: CIGARETTE OR TOBACCO SALES2:
A. Sale Or Delivery: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or give away, directly or indirectly, to any person under the age of eighteen
(18) years any cigarettes, tobacco, or any compounds of tobacco used in filling up or making up of a cigarette or to give or sell any
cigarette papers to minors.
B. Possession By Minors: It shall be unlawful by anyone under the age of eighteen (18) years to use or possess tobacco or tobacco
products within the city limits. (1997 Code)
5-3-3: DELIVERY OF ALCOHOL TO MINORS:
A. It shall be illegal and a violation of Colona ordinance for any person or business to deliver alcohol to a minor.
B. If a business within the city of Colona is accused or prosecuted by the state liquor commission or through a citation from the Colona
police department for the offense of delivery of alcohol to a minor, such business shall be required to appear before the Colona liquor
commission for an administrative hearing on such charges.
C. Any hearing before the city of Colona liquor commission to be had in accordance with subsection B of this section is to proceed prior
to any administrative hearing which is to be done by the city of Colona liquor commission.
D. If the Colona administrative hearing finds that alcohol has been delivered to a minor, the business or person who is found guilty shall
be subject to a fine being imposed against such person or business.
E. Penalty for a finding of violation of this section shall carry a fine to be imposed of a minimum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) with
a maximum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) which shall be the limits for a first time offense. Any hearing involving a
second offense for violation of this section shall carry a fine which will be at the reasonable discretion of the state liquor commission.
(Ord. 0-21-12, 12-10-2012)
Chapter 4
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 94/251
ARTICLE A. ADMINISTRATION
5-4A-1: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
A. Position Created: The Animal Control Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council.
B. Badge Of Office: While on duty, the Animal Control Officer shall wear a star engraved "Animal Control Officer" as an emblem of
his/her authority.
C. Residency: The Animal Control Officer shall reside within the City limits or within ten (10) miles of any City boundary line during the
term of employment.
D. Bond: The Animal Control Officer shall be bonded2.
E. Compensation: The salary of the Animal Control Officer shall be determined from time to time by a majority vote of the Mayor and
City Council.
F. Powers And Duties:
1. Supervision Of Animal Pound And Other Facilities: The Animal Control Officer shall have the care, custody, control, and
supervision of the animal shelter of the City and of animals confined and impounded, and shall have the care, custody, and control
of all trucks and equipment used by the Animal Control Officer or his/her assistants for the impounding of animals.
2. Remittance Of Fees: The Animal Control Officer shall deliver all fees and funds collected by the Animal Control Officer or his/her
assistants to the City Clerk at the end of each and every workday; excepting Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.
3. Impoundment Of Animals; Records: The Animal Control Officer shall impound, or cause to be impounded, and shall dispose of
according to the provisions of this Chapter, all animals running at large within the City and shall keep a record of every animal so
impounded, describing the kind of animal, the breed, color, and sex, together with the time and place the animal was captured or
received and the final disposition made of each animal, together with such other information as may come to his/her attention.
4. Reporting: The Animal Control officer shall furnish a report to the City Council each month concerning the activities and financial
status of the animal control program. (1997 Code)
5-4A-2: FUNDS:
A. Funds Collected: All redemption fees, fines and license fees collected in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter shall be used
exclusively for animal control purposes, such as operations, salaries and for construction and maintenance of facilities necessary for
provisions of this Chapter.
B. Appropriation Of Funds: The City Council shall annually appropriate funds for the purpose of sustaining animal control activities.
(1997 Code)
5-4A-3: USE OF LOCAL VETERINARIAN:
The services of a local or nearby veterinarian may be sought for the medical care and/or necessary humane destruction of animals
specified in this Chapter and impounded in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. The veterinarian shall be licensed in and by
the State. (1997 Code)
ARTICLE B. ANIMALS1
5-4B-1: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to permit any dangerous or vicious animal of any kind to run at large within the City. Exhibitions or parades of
animals which are ferae naturae in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon securing a permit from the Chief of Police. Anyone
found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code; amd. Ord. 0-19-01,
2-25-2019)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 95/251
5-4B-2: KEEPING CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
A. Disturbing The Peace: It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the peace by loud or unusual noises2 at any
time.
B. Prohibited Animals: No person shall keep any cattle, sheep, goats, horses, mules, swine including potbellied pigs, or domestic fowl of
the species of geese, ducks, turkeys, guinea hens, or chickens at any place or upon any premises in the City, nor shall any such
animals be permitted to run at large within the City.
C. Beekeeping: No person shall keep or maintain any bees, beehives, or apiaries within the City. (1997 Code)
D. Penalty: Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 0-19-
01, 2-25-2019)
5-4B-3: ANIMAL YARDS:
A. Definition: As used in this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
POULTRY OR ANIMAL YARD: Includes every enclosure, shed or structure used to house two (2) or more rabbits, or other domestic
animals.
B. Location: It shall be unlawful to maintain in the City any animal within twenty five feet (25') of any building used for residence
purposes by anyone other than the one maintaining such animal yard or his/her immediate family, or within twenty five feet (25') of
any public way, other than an alley, or within one hundred feet (100') of any church or school building.
C. Sanitary Condition: Every person maintaining an animal yard shall keep the same clean and sanitary, and free from all refuse. Such
yards shall be thoroughly swept at least once every twenty four (24) hours, and it shall be unlawful to permit any decaying food or
other refuse of any kind to remain in such yard. Refuse from such yards shall, when swept up or collected, be kept in airtight
containers until disposed of in accordance with this Code, and it shall be unlawful to permit any such refuse to remain recovered.
D. Enclosure Of Yard: Every animal yard shall be adequately enclosed so as to be impenetrable against rats or other rodents. The
presence of any rats in the animal yard shall be prima facie evidence that such yard is maintained in violation of the provisions of this
section.
E. Limitation Of Number Of Domestic Animals Other Than Dogs And Cats: No person shall harbor or keep over six (6) animals. (1997
Code)
F. Penalty: Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 0-19-
01, 2-25-2019)
5-4B-4: DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
A. Prohibited: No person shall permit any dangerous animal to run at large nor shall any person lead such an animal with a chain or
rope or other appliance, whether the animal is muzzled or unmuzzled, in any street, avenue, lane or highway or public place or
building within the City, except for public exhibition authorized by the Chief of Police.
B. Nuisance Declared: In addition to any other remedies, and except as expressly authorized in the City by the City Council, dangerous
animals are declared to be nuisances.
C. Disposition: If any dangerous, fierce or vicious animal cannot safely be taken up and impounded, the animal may be slain by any
police officer or animal control officer of the City. Any member of the Police Department, or any other person in the City, is hereby
authorized to kill any dangerous animal of any kind which threatens the safety of any person or property. However, in all cases where
any animal so slain has bitten any person or caused an abrasion of the skin of a person, it shall be the duty of the police officer
slaying the animal to immediately deliver the carcass and the head of the animal to the State Laboratory. Police officers shall not
shoot a rabies suspect in the head. (1997 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 96/251
D. Penalty: Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 0-19-
01, 2-25-2019)
5-4B-5: BITING ANIMALS:
A. Report Of Animal Bites: All bites or attacks on human beings by any animal within the City shall be immediately reported to the Chief
of Police. In the event of a bite by an animal, a detailed report shall be made out by the receiving officer, including the complainant's
name, address and phone number; the name and address of the owner of the animal; a description and location of the wound, and
the name of the doctor treating the wound.
B. Administrative Search Warrant: In the event that the owner of any animal which has bitten a human refuses to turn the animal over to
the animal control officer, the animal control officer may obtain an administrative search warrant to enter the premises of the owner
and take possession of the animal. (1997 Code)
C. Penalty: Any person owning or keeping an animal that, without provocation or justification, bites or attacks a human being within the
City shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4B-6: DISEASED ANIMALS:
A. Exposure: No domestic animal infected with a contagious or infectious disease shall be allowed to run at large or to be exposed in
any public place whereby the health of man or beast may be affected.
B. Shipping Or Removal From Premises: Such diseased animal shall not be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner
thereof, except under the supervision of the Chief of Police or proper health official. (1997 Code)
C. Penalty: Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 0-19-
01, 2-25-2019)
5-4B-7: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
No person shall be cruel to any animal. Cruelty to an animal shall consist of one of the following acts:
A. By overloading, overdriving, overworking, cruelly beating, torturing, tormenting, mutilating, or cruelly killing any animal or causing or
knowingly allowing the same to be done.
B. By unnecessary failing to provide any animal in his/her charge or custody as owner or otherwise, with proper food, drink, shelter and
air.
C. By abandoning any animal in a pound, veterinary clinic, or on the premises of another. (1997 Code)
Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-
2019)
5-4B-8: ANIMAL FIGHTS:
No person shall instigate, cause or procure any dog fight, cock fight, or any public or private fighting of animals within the City. Anyone
found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code; amd. Ord. 0-19-01,
2-25-2019)
5-4B-9: INDECENT EXHIBITION:
No person shall in any manner instigate, cause, or procure or assist in any indecent or immoral show or exhibition of any animal within
the limits of the City. Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
(1997 Code; amd. Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4B-10: TRAPPING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 97/251
No person shall use any type of leg-hold animal trap or other animal trap that could cause cruelty to animals within the City limits without
the written approval, guidance and direction of the Health and Sanitation Department. Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall
be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code; amd. Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4B-11: ANIMALS OWNED BY NONRESIDENTS; EXCEPTION:
A. Prohibited: No person who is not a resident of the City is permitted to keep any animal in the City. This prohibition shall not apply to
persons remaining in the City for thirty (30) days or less or who are passing through the City but shall apply to any nonresident who
habitually allows his/her animal to run at large within the City.
B. Disposition: Any animal found within the City which is not owned by a resident of the City or by a person passing through or
temporarily in the City shall be impounded by the animal control officer and disposed of as provided in this chapter for dogs or cats
not wearing a current inoculation tag.
C. Exception: The provisions of this section shall not apply to veterinary clinics, institutions and licensed dealers. (1997 Code)
D. Penalty: Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 0-19-
01, 2-25-2019)
5-4B-12: UNCLAIMED ANIMALS:
A. Unlicensed, Uninoculated Animals:
1. Whenever any reputable institution of learning, hospital, research laboratory, or their allied institutes which have been duly
licensed by the State in which the institution, hospital, laboratory or institute is located, and which is within a reasonable distance
of the City makes application to the animal control officer with consent of proper authority for permission to use humanely,
unclaimed and impounded animals for the good of mankind and the increase of knowledge relating to the cause, prevention, and
control and cure of disease, the animal control officer with consent of proper authority on being satisfied that the animals will be so
used, shall from time to time release such acceptable unclaimed, impounded animals for the purposes specified.
2. In order to give the owner/keeper of impounded animals time within which to reclaim them, no animal shall be surrendered
pursuant to subsection A1 of this section until such animal has been impounded for a period of at least seven (7) days.
B. Licensed, Inoculated Animals: No impounded animal wearing an unexpired rabies inoculation tag or a County license tag shall be
released for the purposes of medical research. (1997 Code)
C. Penalty: Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 0-19-
01, 2-25-2019)
5-4B-13: ANIMAL WASTES:
A. Control Required: No person owning, harboring, keeping or controlling any dog or other domestic animal or pet shall cause, suffer or
allow such animal to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath,
play area, park, or any place where people congregate or walk or upon any public property whatsoever, or upon any private property
without permission of the owner of said property. The restriction in this section shall not apply to public property when the owner or
person in control of such animal complies with the following conditions:
1. The person who so curbs such animal shall immediately remove all feces deposited by such animal by any sanitary method.
2. The feces removed from the aforementioned designated areas shall be disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping, or
controlling any animal curbed in accordance with the provisions of this section in a sanitary manner approved by the local health
authority.
B. Penalty: Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1997
Code)
5-4B-14: BURIAL OF DEAD ANIMALS:
No owner or keeper of any animal which may die within the City shall leave the animal unburied for more than twelve (12) hours after its
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 98/251
death, or shall anyone bring and leave the carcass of any dead animal within the City. Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall
be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code; amd. Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4B-15: ANIMALS IN FESTIVAL AREAS:
A. It shall be unlawful for anyone to have present a dog, cat, or other animal at any festival area except pursuant to a permit in the City.
B. This section shall not apply to:
1. Seeing eye dogs.
2. Horses or dogs used by law enforcement agencies in performance of their law enforcement duties.
3. Animals in a parade within the City.
4. Carnival vendors who bring in animals as part of their carnival and register the animals and obtain a permit from the City Clerk.
Said animals allowed by permit in this section may only be allowed in areas designated by the Colona Police Chief or his
designee.
C. "Festival area" is defined as that area providing or set up to provide entertainment, food, beverages, contests, carnival midways, or
any area within fifty feet (50') of the foregoing areas.
D. The "no contest" fine shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00) pursuant to the no contest ordinance.
E. The fine for violating this section shall be up to five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 99-08, 8-9-1999)
ARTICLE C. DOGS AND CATS1
5-4C-1: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
A. Definition: "Owner" or "keeper" as used herein shall mean any person having a right of property in a dog or cat or who keeps or
harbors a dog or cat or who has a dog or cat in his or her care or acts as a custodian of a dog or cat or who knowingly permits a dog
or cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by him or her.
B. Animals At Large:
1. Prohibited: No dog or cat shall be permitted or allowed to run at large within the city and shall be confined at all times on the
owner's or keeper's premises, or on a leash or on the owner's or keeper's premises under the control of a person physically able to
control such dog or cat.
2. Declared Nuisance: If found running at large, the dog or cat is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be taken up and
impounded by the animal control officer or member of the police department in accordance with the provisions of this article.
3. Subject To Impoundment: Every dog or cat running at large within the city is subject to impoundment by the animal control officer.
4. Prima Facie Evidence: When any dog or cat shall be found running at large in violation of the provisions herein, it shall be prima
facie evidence that the owner or keeper of said dog or cat allowed and permitted the animal to run at large.
C. Penalty: Any person owning or keeping and permitting any dog or cat to run at large and not keeping such animal confined at all
times, except as otherwise provided herein, on the owner's or keeper's premises shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-
4-1 of this code. (1997 Code)
5-4C-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. Purchase Required: No dog or cat shall be permitted to be or remain in the city without being licensed as herein provided.
B. Annual Registration; Tag: Every owner of or person who keeps or harbors a dog or cat within the limits of the city shall report to the
clerk annually, within thirty (30) days after May 1 each year, his/her name and address, and shall give the name, breed, month of
birth, color and sex of each and every dog or cat owned, kept and harbored by such person and shall pay such license fee as
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 99/251
required in section 5-4C-4 of this article for male or female dogs or cats owned, kept or harbored, and shall cause such dogs or cats
to be registered in the Office of the City Clerk or animal control officer, who shall furnish the person paying the license therefor with
the metal tag or check as hereinafter provided.
C. Rabies Certificate: Every owner or person who harbors or keeps a dog or cat within the limits of the City shall, before securing
registration tags, exhibit to the Clerk or animal control officer a current County rabies certificate.
D. Penalty: Any person owning a dog or cat shall purchase a license as herein provided or be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code)
5-4C-3: LICENSE TAGS, COLLAR REQUIRED:
A. Registry: The City Clerk or animal control officer shall keep a complete registry in a book kept for that purpose, of all licensed dogs or
cats describing the same by name, breed, color and sex, and shall also enter the name and address of the owner or keeper as
given, and the number of the City license, tag or check.
B. Tags Provided By City: The City Clerk or animal control officer shall also provide each and every year, such number of metal tags or
checks as may be necessary, having stamped thereon the year for which the license is issued, the letters "C.A.T.", and also the
number of the tag or check, and it shall be the duty of the City Clerk or animal control officer to deliver one of such tags or check
numbered to correspond with the registry of the animal, to the person having paid the license tax upon any such animal. The owner
of each animal being of the age of four (4) months or over must have a tag for such animal.
C. Collar Required: Every dog or cat over the age of four (4) months shall be provided by its owner or keeper with a collar to which shall
be securely attached and kept the license registration tag furnished by the City Clerk or animal control officer as hereinabove
provided.
D. Removal Of Collars, Tags Or Leashes: No person, other than the animal control officer, a police officer, or an owner shall remove the
collar, inoculation tag or leash from any dog or cat within the City without the consent of the owner or keeper of the dog or cat. Any
such removal shall subject the dog or cat to impoundment. (1997 Code)
E. Penalty: Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 0-19-
01, 2-25-2019)
5-4C-4: FEES:
A. License Fee: An annual license fee for dogs and cats shall be established by the City Council as may be necessary.
B. Violation Fees:
1. Failure To License Or Display License: The animal control officer shall issue to the owner or keeper of any unlicensed dog or cat
or the owner of any dog or cat failing to display the license tag a notice of ordinance violation.
2. Notice Of Ordinance Violation: A person receiving a notice of ordinance violation may, at his/her discretion, pay to the animal
control officer within seven (7) working days a sum established by the administrative fee schedule in subsection C of this section.
3. Failure To Comply: In the event no payment is received within the time period prescribed by the animal control officer, a formal
Municipal ordinance violation complaint shall be initiated in the Circuit Court.
C. Administrative Fee Schedule: The animal control officer is authorized to accept in full satisfaction of any notice of ordinance violation
the payment of the following administrative fees:
1. Twenty dollars ($20.00) for the first offense and forty dollars ($40.00) for each offense thereafter.
2. Proof of payment of fees imposed by section 5-4C-7 of this article.
3. The penalty for violating this section shall be a fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the first offense and a fine of fifty dollars
($50.00) for each offense thereafter. (1997 Code)
5-4C-5: LIMITATION ON NUMBER:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 100/251
A. Number Allowed At Residence: No person in charge of a residence shall keep, harbor or control more than four (4) dogs, four (4)
cats, or a combination of four (4) at his/her residence. (1997 Code; amd. Ord. 08-05, 6-13-2005)
B. Unoccupied Residence: It shall be illegal and improper for any resident or nonresident of the City of Colona to house or keep animals
or pets of any nature at a residence which is unoccupied. (Ord. 08-05, 6-13-2005)
C. Penalty: Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 0-19-
01, 2-25-2019)
5-4C-6: INOCULATION:
A. Inoculation Required: Each owner or keeper of any dog or cat within the City shall cause the dog or cat to be inoculated by a licensed
veterinarian and shall maintain a current rabies inoculation for such dog or cat at all times. Current status shall be determined by the
rules and standards of the State Department of Agriculture and by the United States Department of Agriculture.
B. Inoculation Tag: The animal control officer shall be the official responsible for and charged with the duty of issuing the inoculation tag
evidencing the administration of a valid rabies inoculation required by subsection A of this section.
C. Attachment To Collar: Each dog or cat kept within the City shall be provided by its owner or keeper with a good and substantial collar,
and shall cause to be attached in a secure manner a current inoculation tag. The owner or keeper shall at all times cause the dog or
cat to wear the collar with inoculation tag attached.
D. Removal Of Tag: Any dog or cat found within the City, but off of the premises occupied by the owner of the dog or cat and not
wearing a collar with inoculation tag attached as required under this section shall be impounded and disposed of as provided in this
chapter. (1997 Code)
E. Penalty: Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 0-19-
01, 2-25-2019)
5-4C-7: IMPOUNDMENT; REDEMPTION:
A. Impounding: It shall be the duty of the animal control officer or the officers of the Police Department to take up and impound, in such
place as shall be provided by the City Council for that purpose to be known as the "animal pound", any dog or cat running at large
within the City in violation of section 5-4C-1 of this article.
B. Capture, Transporting:
1. Method Of Capture: The animal control officer and his/her assistants shall be allowed the use of leashes, nets and tranquilizer
guns as means of taking up and impounding animals specified in this chapter. The use of a tranquilizer gun shall be allowed only
after an authorized individual has been properly instructed in its use by a qualified instructor previously approved by a majority
vote of the City Council.
2. Transporting: The Animal Control Department shall provide means of transporting impounded animals specified in this article from
place of capture to the pound. Transportation may include the use of:
a. A portable pen temporarily or permanently mounted in a vehicle which is property of the animal control officer or his/her
assistants; or
b. A portable pen temporarily or permanently mounted in a City-owned vehicle assigned temporarily or permanently for animal
control purposes; or
c. A specially designed City-owned vehicle assigned for animal control purposes.
C. Notice Of Impoundment:
1. Determination Of Ownership: When any dog or cat displaying an inoculation tag, license tag, or tattoo registered with the City shall
be impounded, the animal control officer shall make a search of the City records or contact the veterinarian who issued the
inoculation tag to determine the owner thereof and shall immediately provide the apparent owner thereof, if any, with written notice.
The notice shall be delivered by certified, return receipt requested mail.
2. Notice: The notice provided for in subsection C1 of this section shall be in the following or a similar form:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 101/251
NOTICE
You are hereby notified that a ( ) male ( ) female dog/cat ( ) believed to be owned by you ( ) of which you are the registered
licensed owner, has been impounded by the Animal Control Officer of the City of Colona because the dog/cat was found to be
running at large ( ) with ( ) without a proper license.
As the owner of the dog/cat, you are liable for a fine up to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for violation of Title 5, Chapter 4,
Article C of the City Code.
You may redeem the dog/cat upon showing the Animal Control Officer that the dog/cat has been inoculated and upon payment
of a redemption fee of $20.00 for the first offense and $40.00 for each offense thereafter and the current tax if the same is unpaid.
Such fees shall be paid to the Animal Control Officer.
If redemption of the dog/cat is not made within seven (7) days from the time of impoundment or by A.M./P.M. on , the dog/cat
shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of subsection 5-4C-7H of the City Code.
You are hereby notified that if you do not appear within five (5) days of the date of this notice, I will appear before the Circuit
Court of Henry County and sign a complaint formally charging you with violation of Title 5, Chapter 4, Article C of the City Code.
Animal Control Officer
D. Care Of Impounded Animals:
1. Shelter: Sufficient shelter shall be furnished in which to cause retention and in which to sustain or improve the health of
impounded animals.
2. Food: Sufficient feeding shall be furnished to sustain or improve the health of impounded animals.
3. First Aid; Medical Care: Necessary first aid and medical care shall be furnished to sustain or improve the health of impounded
animals.
E. Redemption: Any dog or cat taken up and confined in the City-authorized animal pound may be redeemed by the owner or keeper
thereof any time within seven (7) days from the time the same was impounded, upon payment of the following fees:
1. A redemption fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for the first offense and forty dollars ($40.00) for each offense thereafter;
2. The amount of the current veterinarian inoculation fee unless current inoculation is proven;
3. The license fee imposed by section 5-4C-4 of this article unless valid license is proven;
4. Both the redemption fee and impoundment fee shall be waived for animals which were licensed at the time of impoundment and
which have not previously been impounded.
F. Removal Without Paying Fees: Any owner or keeper who shall take said dog or cat from such animal pound without payment of the
fees prescribed herein shall be subject to the penalties provided for in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
G. Exempt Animals: It shall be the discretion of the animal control officer to exempt animals violating the provisions of this article after
being shown by the owner or keeper proof of restraint or failure.
H. Disposition Of Unclaimed Animals: All dogs or cats not redeemed within seven (7) days from the time the same was impounded shall,
under the direction of the Chief of Police or animal control officer be destroyed by a qualified employee or veterinarian.
I. Liability Of Owners Or Keepers: Owners or keepers identified of unclaimed animals will be held liable for all expenses incurred
including pickup fees, boarding fees, euthanasia and disposal of such animal. Owner or keeper will also be held liable for any other
expenses such as attorney fees that may arise due to the animal remaining unclaimed. (1997 Code)
5-4C-8: INJURED ANIMALS:
A. Picked Up By Animal Control Officer: The animal control officer shall remove from any street or public place within the City any
injured dog or cat not being attended and properly cared for by the owner and shall, if the animal control officer deems it advisable,
impound and confine the dog or cat with some veterinarian within the City.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 102/251
B. Veterinary Costs: If the veterinarian shall treat the injured dog or cat, the veterinarian shall advise the animal control officer of the cost
of the treatment and in the event such dog or cat is redeemed as provided in this article, the person redeeming the dog or cat shall
pay the charges of the veterinarian.
C. Unredeemed Animal: If the dog or cat is not redeemed, it shall be disposed of in the manner provided in this article. (1997 Code)
5-4C-9: ANIMALS IN ESTRUS:
No owner or keeper of any female dog or cat shall permit the dog or cat to run at large within the City while in "heat". Any female dog or
cat found running at large should be taken up and impounded in the animal pound and the dog or cat shall be disposed of, or may be
redeemed upon the payment of the same fees and in the same manner as dogs and cats may be redeemed which have been
impounded. Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1997
Code; amd. Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4C-10: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
No person shall permit, allow, keep, or harbor in such a way as to permit or allow any dog or cat to unduly disturb the quiet of a
neighborhood within the City. Any dog or cat that unduly disturbs the quiet of a neighborhood is declared to be a nuisance. (1997 Code)
5-4C-11: ANIMAL BITES:
A. Notification Of Bite; Leaving City Prohibited: No owner or keeper of any dog or cat, when notified that such dog or cat has bitten any
person or has so injured any person as to cause an abrasion of the skin, shall sell or give away such dog or cat or permit or allow the
dog or cat to be taken beyond the limits of the City. (1997 Code)
B. Confinement; Cost: It shall be the duty of the owner or keeper, upon receiving notice of such an injury caused by the dog or cat, from
the animal control officer, or otherwise, to surrender possession of the dog or cat to the animal control officer for confinement at a
licensed veterinary clinic in the City for not less than ten (10) days, the cost of such confinement to be paid by the owner or keeper.
Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code; amd.
Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4C-12: VICIOUS ANIMALS:
5-4C-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this section 5-4C-12, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings set forth in this section:
BITE: To seize or cut with the teeth.
CONFINEMENT STRUCTURE: A securely locked pen, kennel or structure designed and constructed for the keeping of a vicious dog
shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the standards herein. Such pen, kennel or structure must have
secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. All structures used to confine a City registered and licensed vicious dog must be
locked with a key or combination lock when such animals are within the structure. Such structure must have a secure bottom or floor
attached to the sides of the pen or the sides must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet (2'). All structures erected to house
vicious dogs must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the City. All such structures erected to house vicious dogs must be
adequately lighted, ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
FIGHT: A prearranged conflict between two (2) or more animals but does not include a conflict that is unorganized or accidental.
K-9 PATROL OR POLICE DOG: A professionally trained dog used by law enforcement officers for law enforcement and activities.
LEASH: A cord, chain, rope, strap, or other such physical restraint having a tensile strength of not less than three hundred (300)
pounds.
MUZZLE: A device constructed of strong, soft material or a metal muzzle. The muzzle must be made in a manner which will not cause
injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but must prevent it from biting any person or animal.
NIP: To pinch or squeeze with teeth with no breaking of skin or tissue.
RUNNING AT LARGE: The failure to confine a vicious dog in accordance with section 5-4C-1 of this article.
VICIOUS DOG: Any dog that has, without provocation attacked a human being or other animal, or a dog that by its behavior or physical
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 103/251
condition constitutes an immediate and serious physical or health threat to human beings or animals, or any dog which has previously
attacked or bitten any human being or other animal on two (2) or more reported occasions, or a dog that has been determined to be a
vicious or dangerous dog as set forth in section 5-4C-12-2 of this article. (Ord. 0-11-14, 7-14-2014)
5-4C-12-2: DETERMINED DANGEROUS:
A. Notice Of Determination: When in the judgment of the animal control officer a dog may pose a danger or threat to the safety of the
residents of the city by reason of the dog's actions or past conduct, the animal control officer may issue to the owner or keeper of
such dog a written notice stating that the animal control officer has deemed such dog to be a threat or danger to the residents of the
city and set forth the reasons for that judgment.
B. Failure To Comply: Failure of the owner or keeper of such dog to comply with the requirements of this section 5-4C-12 in the time set
by the animal control officer shall constitute a violation of this section 5-4C-12 and each day the owner or keeper of such dog fails to
comply with the requirements of this section 5-4C-12 shall constitute a new violation. (Ord. 0-11-14, 7-14-2014)
5-4C-12-3: LICENSING:
A. License Required: No person shall possess any vicious dog for a period of more than forty eight (48) hours without having first
obtained a license therefor from the city.
B. Application; Fee: An application for a license to possess a vicious dog shall be filed with the Colona police department on a form
prescribed and provided by the Colona police department and shall be accompanied by all of the following:
1. Verification Of Identity Of Owner: Verification of the identity of the owner and current address by providing a photostatic copy of
the owner's driver's license.
2. Proof Of Ownership: Proof of ownership of the vicious dog.
3. Current Immunization And Health Records: A copy of the current immunization and health record of the vicious dog by a
veterinarian licensed to practice in the state.
4. Certificate Of Insurance: A certificate of insurance evidencing coverage in an amount not less than three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) providing coverage for any injury, damage or loss caused by the vicious dog.
5. Photographs: Two (2) photographs of the vicious dog to be licensed taken not less than one month before the application. One
photograph shall provide a front view of the vicious dog and shall clearly show the face and ears of the vicious dog. One
photograph shall show a side view of the vicious dog.
6. License Fee: A license fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
7. Additional Information: Such other information as may be required by the animal control officer.
8. Annual Submittal: All fees, inspections and licensing requirements of this subsection B are due annually.
C. Inspection Of Premises: Upon receipt of an application, the police department shall forward such application to the animal control
officer who shall cause an inspection of the premises on which the vicious dog shall be kept to determine that all provisions of this
section 5-4C-12 relating to the confinement and posting of signs have been complied with by the applicant. Upon completion of the
inspection, the animal control officer shall notify the Colona police department in writing of the results of his/her inspection.
D. Approval/Denial Of Application: Upon receipt of the results of the animal control officer's inspection the animal control officer shall
notify the applicant of the approval or denial of the license. In the event the animal control officer is not available the chief of police
will designate another employee of the Colona police department who shall notify the applicant of the approval or denial of the
license. In the event that the license is denied, the notification shall be provided in writing and the reasons for such denial shall be
stated. Upon approval, the Colona police department shall issue a license to the applicant. (Ord. 0-11-14, 7-14-2014)
5-4C-12-4: CONFINEMENT:
No person shall possess any vicious dog unless the vicious dog is confined in accordance with this section.
A. Indoors: No vicious dog may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the vicious dog to exit
the structure when the windows are open or when screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the vicious dog
from exiting the structure.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 104/251
B. Exterior Yard: No person shall confine a vicious dog in an exterior area unless such vicious dog is confined in a confinement structure
constructed and maintained in accordance with this section 5-4C-12, except that a vicious dog may be confined outside of a
confinement structure in a manner set forth in subsection C of this section.
C. Leash: No person shall permit a vicious dog to go outside a confinement structure, house or other structure unless the vicious dog is
securely restrained with a leash no longer than three feet (3') in length and fitted with a muzzle. No person shall permit a vicious dog
to be kept on a leash unless a person is in physical control of the leash. No leash restraining any vicious dog shall be attached to
any inanimate object including, but not limited to, trees, posts, stakes, and buildings. (Ord. 0-11-14, 7-14-2014)
5-4C-12-5: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS OF LICENSEE:
Any person holding a license pursuant to this section 5-4C-12 shall report the incidence of any of the following events:
A. Change In Ownership; Death: The sale, barter, exchange, gift or death of any vicious dog shall be reported within forty eight (48)
hours.
B. Escape; Theft: The escape from confinement or theft of any vicious dog shall be reported upon discovery of the escape or theft.
C. Biting Or Nipping: Biting or nipping of any person or animal by a vicious dog shall be reported upon occurrence.
D. Birth Of Offspring: The birth of any offspring of a vicious dog shall be reported within forty eight (48) hours of the birth of the offspring.
E. Permanent Removal: The permanent removal of any vicious dog from the territorial limits of the city shall be reported within forty eight
(48) hours of such removal by surrender of the license of the owner to the city clerk.
Except as provided in this section, the report of any incident required to be reported under this section shall be made to the animal
control officer. (Ord. 0-11-14, 7-14-2014)
5-4C-12-6: SIGN REQUIRED:
All persons possessing a vicious dog shall display in a prominent place on the premises where the vicious dog is to be kept a sign which
is readable by the public from a distance of not less than one hundred feet (100') using the words "Beware Of Vicious Dog". A similar
sign shall be posted on a confinement structure. (Ord. 0-11-14, 7-14-2014)
5-4C-12-7: FIGHTING PROHIBITED:
No person shall fight or bait, conspire to fight or bait, or keep, train, or transport for the purpose of fighting or baiting, any pit bull dog
and/or vicious dog. (Ord. 0-11-14, 7-14-2014)
5-4C-12-8: IMPOUNDMENT:
A. Vicious Dog: Any dog which by its actions is a "vicious dog" as defined herein shall be subject to immediate impoundment by the
animal control officer in a humane facility for the keeping of dogs. If the incident giving rise to the impoundment has resulted in an
injury to a person, upon impoundment by the animal control officer, the chief of police or his/her designee shall notify the rabies
control administrator of the county pursuant to 510 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12, and shall transfer control of the vicious dog to the
administrator in accordance with 510 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/13.
B. Running At Large: Any known vicious dog found to be running at large by the animal control officer or any member of the police
department shall be presumed to be in violation of this section 5-4C-12 and shall be subject to impoundment by the animal control
officer in a humane facility for the keeping of dogs.
C. Redemption: An owner of a vicious dog holding a license pursuant to this section 5-4C-12 may redeem an impounded vicious dog if:
1) a vicious dog has been impounded pursuant to this section, or 2) a vicious dog has not caused injury to a person subject to the
following conditions:
1. Proof of a valid license issued by the City under this section 5-4C-12.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 105/251
2. Payment of the cost of keeping the vicious dog during the period of impoundment.
An owner of a vicious dog which has caused an injury to a person resulting in the impoundment of the vicious dog shall be entitled
to redeem the vicious dog in accordance with 510 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12. (Ord. 0-11-14, 7-14-2014)
5-4C-12-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A license granted pursuant to this section 5-4C-12 shall be automatically revoked upon any violation by the licensee of any provision of
this section 5-4C-12. In the event of a revocation of the license, the license fee shall be retained by the City. Upon revocation of license,
owner of said animal shall have twenty four (24) hours to remove the animal from the City. (1997 Code)
5-4C-12-10: EXCEPTIONS:
This section 5-4C-12 shall not apply to any "K-9 patrol dogs" or "police dogs" as defined herein. (1997 Code)
5-4C-12-11: PENALTY:
A. Violation: Upon conviction of a violation of any section or subsection of this section 5-4C-12, the court shall assess a fine as provided
in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
B. Court Order: Upon a finding by the court that a licensee has violated section 5-4C-12-4, 5-4C-12-5 or 5-4C-12-7 of this section 5-4C-
12, the City shall enter an order revoking the license and ordering the former holder of the license to remove the pit bull dog and/or
vicious dog from the City. (1997 Code)
5-4C-13: PROCEDURE FOR SUSPECTED RABIES:
Any dog or cat having symptoms of the disease known as rabies shall be confined under the supervision of a veterinarian for a period of
ten (10) days. Any dog or cat having any symptoms of rabies when impounded by the animal control officer shall be immediately placed
in the care of a veterinarian. If it shall be deemed that the dog or cat is suffering from rabies, the animal may not be destroyed without
specific authorization of the veterinarian. Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-
4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code; amd. Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4C-14: DESTROYING ANIMALS:
Whoever wilfully and maliciously abandons, kills, wounds, maims, disfigures or poisons any dog or cat or exposes poisonous
substances with the intent that the life of any dog or cat should be destroyed thereby, such dog or cat being the property of another or
said owner or keeper himself/herself, shall be subject to the penalties provided for in this Code. Anyone found guilty of violating this
section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code; amd. Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4C-15: MONTHLY REPORT:
The animal control officer shall, on a monthly basis, make a report to the City Council of all fees, fines, and warrants; and shall keep a
log of all calls and further report said calls on said log. (1997 Code)
5-4C-16: KENNELING DOGS IN FRONT YARDS:
A. It shall be unlawful to kennel, house, chain, tie up, or otherwise keep a dog or dogs in any part of the front yard of a property being
used as a residence.
B. "Front yard" shall be defined as an open space extending the full width of a lot between a building and the front lot line, unoccupied
and unobstructed from the ground upward.
C. The property owner, all occupants of the residence, and the owners of the dog or dogs shall each be jointly and/or severally liable for
compliance with this section.
D. Any property not in compliance with this section shall be brought into compliance within sixty (60) days after the effective date hereof.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 106/251
E. Should any portion of this section be deemed illegal, then only that portion of the section that is illegal shall be stricken and all other
portions shall remain in full force and effect.
F. Each day the violation exists is a separate offense.
G. The fine for violating this section is not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
H. Violation of this section shall also be part of the "no contest" procedure and ordinance previously enacted. The "no contest" fine shall
be seventy five dollars ($75.00). (Ord. 98-10, 11-9-1998)
I. Any property owner, occupant of the residence or the dog owner may petition the Colona Police Commission for a variance from this
section if the layout or construction of the residence makes compliance with this section impossible or impractical. The Colona Police
Commission shall conduct a hearing on the petition at which time the petitioner may informally present evidence. If the commission
finds the compliance is impossible or impractical then a variance may be granted under such terms and conditions as it sees fit. The
commission shall issue a written decision and mail a copy to the petitioner when issued. Any notice of appeal to the Police
Commission's decision must be filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of issuance of the written decision of the Police
Commission. The appeal will be scheduled for review by the full City Council within forty (40) days of the filing of the notice of appeal.
The City Council will review the findings of the Police Commission and issue written findings and decision. The decision will be final
and appealable upon signing by the Mayor. (Ord. 98-10, 11-9-1998; amd. Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-2015)
Chapter 5
FINES
5-5-1: NO CONTEST FINE:
In the event that a person is accused of a violation and does not wish to contest said allegation, then said person so accused may pay
to the City at police headquarters or pay online within fourteen (14) days from the date of the citation (the date of issuance included) for
and in full satisfaction of said violation a fine in the amount of the minimum penalty, which minimum penalty shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00) unless otherwise listed in this Code1. In the event the accused person avails himself or herself of the foregoing provisions of
this section, then no court appearance, court costs, administrative hearing appearance or administrative hearing costs shall be required.
(Ord. 0-18-04, 1-22-2018)
5-5-2: GEOMETRIC PROGRESSION OF FINE:
Ordinance violation fees and/or fines assessed under no contest offenses shall be doubled for repeat offenders during the period of
twelve (12) months following the date of their last ticket for the same offense. Every violation fee continues to double until a twelve (12)
month period of being violation free of the same offense.
Example: A March 2010 ticket followed by a September 2010 ticket for the same offense: If March fine was twenty five dollars ($25.00)
the September fine would be fifty dollars ($50.00) and if a third ticket is incurred within twelve (12) months the September ticket and fine
would be one hundred dollars ($100.00) and the doubling of the last fine shall continue until the arrested person is free of such offense
for a twelve (12) month period following their last ticket for the offense. (Ord. 0-15-10, 5-10-2010)
Title 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS1
6-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this title the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
ALLEY: A public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear of lots or buildings, and not used for general traffic circulation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 107/251
BICYCLE: Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels except scooters
and similar devices.
CROSSWALK: A. That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on
opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway, and in
the absence of a sidewalk on one side of the highway, that part of the highway included within the extension of the lateral line of the
existing sidewalk to the side of the highway without the sidewalk, with such extension forming a right angle to the centerline of the
highway;
B. Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on
the surface placed in accordance with the provisions in the manual adopted by the department of transportation.
DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Police vehicles, vehicles of fire department, ambulances, vehicles carrying a state, county or municipal officer
or employee in response to an emergency call, and emergency vehicles of public service corporations on emergency call.
INTERSECTION: A. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral
boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles or the area within which
vehicles traveling upon different roadways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
B. Where a highway includes two (2) roadways forty feet (40') or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided
highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
C. The junction of an alley with a street or highway does not constitute an intersection.
METAL TIRES: Every tire the surface of which in contact with the roadway is wholly or partially of metal or other hard, nonresilient
material.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in
contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
PARK: To stand a vehicle whether occupied or not, for a period of time greater than is reasonably necessary for the actual loading or
unloading of persons.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
PNEUMATIC TIRES: Every tire in which compressed air is designed to support the load.
PROPERTY LINE: The line making the boundary between any street and the lots or property abutting thereto.
PUBLIC BUILDING: A building used by the City, the County, any park district, school district, the State, or the United States government.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
ROAD TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other
than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
SAFETY ZONE: The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is
so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone.
SCHOOL BUS: Every motor vehicle of the second division operated by or for a public or governmental agency or by or for a private or
religious organization solely for the transportation of pupils in connection with school activities.
SEMI-TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle
and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended
for use of pedestrians.
SOLID TIRE: Every tire of rubber or other resilient material which does not depend upon compressed air for the support of the load.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between property lines or every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is
open to the use of the public, as a matter or right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances whether singly or together while using any highway
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 108/251
for the purpose of travel.
TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying passengers or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and
so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
TRUCK TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a
load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
URBAN DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including any street which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or
dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than one hundred feet (100') for a distance of a quarter (1/4) mile or more.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway except devices
moved by human power.
YIELD RIGHT OF WAY: When required by an official sign, means the act of granting the privilege of the immediate use of the
intersecting roadway to traffic within the intersection and to vehicles approaching from the right or left; provided, that when the roadway
is clear the vehicle may proceed into the intersection. (1997 Code)
6-1-2: ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED:
In order to establish rules and regulations for the movement of traffic in and about the city, the city council does hereby adopt the
provisions of the Illinois vehicle code as presented in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5 and as hereafter amended. (1997 Code)
6-1-3: SPEED LIMIT:
It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on any street in the city, not under the jurisdiction of the state of Illinois or Henry County, at
a speed in excess of twenty five (25) miles per hour, unless otherwise posted. (1997 Code)
6-1-4: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE:
Members of the police department, and special police assigned to traffic duty, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic in accordance
with the provisions of this title, or in emergencies as public safety or convenience may require, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a policeman. Except in case of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any
person not authorized by law to direct or attempt to direct traffic2. (1997 Code)
6-1-5: SCENE OF FIRE:
The fire department officer in command, or any fireman designated by such fire department officer, may exercise the powers and
authority of a policeman in directing traffic at the scene of any fire or where the fire department has responded to an emergency call for
so long as fire department equipment is on the scene in the absence of or in assisting the police. (1997 Code)
6-1-6: SIGNS AND SIGNALS:
A. Obedience To: It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the instructions of any traffic sign or signal placed in view by
authority of the mayor and city council or in accordance with the laws of the state, excepting on direction of a police officer. All signs
and signals established by direction of the governing body shall conform to the state manual of uniform traffic control devices for
streets and highways.
B. Unauthorized Signs: No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal,
marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or
which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, nor shall any person place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any
other sign which hides from view or interferes with the movement of traffic or effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any railroad
sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic-control device
or railroad sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising3.
C. Interference With Signals Or Signs: It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, move or interfere with any official traffic sign
or signal4. (1997 Code)
6-1-7: ANIMALS OR BICYCLES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 109/251
Every person riding a bicycle or an animal, or driving any animal drawing a vehicle upon any street, shall be subject to the provisions of
this chapter applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions which can have no application to one riding a bicycle or driving
or riding animals; provided, that, except in business districts, bicycles may be ridden on sidewalks5. (1997 Code)
6-1-8: EXEMPTIONS:
A. Emergency Vehicles: The provisions of this title regulating the movement or parking of vehicles shall not apply to the driver of any
authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call, but such driver, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any
stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety but may proceed cautiously past such red or stop sign or signal. At other times
drivers of authorized emergency vehicles shall stop in obedience to a stop sign or signal.
B. Assumption Of Special Privileges: No driver of any authorized emergency vehicle shall assume any special privileges under the act
except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator
of the law.
C. Street Improvements: The provisions of this title regulating the movement and parking of vehicles shall not apply to equipment or
vehicles while actively engaged in installing, repairing, or otherwise improving streets or street pavement. (1997 Code)
6-1-9: DRIVERS:
A. Liquor Or Drugs: It shall be unlawful for the habitual user of narcotic drugs to operate any motor vehicle on any street; and it shall be
unlawful for any intoxicated person, or any person under the influence of alcohol or of a narcotic drug, to operate or attempt to
operate any motor vehicle on any street6.
B. Accidents: The driver of a vehicle which has collided with, or been in an accident with any vehicle, person or property in such a
manner as to cause injury or damage, shall stop immediately, and render such assistance as may be possible, and to give his/her
true name and residence to the injured person or any other persons requesting the same on behalf of the injured person, or to the
owner of the property damaged, and to a policeman, if one is present. A report of each such accident shall be given by the driver of
each vehicle concerned in it to the chief of police within twenty four (24) hours after the accident7. (1997 Code)
6-1-10: PENALTY:
A. Bail, Arrest Ticket: Any person arrested for a violation of any provision of this title regulating traffic, with the exception of those
provisions concerning parking, shall be released from custody upon posting bail, as may be required by statute or by order of the
court of the fourteenth judicial district. Excepting those provisions hereof concerning parking, all persons arrested shall be supplied
with a copy of a uniform arrest ticket advising such arrested party of the charge against him/her.
B. Fine, General: Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this title, with the exception of those provisions regarding
parking violations, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1997 Code)
6-1-11: SNOWMOBILE REGULATIONS:
A. The snowmobile regulations act set out in the Illinois Compiled Statutes is incorporated into this code by reference. Said snowmobile
regulations are cited as 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1-1 through 11-1.
B. Violations of this section may be paid through the city's no contest sections of this code. All violations which go to trial shall be
governed by the general penalty clause of this code.
C. Designated snowmobile route within the city limits is as follows:
The snowmobile route shall consist of the bike trail from Interstate 80 to Route 84, then stay on the trail to the 5th and 6th Street
bridge crossing, then the trail shall cross over the south side of the canal and the trail shall consist of the shoulder of the bike trail to
the locks.
D. Designated parking areas are:
1. The parking area on the corner of Water Street and Maple,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 110/251
2. The parking lot at Galliaerts field off Colona Road,
3. The canal area along 5th Avenue between 3rd Street and 4th Street,
4. The Hennepin Drive parking area just off 5th Avenue,
5. The open field at the end of 9th Street, and
6. The boat ramp parking lot.
E. City roads to travel on:
1. Maple Street from Water to Broadway Street.
2. Broadway Street from Maple to Warren Street.
3. Warren Street from Broadway to High Street.
4. High Street from Warren Street to Cleveland Road.
5. 1st Street from 5th Avenue to 7th Avenue.
6. 6th Street from 5th Avenue to 1st Avenue.
F. The designated snowmobile route, parking areas and city roads will be open the same times as the Hennepin Trail. (Ord. 11-02, 11-
11-2002)
Chapter 2
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING1
6-2-1: PARKING RULES; NO PARKING PLACES:
It shall be unlawful at any time to permit any vehicle to stand in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a policeman or traffic control device:
A. In any intersection.
B. In a crosswalk.
C. Upon any bridge or viaduct, or in any subway or tunnel or the approach thereto.
D. Within thirty feet (30') of a stop sign, or on the approaching side.
E. Within twenty feet (20') of any intersection or crosswalk.
F. At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable width of the roadway for moving traffic to less than sixteen feet
(16').
G. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
H. At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway.
I. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad grade crossing.
J. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire department station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to
any such station within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance when properly signposted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 111/251
K. On any sidewalk or parkway.
L. At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
M. On the side of any street against the flow of traffic. (1997 Code)
N. On 9th Avenue between 8th and 9th Streets on both sides of 9th Avenue. (Ord. 10-06, 5-8-2006)
6-2-2: SIGNS POSTED:
The chief of police or any other person authorized by the mayor and city council shall cause signs to be posted in all areas where
parking is limited or prohibited, indicating such limitations or prohibitions. (1997 Code)
6-2-3: PENALTY:
Persons who receive a parking ticket shall have the option of a no contest fine as established in section 5-5-1 of this code.
A. A person who determines to take a parking ticket to trial shall no longer be able to avail themselves of the no contest fine but would
be subject to the general penalty clause of this code.
B. The no contest fine may apply to tickets issued during time of snowfall. (Ord. 0-17-10, 5-10-2010)
Chapter 3
STREETS AND INTERSECTIONS
6-3-1: THROUGH STREETS:
The streets and parts of streets of the city designated by ordinance as through streets are hereby declared to be through streets. The
driver of a vehicle shall stop at the entrance to a through street and shall yield the right of way to other vehicles which have entered the
intersection or which are approaching so close on a through street as to constitute an immediate hazard, unless directed otherwise by
the traffic officer or a traffic control signal. (1997 Code)
6-3-2: ONE-WAY STREETS OR ALLEYS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any street or alley designated as a one-way street or alley by ordinance in any direction
other than that so designated. (1997 Code)
6-3-3: STOP STREETS:
The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign at an intersection where a stop sign is erected at one or more entrances
thereto, and shall proceed cautiously yielding to the vehicles not so obliged to stop which are within the intersection or approaching so
close as to constitute an immediate hazard, unless traffic at such intersection is controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event the
directions of the police officer shall be complied with. (1997 Code)
6-3-4: YIELD RIGHT OF WAY:
The driver of a vehicle shall, in obedience to yield right of way signs, yield the right of way in accordance with the provisions of 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-904(c). The intersections and streets where a driver of a vehicle shall stop shall be designated by an
appropriate stop sign. (1997 Code)
6-3-5: LIMITED LOAD STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any street in the city when the gross weight on the surface of the road exceeds twenty
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 112/251
thousand (20,000) pounds, and on any street where the weight of vehicles permitted on such street is limited by ordinance and signs
indicating such limitations are posted. It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of such weight on such street, except for the
purpose of making delivery or picking up a load, in which case vehicle may be driven on such street after first securing the consent of
the police department. (1997 Code)
6-3-6: POSTING SIGNS:
The chief of police or any other person designated by the mayor and city council shall post or cause to be posted suitable signs for all
such through streets, one-way streets or alleys and stop intersections. (1997 Code)
6-3-7: ACCESS LIMITATIONS:
A. Travel is prohibited at any time on county designated road E550 Street in the city of Colona for vehicles weighing twenty (20) tons or
more. The speed limit for all vehicles shall be no more than thirty (30) miles per hour.
B. The restrictions placed on vehicles described in subsection A of this section shall be designated by appropriate signs placed on such
highways by the city of Colona and such restrictions shall not be effective unless and until such signs are erected and maintained.
(Ord. 04-02, 5-28-2002)
Chapter 4
PEDESTRIANS1
6-4-1: PEDESTRIAN REGULATIONS:
A. Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals at intersections as provided in the provisions of this Title, but all other places
pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this Chapter.
B. A pedestrian shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device specifically applicable to him, unless otherwise directed by
a police office. (1997 Code)
6-4-2: PEDESTRIANS IN CROSSWALKS:
A. Right Of Way At Crosswalks: When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of the vehicle shall yield the
right of way, slowing down or stopping if need be, to yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the
pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway which the vehicle is traveling upon, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from
the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger; but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk
or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. This provision shall not apply under the
conditions stated in subsection 6-4-3B of this Chapter.
B. Passing Prohibited: Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to
permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such
stopped vehicle.
C. Stay To Right: Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. (1997 Code)
6-4-3: CROSSING STREETS:
A. Unmarked Crosswalk Or Other Point: Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or
within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
B. Pedestrian Tunnel Or Overhead Crossing: Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead
pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
C. Use Of Marked Crosswalk Required: Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operating, pedestrians
shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 113/251
D. Diagonal Crossing: No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless authorized by official traffic-control devices;
and, when authorized to cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official traffic-control devices pertaining
to such crossing movements. (1997 Code)
6-4-4: DRIVER'S RESPONSIBILITY:
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any
pedestrian, or any person operating a bicycle or other device propelled by human power upon any roadway and shall give warning by
sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated
person upon any roadway. (1997 Code)
6-4-5: PEDESTRIANS ON ROADWAY:
A. Sidewalks Present: Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon adjacent roadways.
B. Absence Of Sidewalks: Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking upon a roadway shall, when practicable, walk only
on the left side of the roadway on its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction. (1997 Code)
6-4-6: SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS:
A. Prohibited: No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, employment, or business from the occupant of any
vehicle2.
B. Watching Or Guarding Vehicle: No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for the purpose of soliciting the
watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a street or highway. (1997 Code)
Chapter 5
VEHICLE CONDITION; EQUIPMENT1
6-5-1: CLEAR VISION:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which is loaded or in such a condition that the operator does not have a clear vision of all
parts of the roadway essential to the safe operation of the vehicle. Any view of the roadway to the rear so obstructed shall be equipped
with a mirror so attached as to give the driver a view of the roadway behind such driver. (1997 Code)
6-5-2: GAS AND SMOKE:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which emits dense smoke or such an amount of smoke or fumes as to be dangerous to the
health of persons or as to endanger the drivers of other vehicles. (1997 Code)
6-5-3: PROJECTING LOADS; WIDTH AND HEIGHT:
A. Maximum Width And Height: The maximum width and height of any vehicle and its load shall not exceed the limits expressed in the
State traffic law.
B. Maximum Load Width: No passenger type vehicle shall be operated on the streets with a load extending beyond the line of the
fenders on the left side of the vehicle nor extending more than six inches (6") beyond the line of the fenders on the right side thereof.
C. Maximum Length, Single Vehicle: No vehicle, unladen or with load, shall exceed a length of forty two feet (42') extreme overall
dimensions.
D. Maximum Length, Combination Of Vehicles: No combination of vehicles coupled together shall consist of more than two (2) units,
and no such combination of vehicles, unladen or with load, shall exceed a total length of fifty feet (50'); but such length limitations
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 114/251
shall not apply to vehicles operated in daytime when transporting pipes, poles, machinery and other objects which cannot be readily
dismembered, nor to such vehicles operated at nighttime by a public utility when engaged in emergency repair work; but such loads
carried at night shall be clearly marked with sufficient lights to show the full dimensions of the load.
E. Maximum Extension In Front Of Vehicle: No part of the load of a vehicle shall extend more than three feet (3') in front of the extreme
front portion of the vehicle. (1997 Code)
6-5-4: SPILLING LOADS:
No vehicle shall be so loaded that any part of its load spills or drops on any street or alley in the City. (1997 Code)
6-5-5: DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES:
It is unlawful for any person to drive or move, or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, on any highway any
vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person or property, or which does not contain
those parts or is not at all times equipped with such lamps and other equipment in proper condition and adjustment as required in this
Chapter, or which is equipped in any manner in violation of this Code2. (1997 Code)
6-5-6: LUG WHEELS, NONSKID DEVICES PROHIBITED:
A. Lug Wheels: It shall be unlawful for tractors with wheels injurious to pavement to be permitted upon the public thoroughfares unless
the operator of such vehicle shall first plank such streets.
B. Nonskid Devices: It shall be unlawful to operate upon any street any motor vehicle equipped with any nonskid device so constructed
that any rigid or nonflexible portion thereof comes into contact with the pavement or roadway. (1997 Code)
6-5-7: REQUIRED EQUIPMENT:
A. Horns And Warning Devices:
1. Horn: Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway shall be equipped with a horn in good working order and capable of
emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than two hundred feet (200'), but no horn or other
warning device shall emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound or a whistle. The driver of a motor vehicle shall, when reasonably
necessary to ensure safe operation, give audible warning with his/her horn but shall not otherwise use such horn when upon a
highway.
2. Siren, Whistle, Bell: No vehicle shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a vehicle any siren, whistle, or bell, except
as otherwise permitted in this subsection. Any authorized emergency vehicle as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1 may
be equipped with a siren, whistle, or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less
than five hundred feet (500'), but such siren, whistle or bell, shall not be used except when such vehicle is operated in response to
an emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in either of which events the driver of
such vehicle shall sound such siren, whistle or bell when necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof.
B. Brakes: It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle upon a street unless such vehicle is equipped with good and sufficient brakes
in good working condition, as required by the state traffic law, or to operate any vehicle which is so loaded that the operator does not
have ready access to the mechanics operating the brakes of such vehicle3.
C. Lights:
1. Operation Or Parking On Street: It shall be unlawful to operate or park on any street any vehicle not equipped with adequate lights
conforming to the requirements of the state law; provided, that vehicles may be parked at nighttime without lights on any street or
portion thereof, designated by ordinance as a place where vehicles may so park at nighttime4.
2. Volunteer Fireman: Any motor vehicle owned or usually operated by a volunteer fireman may be equipped with not to exceed two
(2) lamps which shall emit a blue light without glare. One such lamp may be mounted on the rear of any such vehicle. A flashing
blue light may be used only when such fireman is responding to a fire call5.
D. Tires: It shall be unlawful to operate on any street any motor vehicle which is not equipped with tires conforming to the requirements
of the state traffic law6.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 115/251
E. Mufflers; Unnecessary Noise: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle which shall not at all times be equipped
with a muffler upon the exhaust thereof in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and it
shall be unlawful for any person operating any motor vehicle to use a cutout, bypass or similar muffler elimination appliance7. (1997
Code)
F. Adoption Of Statutes: That equipment of vehicles set out in Illinois Compiled Statutes be incorporated into this code by reference.
Said equipment of vehicles is cited as 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-101 through 5/12-902. Violations of this section may be
paid through the city's no contest sections of this code. All violations which go to trial shall be governed by the general penalty clause
of this code. (Ord. 12-02, 11-11-2002)
Chapter 6
BICYCLES1
6-6-1: EQUIPMENT:
A. Lights: Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a
distance of at least five hundred feet (500') to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible from all
distances from one hundred feet (100') to six hundred feet (600') to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of
headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear may be used
in addition to the red reflector. (1997 Code)
1. It shall be unlawful to operate a bicycle upon any public street, road, highway or sidewalk from dusk to dawn without a light and
reflector as required by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1507.
2. The penalty for violating this subsection shall fall under the general penalty provisions.
3. This offense shall also be included as a no contest option. The no contest fine is twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 00-10, 2-28-
2000)
B. Brake: Every bicycle shall be equipped with good and adequate brakes. (1997 Code)
6-6-2: FORFEITURE:
A. Violation: Any bicycle operated with the knowledge and consent of the owner in violation of any State statute or City ordinance shall
be subject to confiscation as follows:
1. First Violation: Warning upon first violation.
2. Second Violation: Forfeiture for a period of not less than seven (7) days upon second violation.
3. Third Violation: Forfeiture for a period of not less than thirty (30) days upon the third violation.
B. Order Of Forfeiture: Any officer confiscating a bicycle under subsections A2 and A3 of this Section shall have the City Attorney apply
to the associate judge for an order of forfeiture.
C. Prima Facie Evidence: The operation of a bicycle in violation of State statutes or City ordinance shall be prima facie evidence that
such operation is with the knowledge and consent of the owner. (1997 Code)
6-6-3: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
The parent or legal guardian of a minor found operating a bicycle within the City in violation of State statute or City ordinance on three
(3) occasions shall be given a written warning on each occasion. On the fourth occasion, the parent or legal guardian shall be issued a
notice to appear for violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 130/2a. (1997 Code)
Chapter 7
ABANDONED, INOPERABLE VEHICLES1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 116/251
6-7-1: ABANDONED, UNATTENDED VEHICLES:
No person shall leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building, or structure or any vacant lot, or within any unoccupied
dwelling, building, or structure, or any vacant lot, under his/her control, in a place accessible to children any abandoned, stored,
discarded, elevated, or propped or unattended motor vehicle. (1997 Code)
6-7-2: ABANDONMENT GENERALLY:
A. Abandoned On Highway: The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof on any highway in the City is
unlawful and subject to penalties as set forth herein.
B. Abandoned On Public Or Private Property: The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicles or any part thereof on private or
public property, other than a highway, in view of the general public anywhere in the City is unlawful except on the property of the
owner or bailee of such abandoned vehicle.
C. Removal: A motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on private property may be authorized for removal by or
upon the order of the Chief of Police after a waiting period of seven (7) days or more has expired. (1997 Code)
6-7-3: NOTIFICATION OF POLICE; TOWING VEHICLE AWAY:
A. Notifying Police Required: When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle comes into the temporary
possession or custody of a person in this State, not the owner of the vehicle, such person shall immediately notify the Police
Department when the vehicle is within the corporate limits of the City.
B. Towing; Maintenance Of Vehicle And Contents: Upon receipt of such notification, the Chief of the Police Department shall authorize a
towing service to remove and take possession of the abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle. The
towing service will safely keep the towed vehicle and its contents, maintain a record of the tow until the vehicle is claimed by the
owner or any other person legally entitled to possession thereof, or until it is disposed of as provided in this Chapter. (1997 Code)
6-7-4: TOWING AWAY:
A. Abandoned Ten Hours Or More: When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is abandoned on a highway in the City, on City property or
public property for ten (10) hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be authorized by order of the Chief of Police.
B. Traffic Hazard: When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned, or partially dismantled motor vehicle or other vehicle is creating a
traffic hazard because of its position in relation to the highway or its physical appearance, removal from the highway by a towing
service may be authorized by order of the Chief of Police.
C. Towing Costs: When a vehicle removed from either public or private property is authorized by order of the chief of police, the owner of
the vehicle will be responsible for all towing costs. (1997 Code)
D. Storage Charge: In the event that the police should impound a vehicle on city property, a storage charge of ten dollars ($10.00) per
day shall be levied. The same shall become due before such property will be returned to the owner. (Ord. 06-05, 4-11-2005)
6-7-5: RECORDS:
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to be towed away, the police department shall keep and maintain a record of the
vehicle towed, listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer's trade name, manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle
identification number, and license plate year, and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also include the date and hour of
tow, location towed from, location towed to, reason for towing and the name of the officer authorizing the tow. (1997 Code)
6-7-6: OBTAINING REGISTRATION INFORMATION:
A. Vehicle Registration Search: When the police department does not know the identity of the registered owner or other legally entitled
person, they will cause the state motor vehicle registration to be searched by a direct communication to the secretary of state for the
purpose of obtaining the required ownership information.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 117/251
B. Search Of Stolen Motor Vehicle Files:
1. State Police: The police department will cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the state police to be searched by direct
communication to the state police for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle.
2. National Crime Investigation Center: When the state police files are searched with negative results, the information contained in
the National Crime Information Center (NCIC) files will be searched by the state police.
3. Use Of Information: The information determined from these record searches will be used by the city police department in sending
a notification by certified mail to the owner or legally entitled person advising where the vehicle is held, requesting a disposition be
made and setting forth public sale information.
C. Unidentified Owner: When the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle
cannot be identified from the registration files of the state or from the registration files of a foreign state, if applicable, the police
department shall notify the state police for the purpose of identifying the vehicle's owner or other person legally entitled to
possession of the vehicle. The information obtained by the state police will be immediately forwarded to the law enforcement agency
having custody of the vehicle for notification of the owner. (1997 Code)
6-7-7: REDEMPTION:
At any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale or disposed of as provided herein, the owner or other person
legally entitled to its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the police department proof of ownership or proof of the right
to possession of the vehicle. No vehicle shall be released to the owner or other person under this section until all towing and storage
charges have been paid. (1997 Code)
6-7-8: PUBLIC SALE NOTICE:
A. Sale Of Vehicle: Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle, seven (7) years of age or newer,
remains unclaimed by the registered owner or other person legally entitled to its possession for a period of thirty (30) days after
notice has been given as provided herein, the police department having possession of the vehicle shall cause it to be sold at public
sale to the highest bidder.
B. Notice Of Sale:
1. Posting Of Notice: Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten (10) days prior to
the sale on the premises where the vehicle has been impounded.
2. Mailing Of Notice: At least ten (10) days prior to the sale, the police department shall cause a notice of the time and place of the
sale to be sent by certified mail to the registered owner or other person known by the police department or towing service to be
legally entitled to possession of the vehicle.
3. Contents Of Notice: Such notice shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to be sold and what steps must be taken by
any legally entitled person to reclaim a vehicle.
C. Second Notice: In those instances where the certified notification specified herein has been returned by the postal authorities to the
police department due to the addressee having moved, or being unknown at the address obtained from the registration records of
this state, the sending of a second certified notice will not be required. (1997 Code)
6-7-9: DISPOSAL OF VEHICLES:
A. Vehicle Seven Years Old Or Newer: When the identity of the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an
abandoned, lost, or unclaimed vehicle of seven (7) years of age or newer cannot be determined by any means provided for in this
chapter, the vehicle may be sold as provided herein or disposed of in the manner authorized by this chapter without notice to the
registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle.
B. Vehicle Older Than Seven Years: When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven (7) years of age is impounded as specified by this
chapter, it will be kept in custody for a minimum of ten (10) days for the purpose of determining ownership, the contacting of the
registered owner by mail, public service or in person for a determination of disposition, and an examination of the state police stolen
motor vehicle files for theft and wanted information. At the expiration of the ten (10) day period, without the benefit of disposition
information being received from the registered owner, the chief of police will authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk only.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 118/251
C. Antique Vehicle: A motor vehicle or other vehicle classified as an antique vehicle is excluded from this chapter. (1997 Code)
6-7-10: REPORT BY POLICE DEPARTMENT:
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody of the police department is reclaimed by the registered owner or other legally
entitled person, or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as provided in this chapter, a report of the transaction
will be maintained by the police department for a period of one year from the date of the sale or disposal. (1997 Code)
6-7-11: PROCEEDS OF PUBLIC SALE:
When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of the city is authorized to be towed away by the chief of police and disposed of as set
forth in this chapter, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition after the deduction of towing, storage and processing charge shall be
deposited in the municipal treasury. (1997 Code)
6-7-12: IMMUNITY FROM DAMAGES:
Any police officer, towing service owner, operator or employee shall not be held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought
by the registered owner, former registered owner, or his/her legal representative, or any other person legally entitled to possession of a
motor vehicle or other vehicle when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by this chapter. (1997 Code)
6-7-13: DERELICT AND ABANDONED VEHICLES:
A. City Policy:
1. Findings: The city council finds that derelict and abandoned vehicles constitute a safety hazard and a public nuisance; are
detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the general public by harboring disease, providing breeding places for vermin,
inviting plundering, creating fire hazards, and presenting physical dangers to children and others; produce scenic blights which
degrade the environment and adversely affect land values and the proper maintenance and continuing development of the city;
represent a resource out of place and an energy loss to the city economy, and require municipal government attention, in order to
assure the expeditious removal and recycling of the derelict and abandoned vehicles.
2. Declaration: The city council declares, therefore, that it is the policy of the city to:
a. Prohibit the abandonment of vehicles and the retention of derelicts, and to enforce such prohibition by law while reminding
vehicle owners of their own individual responsibility to dispose of such vehicles.
b. Encourage the development of procedures and techniques to facilitate the expeditious removal of derelict and abandoned
vehicles from public or private premises.
B. Nuisance Declared; Exception:
1. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following words shall have the meaning ascribed to them as follows:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: All vehicles in a state of disrepair rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition; or any
vehicle that has not been moved or used for seven (7) consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted.
DERELICT VEHICLE: Any inoperable, unregistered or discarded motor vehicle, regardless of title, having lost its character as a
substantial property and left unattended without justification on the owner's land contrary to the public policy expressed in
subsection A of this section.
2. Storing, Parking Or Leaving:
a. Prohibited: No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any motor vehicles of any kind which as
defined in subsection B1 of this section, is a "derelict vehicle" or an "abandoned vehicle", whether attended or not, upon any
property, private or public, within the city for a period of time in excess of seventy two (72) hours.
b. Statute Authority: This section relating to the declaration and abatement of nuisances is enacted pursuant to the powers vested
in this city by and through the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-60-2 entitled "definition and abatement of
nuisances".
c. Declared Nuisance: The presence of a derelict or abandoned vehicle, or parts thereof, on private or public property is hereby
declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this section.
d. Applicability: This section shall also apply to abandoned or derelict vehicles covered with a tarp, canvas, plastic or other such
soft covering. There is a rebuttable presumption that probable cause exists to believe an abandoned or derelict vehicle exists
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 119/251
under a tarp, canvas, plastic or other such soft covering if a person of reasonable intelligence observes a tarp, canvas, plastic,
or other such soft covering, covering items that a person reasonably believes to be personalty.
e. Exception: This section shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within a building on private property or to any vehicle stored or
parked on the premises of a business enterprise, actively operated with an office on the subject premises, and being properly
operated in the appropriate business zone, pursuant to the zoning and licensing ordinances of the city or to any motor vehicle in
operable condition specifically adapted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways.
3. Notice To Remove: Whenever it comes to the attention of the police department that any nuisance as defined in subsection B1 of
this section exists in the city, a notice in writing giving notice of the existence of the nuisance and demanding its removal shall be
given as provided in subsection B5 of this section.
4. Responsibility For Removal: Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of the derelict or abandoned vehicle and
the owner or occupant of the private property on which the same is located, whichever party having been so notified, shall be
responsible for its removal. In the event of removal and disposition by the city, the owner or occupant of the private property where
same is located shall be liable for the expenses incurred.
5. Notice Procedure: The police department, or agent thereof, of the city shall give notice of removal to the registered owner of the
vehicle, if said owner can be ascertained and to the owner or occupant of the private property where said vehicle is located at
least seven (7) days before the time of compliance. It shall constitute sufficient notice when a copy of same is posted upon the
vehicle itself or on a conspicuous place upon the private property on which the vehicle is located and duplicate copies are sent by
registered mail to the registered owner of said vehicle if said owner can be ascertained and to the owner or occupant of the private
property at his/her last known address.
6. Content Of Notice: The notice shall contain the request for removal within the time specified in this section, and the notice shall
advise that upon failure to comply with the notice to remove, the city or its designee shall undertake such removal with the cost of
removal to be levied against the owner or occupant of the property. (1997 Code)
7. Request For Hearing: The persons to whom the notices are directed, or their duly authorized agents, may file a written request for
hearing before the derelict vehicle appeals committee, within the seven (7) day period of compliance, prescribed in subsection B5
of this section for the purpose of defending the charges by the city. The derelict vehicle appeals committee shall be composed of
the person requesting notice and police commission to be appointed by the mayor for a period of one year for each term. (1997
Code; amd. Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-2015)
8. Procedure For Hearing: The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after the filing of the request and the persons to whom
the notices are directed shall be advised of the time and place of said hearing at least three (3) days in advance thereof. At any
such hearing the city and the persons to whom the notices have been directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as
either party deems necessary.
9. Removal Of Vehicle: If the violation described in the notice has not been remedied within the seven (7) day period of compliance,
or in the event that a notice requesting a hearing is timely filed, a hearing is had, and the existence of the violation is affirmed by
the derelict vehicle appeals committee, then the chief of police or his/her designee shall have the right to take possession of the
derelict or abandoned vehicle and remove it from the premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or
refuse to allow such person to enter upon private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of this
section.
10. Notice Of Removal: Within forty eight (48) hours of the removal of such vehicle, the chief of police shall give notice to the
registered owner of the vehicle, if known, and also to the owner or occupant of the private property from which the vehicle was
removed that said vehicle has been impounded and stored for violation of this section. The notice shall give the location of where
the vehicle is stored and the costs incurred by the city for removal.
11. Disposition Of Vehicles: Removed vehicles shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with the
disposal procedures of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-203.
12. Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be
subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code and ordered to make restitution for the vehicle removal and storage
costs. Each act in violation of any of the provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offence. A violation of this section shall be
charged by the issuance of a citation by the police department, as with other motor vehicle violations. (1997 Code)
6-7-14: CURRENT VALID LICENSE TAGS:
A. Nuisance Declared: All operable motor vehicles on private property and in view of the general public not displaying a current valid
license tag in a manner in accordance with the statutes and regulations of the state for the display of license tags are hereby
declared a nuisance.
B. Application For Exemption; Fee: Upon notice by the tagging of a vehicle, any person who is the owner or keeper of an operable
motor vehicle not displaying a current, valid license tag shall, within seven (7) days after such vehicle is tagged, either obtain and
display a current valid license tag or make application to the city clerk requesting exemption from the requirement of this section and
stating the reasons for such exemption. Such application shall be accompanied by an application fee set by the city council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 120/251
C. Presentation To Council: Upon receiving an application for exemption, the city clerk shall present the application to the city council or
to such body designated by the city council to consider such applications.
D. Request To Appear: On considering the application, city council or its designated body may request that an applicant appear before it
for further information.
E. Approval/Rejection Of Application: After due consideration of an application, the city council or its designated body shall approve or
reject such application. Their determination shall be final.
F. Procurement Of Valid Tags: Upon rejection of an application, an applicant shall have seven (7) days from the date of rejection to
display current valid license tags or be in violation of this section.
G. Exception: This section does not apply to any vehicle that is kept within a building or to a vehicle on the premises of a place of
business engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles.
H. Penalty: Any person in violation of the requirements of this section shall be subject to the penalty provided for in this chapter. (1997
Code)
6-7-15: PENALTY:
Any person violating this Chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code for each violation thereof. (1997
Code)
Chapter 8
ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY AND VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT
6-8-1: VIOLATIONS:
A motor vehicle, operated with the permission, express or implied, of the owner of record, that is used in connection with the following
violations shall be subject to seizure and impoundment by the City of Colona, and the owner shall be liable to the City for an
administrative penalty in the amount of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00), in addition to any towing and storage fees as hereinafter
provided. (Ord. 0-18-18, 12-10-2018)
A. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an offense for which a motor vehicle may be
seized and forfeited pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/36-1 (Criminal Code of 1961); or
B. Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs, an intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in
violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501(a); or
C. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, a felony, or in violation of the Cannabis Control
Act1; or
D. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act2; or
E. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/24-1, 24-1.5, or 24-3.1 (Criminal Code of 1961); or
F. Driving while a driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/6-303; or
G. Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing, or attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled
substance, as defined by the 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/3 (Cannabis Control Act) or 570/102 (Illinois Controlled Substances
Act); or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 121/251
H. Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's license, in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101, if the period
of expiration is greater than one year; or
I. Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's license or permit, in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/6-101, or operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's license or permit due to a person's age; or
J. Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a warrant has been issued by a Circuit Clerk in Illinois for failing to
answer charges that the driver violated 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101, 6-303, or 11-501; or
K. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/16, et seq., or 5/16A, et seq., (Criminal Code of 1961); or
L. Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the attempt to commit, any other misdemeanor or felony offense in
violation of the Criminal Code of 1961, when so provided by local ordinance.
M. Any other circumstances under which the vehicle may be towed pursuant to this Code or the Colona Police Department policies and
procedures. (Ord. 0-17-2, 1-23-2017)
6-8-2: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
A. This chapter shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing State or Federal laws or City ordinances pertaining to vehicle
seizure and impoundment, and these penalties shall be in addition to any penalties that may be assessed by a court for any criminal
charges.
B. The administrative penalty under this chapter shall be waived if the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at that time, a police
report was filed, and there is verifiable proof that the vehicle was stolen.
C. The references to provisions of State law shall not be interpreted to require that prosecution of the specific charge is a necessary
prerequisite to enforcement of this subsection, nor shall this subsection require proof of the violation beyond a reasonable doubt.
D. All administrative fees, and towing and storage fees, shall be imposed on the registered owner of the motor vehicle or the agents of
that owner. (Ord. 0-17-2, 1-23-2017)
6-8-3: NOTICE:
Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter,
the police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility authorized by the City. At the time the vehicle is towed, the police
officer shall notify the owner, or if the owner is not present, the person in control of the vehicle, of the owner's right to request an
administrative hearing. The officer shall also provide notice that the motor vehicle will remain impounded pending the completion of an
administrative hearing, unless the owner or lessee of the vehicle or a lienholder waives the administrative hearing by paying the
administrative impoundment fee and all towing and storage fees. (Ord. 0-17-2, 1-23-2017)
6-8-4: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
A. The City shall appoint an attorney licensed to practice law for at least three (3) years to serve as an Administrative Hearing Officer.
B. The owner of record may contest the impoundment by filing a written request for an administrative hearing with the Administrative
Hearing Officer. The request must be filed no later than ten (10) business days after the seizure.
C. Upon receipt of a request for hearing, a hearing shall be scheduled and convened no later than forty five (45) days after receipt of
said request.
D. Interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard at the hearing. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing,
and hearsay evidence shall be admissible. (Ord. 0-17-2, 1-23-2017)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 122/251
E. If, after the hearing, the Hearing Officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the motor vehicle was used in violation
of this chapter, the Hearing Officer shall enter an order finding the owner of record of the motor vehicle liable to the City for the
amount of the administrative impoundment fee, plus an additional administrative fee as set from time to time by the City Council, and
towing and storage fees. (Ord. 0-17-23, 11-27-2017)
F. If, after the hearing, the Hearing Officer does not determine by a preponderance of the evidence that the motor vehicle was used in
such a violation, the Hearing Officer shall enter an order finding for the owner and for release of the vehicle, with no administrative
impoundment fee due, and after towing and storage fees have been paid. (Ord. 0-17-2, 1-23-2017)
G. If, after the Hearing Officer makes a ruling of guilty, and allows for a time to pay; the owner and driver, if not present, will be notified
by U.S. mail that they were found guilty in default, otherwise if at the hearing they will be immediately notified. If the owner or
operator of the vehicle found in violation has not paid the determined fines and penalties by the time allotted from the Hearing
Officer, the City of Colona will turn the unpaid fees over to collections to be collected. (Ord. 0-17-23, 11-27-2017)
6-8-5: BONDING PROCEDURE:
Whenever the owner, or an authorized agent of the owner, of a vehicle seized pursuant to this chapter wishes to retrieve their vehicle
prior to the evidentiary hearing, and without waiving the evidentiary hearing, they may do so by posting a cash bond at the Colona
Police Department. The cash bond will be in the amount of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) plus towing and storage fees. The
vehicle will be released once the bond has been paid. (Ord. 0-18-18, 12-10-2018)
6-8-6: UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
Vehicles not retrieved from the towing facility or storage facility within thirty five (35) days after the Administrative Hearing Officer issues
a written decision shall be deemed abandoned, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this Code. (Ord. 0-17-2, 1-23-
2017)
Title 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
Chapter 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS1
7-1-1: SUPERVISION OF PUBLIC WAYS:
All maintenance and repair of public streets, alleys, and other public ways shall be under the supervision of the Public Works Director.
(1997 Code)
7-1-2: PAVING CONSTRUCTION:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement on any public street, sidewalk, alley or other public way, or to
repair the same, without having first secured a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made to the City Clerk and shall
state the location of the intended pavement or repair, the extent thereof, and the person who is to do the actual construction work.
No such permits shall be issued except where the work will conform to the provisions of this Code.
B. Bond Required: Each applicant shall file a bond in the amount specified by the City Council with surety to be approved by the Council
conditioned to indemnify the City for any loss or damage resulting from the work undertaken or the manner of doing the same. (1997
Code)
7-1-3: OPENINGS IN STREETS, PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any opening in any public street without a permit from the City Council. All such lawfully
maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable strong cover or railing to the approval of the Public Works Director. (1997 Code)
7-1-4: INJURY TO NEW PAVEMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 123/251
It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon, or injure any newly laid street while the same is guarded by a
warning sign or barricade, or to knowingly injure any soft or newly laid surface. (1997 Code)
7-1-5: REPAIRS; REPORT DEFECTS:
A. Repairs; Supervision: All public streets shall be in good repair. Such repair work, whether done by the City or by the abutting owner,
shall be under the supervision of the Public Works Director.
B. Report Of Defects: It shall be the duty of every City officer and employee becoming cognizant of any defect in any street, or any
obstruction thereof, to report the same to the Public Works Director as soon as possible. (1997 Code)
7-1-6: BARRICADES:
A. Laying Or Repairing Street; Excavation: Any person laying or repairing any street or other public place or making an excavation in the
same shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury of any person or vehicle by reason of the work. Such barricades shall be
protected by a light at nighttime.
B. Defects In Streets: Any defect in any such street or public way shall be barricaded to prevent injury, and any person properly
maintaining any opening or excavation while the same remains open shall guard the same with proper barricades and lights.
C. Disturbance Or Interference Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere with any barricade or lights lawfully placed to protect
or mark any new pavement or excavation or opening in any public street. (1997 Code)
7-1-7: PRIVATE USE OF STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street or other public place as space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale; or to
write or make any sign or advertisement on any such street or public place2. (1997 Code)
7-1-8: ENCROACHMENTS:
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure which encroaches upon any public street or property. (1997 Code)
7-1-9: OBSTRUCTING STREETS, DRAINS:
It shall be unlawful for any person:
A. Streets: To cause, create or maintain any obstruction of any street or other public way except as may be specified by ordinance or by
the public works director3.
B. Drains: To obstruct any drain in any public street or property. (1997 Code)
7-1-10: DEPOSITS ON STREETS:
A. Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to deposit on any street any material which may be harmful to the surfacing thereof, or any waste
material, or any glass, or other articles which may do injury to any person, animal or property4.
B. Exception: Coal or other materials may be deposited in streets preparatory to delivery or use; provided, that such deposit does not
reduce the usable width of the roadway at that point to less than eighteen feet (18'), and provided that such material or coal other
than material to be used in actual building construction, shall not be permitted to remain in such street for more than three (3) hours.
Any such material or coal shall be guarded by lights if the same remains upon any street after nighttime. (1997 Code)
7-1-11: SNOW REMOVAL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 124/251
It shall be unlawful to park, continue to park or leave a vehicle on an avenue or street when two inches (2") or more of snow has
accumulated during a snowfall to allow for city snow removal. It shall be unlawful for any resident to cause any snow from their property
to be removed, pushed, thrown, or deposited onto any other property other than their own. It shall be unlawful to push, throw, or deposit
any snow onto a public way at any time. (Ord. 0-15-002, 3-9-2015)
7-1-12: BURNING LEAVES AND RUBBISH:
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any leaves, paper, rubbish or other substances upon any of the public streets of the city5.
(1997 Code)
7-1-13: POLES AND WIRES; PERMISSION TO ERECT:
It shall be unlawful to erect any poles or wires or maintain any poles or wires over any public place, street or other public way without
first having secured permission from the mayor and city council. (1997 Code)
7-1-14: OFF ROAD VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful to operate on any public street, road or highway within the city any all-terrain vehicle; snowmobile; or motorcycle
designed for off road use.
A. The penalty for violating this section shall fall under the general penalty provisions. (Ord. 00-07, 2-28-2000)
B. This offense shall also be included as a no contest option. The no contest fine is fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 05-05, 2-28-2005)
ARTICLE A. CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES
7-1A-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this article is to establish policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way within the city's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the
city rights of way and the city as a whole.
B. Facilities Subject To This Article: This article applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public
rights of way within the jurisdiction of the city. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this article may continue to be
maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any
applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
C. Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The city, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within the city rights of way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the city enter into
such an agreement. In such an agreement, the city may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this article.
D. Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
1. Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a
franchise, license or similar agreement with the city, such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during
the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
2. Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this article and the
provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement between the city and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of
such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or
extension thereof.
3. Conflicts In This Code: This article supersedes all ordinances or parts thereof adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to
the extent of such conflict.
4. Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the
requirements of this article, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this article to the maximum extent possible without
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 125/251
violating federal or state laws or regulations.
5. Sound Engineering Judgment: The city shall use sound engineering judgment when administering this article and may vary the
standards, conditions, and requirements expressed in this article when the city so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed
to limit the ability of the city to regulate its rights of way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 14-01, 8-
27-2001)
7-1A-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section
530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American association of state highway and transportation officials.
ANSI: American national standards institute.
ASTM: American society for testing and materials.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this article.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber-optic devices.
CITY: The city of Colona.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area
may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon
the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO roadside design guide.
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The municipal code of the city of Colona.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification
or abandonment in place of facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of a right of way.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The city director of public works or his or her designee.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: For the purposes of this article, any work that obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse
effect on the use of the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other
cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and
compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or
immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER: The city engineer or his or her designee.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 126/251
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber-optic cable, communications and
video cables and wires, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon,
under, across, or within rights of way under this article, except those owned by the city.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter
station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of
access on highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration, location, or other characteristics,
is determined by the city director of public works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or
property or to the ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or
petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be
hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all
highway land and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails,
protective structures and appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
ILCC: Illinois commerce commission.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under a right of way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the center line of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to a facility or for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections 7-1A-4 and 7-1A-5 of this article.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products including, but not limited to,
gasoline, distillates, propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the city. If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30)
days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local, state or federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements
in which the city has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other than those of the city. "Right-ofway"
shall not include any real or personal city property that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not include
city buildings, fixtures, and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of telecommunications and all services
rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section 7-1A-10 of this article.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 127/251
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for
emergency vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering principles, practices and
experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of local, toll, and
wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line
services, specialized mobile radio services, or any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly
requires otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include wireless telecommunications as defined in the Illinois telecommunications
infrastructure maintenance fee act, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 635/1 et seq. "Telecommunications" shall not include value added
services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications
service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or
terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities,
and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end
telecommunications service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale. "Telecommunications" shall not include the
provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and
following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the city
through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal communications commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as
now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or controls facilities in the public right of way used or
designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of telecommunications at retail as
defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined in this article.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an underground casing.
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated
material. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies a right of way within the city shall register on January 1 of each year with the director of public works providing
the utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can
act on behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of way and a twenty four (24) hour
telephone number for each such person, and evidence of insurance as required in section 7-1A-8 of this article, in the form of a
certificate of insurance. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
A. Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this article) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within any city right of way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new facility, 3) disrupts the "right of way" (as
defined in this article), or 4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under,
across or within the right of way, without first filing an application with the city director of public works and obtaining a permit from the
city therefor, except as otherwise provided in this article. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service
connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right of way.
B. Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be filed on a form provided by the city and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the city may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials
that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each
page of such materials accordingly.
C. Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and
shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 128/251
1. The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
2. The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in
the work;
3. The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising
the applicant with respect to the application;
4. A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put.
The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special
emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
5. Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the city:
a. A written traffic-control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois
manual on uniform traffic-control devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to
efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and
b. An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential emergencies, including, without limitation,
construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall
include notification to the city and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ILCC
regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this section unless the city finds that additional
information or assurances are needed;
6. Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the certification of an engineer that such drawings,
plans, and specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
7. Evidence of insurance as required in section 7-1A-8 of this article;
8. Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section 7-1A-10 of this article;
9. Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of section 7-1A-21 of this article; and
10. Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the city.
D. Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities: In addition to the requirements of subsection C of this
section, the permit application shall include the following items as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit
application:
1. In the case of new electric power, communications or natural gas distribution system installation, evidence that any "Certificate of
Public Convenience and Necessity" has been issued by the ILCC that the applicant is required by law, or has elected, to obtain;
2. In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design, construction class, and operating pressures;
3. In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water
supplies, have been satisfied;
4. In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental
protection agency, division of water pollution control, have been satisfied;
5. In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure,
and the design standard to be followed.
E. Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit application review period and the construction period authorized
by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the city
within thirty (30) days after the change necessitating the amendment.
F. Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this
article shall be accompanied by a fee as set by the city council from time to time. No application fee is required to be paid by any
telecommunications retailer that is paying the municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to title 3,
chapter 13 of this code or the optional state telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the telecommunications
municipal infrastructure maintenance fee act, or by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure
maintenance fee pursuant to the electricity infrastructure maintenance fee act. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
A. City Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the
city director of public works within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not conform to the requirements of all
applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the city director of public works shall reject such application in writing,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 129/251
stating the reasons therefor. If the city director of public works is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of
this article and all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the city director of public works shall issue a permit
therefor as soon as practicable.
B. Additional City Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications Retailers:
1. Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify
the city that it intends to commence work governed by this article for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services.
Such notice shall consist of plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the
facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to the city not less than ten (10) days prior to the
commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of work requiring
excavation. The city director of public works shall specify the portion of the right of way upon which the facility may be placed,
used and constructed.
2. In the event that the city director of public works fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer
within either: a) ten (10) days after service of notice to the city by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving
excavation for new construction, or b) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of
work involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit
under this article.
3. Upon the provision of such specification by the city, where a permit is required for work pursuant to section 7-1A-4 of this article
the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the city an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of
subsection B1 of this section. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
A. Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A permit from the city authorizes a permittee to undertake only
certain activities in accordance with this article on city rights of way, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the
permittee to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights of way.
B. Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the city does not excuse the permittee from complying with other
requirements of the city and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings
and specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the city within
ninety (90) days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations
of the actual facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also deviates from the
requirements of this article, it shall be treated as a request for variance in accordance with section 7-1A-21 of this article. If the city
denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right of way or modify the facility so that it
conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-8: INSURANCE:
A. Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying a right
of way or constructing any facility in the right of way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the
utility as named insured and naming the city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional
insureds on the policies listed in subsections A1 and A2 of this section:
1. Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly
referred to as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits not less than:
a. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each person;
b. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one accident; and
c. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability;
2. Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for
personal injury and property damage for each accident;
3. Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
4. Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 130/251
B. Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella
policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that
when any loss covered by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy becomes
effective to cover such loss.
C. Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by this section to the city within ten (10) days
following receipt of a written request therefor from the city.
D. Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following
endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30)
days after receipt by the City, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the City
Public Works Director of such intent to cancel or not to renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the
utility shall obtain and furnish to the city evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.
E. Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The legal liability of the utility to the city and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or selfinsurance
or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its
elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries,
claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit or defense, arising
out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or
misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized,
allowed or prohibited by this article or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the utility's indemnity
obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or
resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this article by the city, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.
(Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-10: SECURITY FUND:
A. Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall
be continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and expense until the completion of the work
authorized under the permit. The security fund shall serve as security for:
1. The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this article;
2. Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the city occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules,
regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the city issued pursuant to this article; and
3. The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that the city may pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by permittee in violation of this article including, without limitation, any damage to public property or
restoration work the permittee is required by this article to perform that the city must perform itself or have completed as a
consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the city from the permittee
pursuant to this article or any other applicable law.
B. Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the city in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the city, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the city. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum:
1. Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the city and the permittee;
2. Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the city of any amounts covered by it; and
3. Shall provide a location convenient to the city and within the state of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 131/251
C. Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of
way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the city director of
public works, and may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the city estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee
fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in
multiple locations in the city, with each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations,
and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or
phases, the city director of public works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of
security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the security fund for phased
construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this subsection for any
single phase.
D. Withdrawals: The city, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise
withdrawal rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided that the permittee has not
reimbursed the city for such amount within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
1. Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
2. Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
3. Fails to reimburse the city for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the city has been compelled to pay or incur by
reason of any action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
4. Fails to comply with any provision of this article that the city determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the
security fund.
E. Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the city that any amount has been withdrawn from the
security fund, the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in subsection C of this section.
F. Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee
by the city, upon written request for said withdrawal to the city, provided that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund
below the minimum balance required in subsection C of this section.
G. Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the
return of the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all
offsets necessary to compensate the city for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this article or other applicable
law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the city to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the city as a result of said
revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee.
H. Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the city with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the city,
whether reserved by this article or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said
security fund shall affect any other right the city may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city shall not be entitled to a double
monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
A. City Right To Revoke Permit: The city may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article for one or more of the following
reasons:
1. Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in the permit application;
2. Noncompliance with this article;
3. Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public
rights of way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
4. Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans.
B. Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The city shall send written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to
this article stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this
section.
C. Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or
suspension from the city, the permittee shall have the following options:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 132/251
1. Immediately provide the city with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;
2. Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the city, the deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the city within five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
3. Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights of way and restore
the rights of way to the satisfaction of the city providing written proof of such removal to the city within ten (10) days after receipt of
the written notice of revocation.
The city may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods provided in this subsection.
D. Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension, the city may issue a stop work order
immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of this section.
E. Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of subsection C of this section, the
city or its designee may, at the option of the city: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2) upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the
permittee, remove the subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to the permittee of failure to cure
the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and property of the city. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the city for all costs
of removal. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
A. Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the city no less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right of way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges
enjoyed by the former owner under the permit, if any, and all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this article,
with respect to the work and facilities in the right of way.
B. Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to
have a new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by,
the terms and conditions of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the city's right of way.
C. Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon
transfer. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and
regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic-control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and,
where applicable, the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications:
1. Standard specifications for road and bridge construction;
2. Supplemental specifications and recurring special provisions;
3. Highway design manual;
4. Highway standards manual;
5. Standard specifications for traffic-control items;
6. Illinois manual on uniform traffic-control devices (92 Illinois administrative code section 545);
7. Flagger's handbook;
8. Work site protection manual for daylight maintenance operations; and
9. Standard specifications for water and sewer main construction in Illinois.
B. Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards
required by this article, the city director of public works shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which
principles apply and such decision shall be final. If requested, the city director of public works shall state which standard or principle
will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 133/251
A. Minimum Requirements: The city's minimum requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois manual on uniform
traffic-control devices and this code.
B. Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective
devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable federal, state, and local requirements for protection of the public and
the utility's workers when performing any work on the public rights of way.
C. Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
D. Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to
any residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time
and duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to section 7-1A-20 of this article,
the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances.
E. Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the city. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
A. Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
1. Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
a. Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
b. Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m)
behind the face of the curb, where available;
c. Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4')
(1.2 m) outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
d. No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
e. Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the
right-of-way line.
2. Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
a. The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to
the right-of-way line;
b. A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with
sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
c. In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above-grounded appurtenance shall be
located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as practicable.
B. Facilities Crossing Highways:
1. No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of city
highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement
or future repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
2. Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage
facilities.
3. Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety degree (90) angle to the center line as
practicable.
4. Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
a. It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ILCC's rules entitled "Construction of Electric Power and Communication
Lines" (83 Illinois administrative code 305);
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 134/251
b. Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
c. Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
5. Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
a. The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenance-free service life; and
b. Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.
6. Markers: The city may require the utility to provide a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a
power or communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency
phone number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations. (49 CFR 192.707 (1989)).
C. Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The city may require that facilities be located within particular rights of way
that are not highways, rather than within particular highways.
D. Freestanding Facilities:
1. The city may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within a right of way.
2. The city may require any freestanding facility located within a right of way to be screened from view.
E. Appearance Standards:
1. The city may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
2. A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features
visible to the highway user or impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
F. Aboveground Installation: Aboveground facilities may be installed only if:
1. No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
2. New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
3. The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest
protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not
limited to, self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable.
G. Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
1. Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other
means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground,
underwater, independent poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under
significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not permitted.
2. A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data
demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge
or roadway structure will be based upon the following considerations:
a. The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and
property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
b. The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the transportation system;
c. The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability;
d. The proposed method of attachment;
e. The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
f. The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
g. The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
h. The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 135/251
7-1A-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
A. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction Methods:
1. Boring Or Jacking:
a. Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified
by the city director of public works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than
forty eight (48) hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking
operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be
designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be
imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
b. Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the roadway.
c. Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with
an auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more
than one inch (1") (25 mm).
d. Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches (6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either
jacking, guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method.
e. Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved shall be bored under
or around the root system.
2. Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction".
a. Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipeline testing.
Only one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the city
director of public works.
b. Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by
chapter 6 of the Illinois manual on uniform traffic-control devices. Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited
between the roadway and the trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the
roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road location.
c. Tree Drip Line To Be Preserved: The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved.
3. Backfilling:
a. Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length
using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction". When
excavated material is hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
b. For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and
restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so ordered by the director of public works, the
utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly
compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined
by the director of public works.
4. Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway
is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in subsection A4d of this section is permitted under section 7-1A-21 of this
article, the following requirements shall apply:
a. Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation,
as designated by the director of public works.
b. Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture
shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon
notification by the city.
c. All saw cuts shall be full depth.
d. For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in
the last three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work
considered necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a JULIE
locate.
5. Encasement:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 136/251
a. Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be
continuous either by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the city.
b. The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No aboveground vent
pipes shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway.
c. In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or city
approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction
and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the city. Bell and spigot-type pipe shall be encased
regardless of installation method.
d. In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.
e. In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be
eliminated only if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe
is provided.
f. If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that
construction does not disrupt the right of way.
6. Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the
following table for minimum cover for the type of facility:
Type Of Facility Minimum Cover
Power or communication line (in general) 30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication line installed by the plowed method 24 inches (0.6 m)
Gas or petroleum products 30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection
B. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
1. Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
a. Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities within city rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and
maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code 305 (formerly general order 160 of the Illinois
commerce commission) entitled "Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines", and the national
electrical safety code.
b. Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single-pole construction and, where practicable, joint
use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be
needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum
visibility.
c. Underground Facilities:
(1) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize
damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads.
(2) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may
be eliminated only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved method which
compress the earth to make the opening for cable installation or b) the installation is by the open-trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
(3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national electrical safety code.
2. Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines may be installed by:
a. The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
b. Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
c. Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
d. Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 137/251
3. Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a
city approved manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of pipeline safety operations, department of
transportation, part 192 - transportation of natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety standards (49 CFR 192),
IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
4. Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI
standard code for pressure piping. (Liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-B 31.4.)
5. Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines Or Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer
lines, and drainage lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current "Standard Specifications for
Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois".
6. Ground-Mounted Appurtenances: Ground-mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a
right of way, shall be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all
directions. The vegetation-free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy-duty plastic or similar
material approved by the director of public works. With the approval of the director of public works, shrubbery surrounding the
appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a
neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
C. Materials:
1. General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted
standards of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction", the requirements of the Illinois commerce commission, or the standards established by other official regulatory
agencies for the appropriate industry.
2. Material Storage On Right Of Way: All pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right
of way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or
damage to the right of way and other property. If material is to be stored on right of way, prior approval must be obtained from the
city.
3. Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the city shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in
the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
D. Operational Restrictions:
1. Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of the city, be required to be discontinued when such operations
would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued
or restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other property.
2. These restrictions may be waived by the director of public works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
3. Unless otherwise permitted by the city, the hours of construction are eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. until four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M.
Monday through Friday.
E. Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the city shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence
and location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The
city will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or
when requested by the city or by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within forty eight (48)
hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act1. (Ord. 14-01,
8-27-2001)
7-1A-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
A. Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the
application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this article.
1. Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be
accomplished by competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming
permits shall designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
2. Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for
cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The city will require compensation for trees extensively
damaged and for trees removed without authorization. The formula developed by the international society of arboriculture will be
used as a basis for determining the compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The city may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 138/251
B. Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The city may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees
or trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, sidearm extensions, covered wire or other
means.
C. Chemical Use: Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to
the satisfaction of the director of public works that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. 14-01, 8-
27-2001)
7-1A-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS:
A. Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the city, a utility shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or
installation of any city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon, the rights of way.
B. Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the city, any utility that owns, controls, or
maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the public rights of way shall, at its own expense, remove all or
any part of such facilities or appurtenances from the public rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the
following circumstances:
1. Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
2. If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;
3. If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this article; or
4. If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
C. Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The city retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the
rights of way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety
emergency. If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility
and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.
D. Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the public rights of way of the city, the utility shall notify the city
within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the city may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the
city director of public works determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the
event that the city does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the city, the
abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or
person. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
Upon completion of all construction or maintenance of facilities, the utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain
in a timely manner and to the satisfaction of the city. This includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway
surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the city director of public works. Such cleanup and repair may be
required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right of way to a condition
substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
A. General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a
manner satisfactory to the city and at the utility's expense.
B. Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
1. If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all
necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or
flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking on the
shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such
an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility is available.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 139/251
2. In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the city director of public works or his or her duly authorized agent of
the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be
required to make the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the
city police shall be notified immediately.
3. In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least
inconvenience to the traveling public.
C. Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the city of a description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty
eight (48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-21: VARIANCES:
A. Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more of the provisions of this article must do so in writing to the city
director of public works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this article from which a
variance is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
B. Authority To Grant Variances: The city director of public works shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this
article identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
C. Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The city director of public works may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the
variance has demonstrated that:
1. One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a
special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the
provision; and
2. All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is
requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
D. Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for authorizing a variance, the city director of public works may
require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained
within this article but which carry out the purposes of this article. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-22: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting any additional or further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this
article. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-23: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to fine
in accordance with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when the city will incur delay or other costs, including thirdparty
claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this article. Unless the utility shows that another
allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the city's costs of damages and its costs of
installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or
commission may review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the city. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility who does
not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
Chapter 2
TREES AND SHRUBS1
7-2-1: PERMITS REQUIRED:
A. Planting: It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or bush in any public street or parkway or other public place without having secured a
permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made to the City Clerk and referred by the Clerk to the Public Works Director
before issuance. All trees and shrubs so planted shall be placed subject to the direction and the approval of the City Council.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 140/251
B. Removal: It shall be unlawful to remove or cut down any tree or shrub in any such public place without having secured a permit
therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made to the City Clerk and shall be referred to and approved by the City Council
before issuance. (1997 Code)
7-2-2: DANGEROUS TREES:
Any tree or shrub which overhangs any street or other public place in the City in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or
travel, or within ten feet (10') of a street shall be trimmed by the owner of the premises abutting or of the premises on which such tree or
shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease. Any tree or limb of a tree which has become likely to fall on or across any public way or
place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which such tree grows or stands. The Public Works Director may trim any such
tree or shrub or remove any such tree or branch thereof so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or passage shall be done away with.
(1997 Code)
7-2-3: WIRE NEAR TREES AND SHRUBS:
A. Permission Required: It shall be unlawful to attach any wire or rope to any tree or shrub in any public street, parkway or other public
place without the permission of the City Council.
B. Maintenance Of Poles And Wires: Any person who maintains poles and wires in the streets or other public places, shall, in the
absence of a provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles free from and away from any trees and
shrubs in such places as far as may be possible, and keep all such trees and shrubs near such wires and poles properly trimmed,
subject to the supervision of the Public Works Director, so that no injury shall be done either to the poles or wires or to the shrubs
and trees by their contact. (1997 Code)
7-2-4: EXCAVATIONS:
In making excavations in streets or other public places, proper care shall be taken to avoid injury to the roots of any tree or shrub
wherever possible. (1997 Code)
7-2-5: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person:
A. Injury: To injure any tree or shrub planted or growing in any such public place.
B. Advertisements, Notices: To attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree or shrub in any such public place. (1997 Code)
Chapter 3
CITY PARKS1
7-3-1: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person:
A. Destruction Of Property, Facilities: To wilfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or remove any building, bridges,
tables, benches, fireplaces railings, paving or paving material, water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof,
signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or other
structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
B. Pollution Of Water: To throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, stream or other
body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters, any substance,
matter or thing, liquid or solid which will or may result in the pollution of such waters.
C. Refuse: To dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse, or
any other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 141/251
thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided. Where receptacles are not provided, all such
rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
D. Vehicles, Speed Limit: To operate a motor vehicle in any area in such parks in excess of twenty five (25) miles per hour.
E. Alcoholic Beverages: To have in his/her possession, custody or control any alcoholic beverage (including beer) of any kind
whatsoever.
F. Sales Prohibited: To expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall any person or business place any stand, cart, or vehicle for
the transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. It is further unlawful to announce, advertise or call the public attention
in any way to any article or service for sale or hire.
G. Advertising, Notices: To paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription whatever, nor shall any
person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever in any public park.
H. Fireworks, Weapons: To have in his/her possession in any parks in the City, any firearm, fireworks, explosives, bow and arrow, or
weapon of any other kind and description.
I. Motorcycles: To operate any motorcycle in the City parks, except on an improved road and in accordance with all City and State laws.
J. Definition: "Person" shall mean any individual seventeen (17) years of age or older. (1997 Code)
7-3-2: USE BY ORGANIZED GROUPS:
A. Purpose: It is the desire of the City Council to provide for the use of City parks by organized groups. The City wants to ensure that the
groups take responsibility for their actions to ensure that the parks are kept clean and the health and safety of the public is protected.
B. Application For Use Permit: Those requesting to exclusively use all or a portion of the parks shall make application to the City Council
for a use permit to reserve all or a portion of the park. Such application shall be on a form provided by, or similar to forms provided
by, the City Clerk and shall at a minimum state the intended number of people expected to attend, the use of the park, the area
requested to be reserved, the date and hours of use, the name of the organization, the responsible individual for the group, the
groups liability insurance carrier. The organizers may not charge any admission fees and agree to abide by all state and local laws
and regulations.
C. Groups Larger Than Fifty: At any event in which more than fifty (50) people will be in attendance, whether all or a portion of the park
will be used exclusively or not, the sponsoring individual or group will provide the chief of police and the city council with:
1. Parking Plan: Written plans for the parking of vehicles for those in attendance, so as to assure the city council of adequate parking
arrangements for the event.
2. Traffic And Crowd Control:
a. Written Plan: Written plans for the providing of adequate security for traffic control and crowd control. Such plans shall be
subject to the review of the chief of police.
b. Uniformed Law Enforcement: The chief may require that the sponsoring individual or group hire a sufficient number of uniformed
law enforcement officers for traffic control and crowd control, depending upon the anticipated size of the attending crowd,
parking facilities available, and the proximity of state highways or a heavily traveled or congested area.
c. Police Squad Car: The chief of police may require the use of a police squad car to slow down and regulate traffic, if the planned
event is in the vicinity of a state highway or a heavily traveled or congested area.
d. Cash Deposit: The chief of police may require that a cash deposit be made by the sponsoring individual or group, seven (7)
calendar days in advance of the planned event in order to adequately assure payment for the security force and/or police squad
car.
3. Sanitation:
a. Written Plan: Written plans for the providing of adequate sanitation facilities in order to accommodate those in attendance at the
planned event.
b. Toilet Facilities: Such plans shall provide for adequate portable toilet facilities, as determined by the health inspector,
considering the anticipated size of the attending crowd.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 142/251
c. Written Contract: The health inspector may require that a written contract with a reputable company, providing portable toilet
facilities by the sponsoring individual or organization, be provided to the city at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the event.
4. Attachment To Application: Such plans as required by this subsection C shall be attached to the application for use permit
submitted to the city council the same as specified in subsection B of this section.
D. Use Fee: The council may from time to time, by resolution, set a usage fee to reserve all or a portion of the parks.
E. Waiver Of Fee: The council, in its discretion, may waive the usage fee for certain educational, civic, charitable groups or organized
baseball or softball groups.
F. Liability Insurance: The council, as a condition of the permit, can require a liability insurance policy be taken out to cover the city prior
to issuance of a permit. (1997 Code)
7-3-3: HOURS:
Except as stated hereafter the parks shall be open to the public twenty four (24) hours daily; however, the city council, by resolution or
ordinance, has the authority to change the closing hours at any time.
A. The closing and opening hours of all parks and the parkway leased by the city of Colona on the Hennepin Canal shall be deemed to
be one-half (1/2) hour after sundown for closing and shall open one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise for individuals under the age of
eighteen (18).
B. Individuals under the age of eighteen (18) shall be allowed to remain in the recreation areas after the closing if accompanied by a
parent or legal guardian.
C. Individuals under the age of eighteen (18) shall be allowed to remain in recreation areas after the closing on those occasions a
designated area is used for a special city sponsored activity. Individuals under eighteen (18) who are attending such sponsored
events shall be out of the area one-half (1/2) hour after the event closes. (Ord. 0-08-10, 11-9-2009)
Title 8
WATER AND SEWER
Chapter 1
WATER REGULATIONS1
8-1-1: WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS COMBINED:
The city council hereby determines that the waterworks and sewer systems operate in combination. (1997 Code)
8-1-2: WATER DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established an executive department of the city to be known as the water department. The mayor and city council are
hereby authorized to appoint a public works director and all other necessary employees. The director shall have the general
management and control of the waterworks system, subject, however, to the supervision of the mayor and city council. (1997 Code)
8-1-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
CHARGES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 143/251
Basic User Charge: The basic assessment levied on all users of the public water system.
Capital Improvement Charge: A charge levied on users to improve, extend or reconstruct the waterworks.
Debt Service Charge: The amount to be paid each billing period for payment of interest, principal and coverage of loan, bond, etc.,
outstanding.
Local Capital Cost Charge: Charges for costs other than the operation, maintenance and replacement costs, i.e., debt service and
capital improvement costs.
User Charge: A charge levied on users of waterworks for the cost of operation, maintenance and replacement.
Water Service Charge: The charge per quarter or month levied on all users of the water facilities. The service charge shall be
computed and shall consist of the total of the basic user charge and the local capital cost if applicable.
CLARIFICATION OF WORD USAGE: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissible.
CURB COCK: A shutoff valve attached to a water service pipe from a water main to a building installed near the curb, which may be
operated by a valve key to start or stop flow in the water supply lines of a building. Also called curb stop.
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
GOVERNMENT:
Federal Government: Administrator: The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Federal Act: The Federal 1996 Safe Drinking Water Act and amendments.
Local Government: Approving Authority: The City Council of the City of Colona.
City: The City of Colona.
State Government: Director: The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
State Act: The Illinois Antipollution Bond Act of 1970.
State Loan: The State of Illinois participation in the financing of the construction of waterworks as provided for by the Illinois
Antipollution Bond Act and for making such loans as filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Illinois.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm, company, municipal, or private corporation, association,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
REPLACEMENT: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the
useful life of the works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed. The term
"operation and maintenance" includes replacement.
SERVICE BOX: A valve box used with corporation or curb cock.
USEFUL LIFE: The estimated period during which the waterworks will be operated.
WATER AND ITS CHARACTERISTICS: Milligrams Per Liter: A unit of the concentration of water constituent. It is 0.001 grams of the
constituent in one thousand milliliters (1,000 ml) of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it
is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water analysis.
ppm: Parts per million by weight.
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in
the IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
WATER FUND: The principal accounting designation for all revenues received in the operation of the water system. (Ord. 03-01, 3-12-
2001)
8-1-3: APPLICATION FOR WATER; DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 144/251
A. Application For Service: No water shall be turned on for use on or in any premises until an application in writing has been made for
that purpose and filed with the City Clerk stating the purpose for which the water is to be used. (1997 Code)
B. Deposit Required: If the applicant is not the owner in fee simple of the recorded title to the property where the applicant desires the
water to be turned on, applicant shall deposit with his/her application the sum approved by the City Council before any water is
turned on. Such deposit shall be held by the City as security for payment of water used by the applicant and may be so applied when
any default is made in payment of a water bill. (Ord. 0-16-14, 2-27-2017)
8-1-4: WATER RATES AND REVENUES:
A. Meters Required; Rates: All premises using the City water supply must have meters installed, and shall pay current rates and
charges as set from time to time by the City Council, as prescribed by law.
B. Purchase Of Meters: All water meters must be purchased from the City by the homeowner or builder at the current rate established
by the Council.
C. Fire Hydrants: In addition to the foregoing rates, there shall be charged to the City the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) per hydrant per
annum, payable from a direct tax levied against all taxable property within the City limits.
D. Right To Change Rates: The City reserves the right to make such reasonable changes in rates and in conditions herein established
and to establish further rules and regulations from time to time as may be found expeditious or necessary. (1997 Code)
E. Duties Of Treasurer: All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the water system shall be deposited in the water account
of the Water Fund. All such revenues and monies shall be held by the City Treasurer separate and apart from his private fund and
separate and apart from all other funds of the City Treasurer not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same or at such more
frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the Mayor and Council.
The City Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the water system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of
such system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in the account of the fund designated as the "Water Fund of
the City". Said Treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by statute of the "Revised Cities and
Villages Act", effective January 1942.
F. Accounts: The City Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in
which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the water system, and at regular annual intervals he
shall cause to be made an audit of the books by an independent auditing concern to show the receipts and disbursements of the
water system.
In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of
the water facilities, including a replacement cost. The financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the following:
1. Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for the current fiscal year.
2. Billing data to show total number of gallons billed.
3. Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
4. Number of users connected to the system.
5. Number of nonmetered users.
G. Review: The adequacy of the water service charge shall be reviewed, not less often than annually, by certified public accountants for
the City of Colona in their annual audit. (Ord. 03-01, 3-12-2001)
8-1-5: RENDITION OF BILLS; PAYMENT2:
A. Responsibility For Payment: The owner(s) of the premises shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of the water service to
such premises and the water services are furnished to the premises by the City only upon the condition that the owner(s) of the
premises are jointly and severally liable to the City. Non receipt of the water bill by the owner(s) does not exempt such person(s)
from responsibility to pay for water services furnished to the premises by the City. (Ord. 0-16-14, 2-27-2017)
1. Billing Of Duplexes, Apartments, Condominiums And Single-Family Home Rentals:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 145/251
a. Water and sewer bills for duplexes having two (2) separate meters shall be sent to the owner of the duplex and the owner of the
duplex shall be responsible for payment of the bill. In addition, it is the owner's responsibility to register with the City Clerk's
Office. (Ord. 0-07-14, 7-28-2014)
b. Bills for apartments with more than two (2) units shall be sent to the owner of the property and the owner shall be responsible
for payment of the bill. Registration by the owner with the City Clerk's Office is required. (Ord. 0-16-14, 2-27-2017)
c. All apartment buildings and condominium buildings with single units or other water/sewer customers usually using over eight
thousand (8,000) cubic feet per month shall be considered and billed as commercial accounts. The meters shall be read
monthly and the bill sent to the owner monthly.
d. Property owners of single-family homes who rent out the property shall be responsible for payment of any water and sewer bills.
(Ord. 0-07-14, 7-28-2014)
e. If property owner(s) want tenant(s) to receive a copy of the bill, they must complete the proper agreement form which states the
property owner remains liable for use of services. (Ord. 0-16-14, 2-27-2017)
B. Delinquent Bills; Late Payment Penalty: Bills for water service shall be rendered monthly and shall be considered delinquent twenty
(20) days after their rendition. In the event of failure to pay the bills within the twenty (20) day period, an additional charge of ten
percent (10%) of the present bill shall be added as a late payment penalty to arrive at the total bill with delinquency charges. (Ord. 0-
15-22, 11-23-2015)
1. Shutoff Notice: On all bills not paid by the following due date, the City shall prepare or cause to be prepared a shutoff notice to the
billing address and mailed by regular mail to same. This shall be a final ten (10) day warning from the date of issuance. Once a
shutoff notice is issued, all past due balances, penalties, and red tag fees must be paid, or a proper payment arrangement made
to avoid shutoff. (Ord. 0-16-11, 8-8-2016)
2. Termination/Reinstatement Of Service: If the bill has not been paid within the ten (10) day warning period, the City shall turn off the
water supply and shall not be compelled again to supply water to the building, place, premises or dwelling until all such bill or past
bills and past liens, together with the cost of bookwork and mailing and the expenses of turning the water off and on have been
paid in full.
3. Additional Charges: The following rates and charges shall be in full force and effect hereafter:
a. There shall be a fee charged that is determined by City Council and set forth in written policy, which is due the City for each
mailing sent after the usual bill in a delinquency case. (Ord. 0-15-012, 9-14-2015)
b. There shall be a fee assessed that is determined by the City Council and set forth in written policy to turn the water off/on at a
residence when the resident fails to provide sufficient payment within the time period allotted for shut-off notices. (Ord. 0-18-01,
1-22-2018, eff. 1-22-2018)
4. Failure To Receive Bill: Failure to receive a bill will not entitle the owner, consumer or user to a remission of penalty. (Ord. 0-15-
012, 9-14-2015)
5. Authority To Require Advance Payment: The City shall have full power and authority to require payment in advance for use of
water furnished in accordance with policy established by the Public Works Committee and approved by the City Council. If water is
shut off three (3) times in a one year period, then a deposit of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) will be required. Once the
customer has been making on-time payments for a period of two (2) years then the deposit will be returned. (Ord. 0-16-14, 2-27-
2017)
6. Authority To Shut Off Water Supply: The City Collector, Public Works Director, or Water Superintendent, the Mayor or the
Chairman of Public Works Committee may authorize an employee of the City to shut off the water supply to any dwelling where
the best interest of the City is served. (Ord. 0-15-012, 9-14-2015)
C. Lien; Notice Of Delinquency: Whenever a bill for water and sewer service remains unpaid after sixty (60) days from date rendered,
the City Collector may file with the Recorder of Deeds of Henry County a statement of lien claim. The statement shall set forth the
legal description of the premises served, and the amount of the unpaid bill, together with the amount of the late charges and any
other charges due, plus interest on the amount of the lien at the rate of eighteen percent (18%) per annum, which runs from the date
of the lien and a notice that the City claims a lien on the described real estate.
1. User Not Owner: If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises, and the City Collector has notice of this, the City
Collector shall mail a notice to the owner that a lien has been filed on such premises.
2. Right To Foreclose: The failure of the City Collector to record such lien or to mail such notice, or the failure of the owner to receive
such notice shall not affect the rights to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned above in this subsection.
3. Release Of Lien: If the City Collector shall have filed the statement of lien claim with the County Recorder of Deeds, then, before
the City will execute and file release of the lien claim with the County Recorder of Deeds, there shall be paid to the City Collector
all outstanding amounts due to the City, including the late charge, all service charges, interest and the sum of thirty dollars
($30.00) to cover the City's expenses in recording the releases of the lien claim; provided, however, if the lien claim for unpaid
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 146/251
water services forms a part of the lien claim for unpaid sewer services, then there shall be only one (1) $30.00-charge to cover the
City's expenses in recording and releasing the combined lien claim.
D. Water Hearing Committee: The Water Hearing Committee of the City shall consist of the City Collector, the Public Works Director and
Superintendent of the Water Department. (1997 Code)
8-1-6: WATER RENT PAYABLE BY OWNER:
In all cases where one (1) service pipe supplies two (2) or more separate consumers in a building, one (1) meter may be placed at the
service connection for either or all of the said consumers and the water rent, as registered by such meters, shall be charged to and be
payable by the owner of such premises or building. (1997 Code)
8-1-7: LIABILITY OF CITY:
All connections and water applied for hereunder, and all the water used hereunder, shall be upon the express condition that the City
shall not be liable, nor shall any claim be made against it for damages or injury caused by reason of the breaking of any main, branches,
service pipes, apparatus or appurtenances connected with said system or plant, or any part or portion of said plant, or for any
interruption of the supply by reason of the breakage of machinery, or by reason of stoppage, alterations, extensions or renewals. (1997
Code)
8-1-8: UNAUTHORIZED USE:
A. Prohibited: No person, not duly authorized by the City, shall turn the water on at any fire hydrant or service cock, or use water from
that hydrant or service cock when turned on.
B. First Offense: A violation of this Section shall result in a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense.
C. Second Or Subsequent Offense: A second or subsequent offense shall result in a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
D. Additional Cost: In addition to other penalties, the person using said water without authorization shall be liable for payment of same.
(1997 Code)
8-1-9: WATER METERS:
A. Repair: Whenever any meter, by reason of its being out of repair or for any cause, fails properly to register the water passing through
the same, the consumer shall be charged at the rate shown for the corresponding time of the previous year under like conditions. If
no record of the previous year exists, then it shall be the duty of the Public Works Director to estimate or determine so far as the
Director can the amount of water consumed during the time such meter failed to operate, and the consumer shall pay the amount so
estimated.
B. Access To Meters: The City and its employees shall have ready access to the premises, place or buildings where meters are located
for the purpose of reading, examining, testing and repairing the same, and examining and testing the consumption, use and flow of
water, and it shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, or obstruct the City, or its duly authorized agent, in its duties
hereunder. Every consumer of water shall take the same upon the conditions prescribed in this Section. (1997 Code)
8-1-10: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The following rules and regulations for the consumers of water and plumbers are hereby adopted and established:
A. Application Required: No water shall be furnished or supplied to any consumer for any purpose whatever until such consumer shall
make application therefor. Such application shall state the location of the premises to be served and the use to which the water will
be put.
B. Subletting Of Water Illegal: No water consumer may supply water to other families or allow them to take water, except for use on the
premises and for the purpose specified in the application, nor after water is introduced into any building or upon any premises shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 147/251
any person make or employ any other person to make any tap or connection with the work upon the premises for alterations, repairs,
extensions or attachments without a written permit therefor to be issued by the Public Works Director.
C. Interrupted Service: The City reserves the right to shut off water in the mains at any time for the purpose of repairing, cleaning,
making connection with or extensions to same, or for the concentrating of water in any part of the City in case of fire, and for
restricting the use of the water in case of deficiency in supply. No claim shall be made against the City by reason of the breaking of
any service pipe or service cock or damage arising from shutting off water for repairing any part of the water system, or from other
connections or repairing any part of the water system, or from failure of the water supply, or by increasing the water pressure at any
time, or from concentration or restricted use of water as set forth in this Chapter. (1997 Code)
8-1-11: RIGHT TO RESTRICT USE OF WATER:
The right is reserved to suspend the use of lawn fountains, hoses for sprinkling lawns and gardens and swimming pools whenever, in
the opinion of the Mayor and City Council, public exigencies require it. (1997 Code)
8-1-12: SERVICE CONNECTION SPECIFICATIONS:
A. Domestic Water Service: All domestic water service shall be constructed in the city of type K copper from the curb stop into the
building and shall be laid at a minimum depth of four feet (4'). The service entrance to the building shall be protected from freezing
by the property owner, or his/her agent.
B. Commercial Service: All commercial service shall be of type K copper or cast iron class 150 of size appropriate to the water demand,
or as may be determined by the public works director.
C. Valve: At the distribution point within the building, a valve shall be installed to stop all water flow from said service.
D. Inspection: The connection of any service shall be inspected at the time of connection by the public works director, or other duly
authorized representative of the city. No cross-connections to any private water service shall be permitted. All connections shall be in
strict accord with all regulations of the state sanitary water board of the state of Illinois3. (1997 Code)
8-1-13: CONNECTING TWO PREMISES; STOPCOCKS, PIPES:
No owner or plumber shall be permitted to connect water pipes into any two (2) distinct premises or tenements unless separate and
distinct stopcocks shall be placed on the outside of such premises along the sidewalk opposite the same, nor shall any pipe be allowed
to cross lots or buildings to adjoining premises. (1997 Code)
8-1-14: WATER USE FOR BUILDING OR CONSTRUCTION:
Any and all persons desiring to use city water for building or construction purposes shall make application therefor in writing and file the
same in the office of the city clerk on a form to be provided for that purpose. Upon a permit being granted (permits shall be issued in
writing and signed by the public works director) the service pipe shall be carried at the expense of the applicant to the inside of the curb
line, where a service cock and meter shall be placed, with pipe leading to the surface and a faucet at the end thereof above said
surface. When the building or construction work is completed, the faucet and meter shall be removed and the water shut off, unless
permanent connection hereunder is made. Charge for the use and connecting of meters shall be as prescribed by the mayor and city
council. (1997 Code)
8-1-15: OBSTRUCTING WATER FLOW:
A. Immediate Access Ensured: No person shall in any manner obstruct the access to any stopcock, hydrant or valve, or any public
faucet or opening for taking water in any street, alley, public ground or place connected with or part of said water system, nor pile or
place any lumber, brick or building material or other article, thing or hindrance whatsoever within twelve feet (12') of the same, or so
as to in any manner hinder, delay or obstruct the members of the fire department in reaching the same.
B. Protection Of System: It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to interfere with or obstruct the flow, retention, storage or
authorized use of water in said water system, reservoir or plant, or any part thereof, or to injure, deface remove or displace any water
main, hydrant, service pipe, water meter, shutoff box, public fountain, valve, engine or building connected with said water system, or
plant, or to cause, suffer or permit any of said things to be done.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 148/251
C. Liability For Damages: Any person who shall perform any act in violation of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and shall, in addition, be liable for the actual damage done or caused. (1997 Code)
8-1-16: VIOLATION OF RULES; NONPAYMENT OF BILLS:
For violation of any of the foregoing rules or for nonpayment of water bills, the city reserves the right to turn off the water after notice and
opportunity for hearing and to forfeit any payments made. After the water has been turned off from any service pipe on account of
nonpayment of water bills, or violations of rules, the same will not be turned on until all delinquent bills and penalties are paid, together
with expense of turning off and on such meter, as provided in subsection 8-1-5B3b of this chapter. No water will be furnished to any
person who is indebted to the city on account of water consumed, material or repairs. (1997 Code)
8-1-17: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The IEPA or its authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the city which are
applicable to the city system of user charges for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure
compliance with the terms of the loan agreement and any state grant. (Ord. 03-01, 3-12-2001)
8-1-18: WATER METER READER:
The job consists of reading the entire meter system. The job will be performed within the latter two (2) weeks of each month, and the
person appointed to the job as water meter reader shall obey the city rules and regulations.
The salary for the job of water meter reader shall be four hundred dollars ($400.00) per month, and when the job is started, it must be
finished within the time frame hereinbefore allotted.
The city clerk of the city of Colona will decide on any different reading schedule.
The person appointed to the job of water meter reader shall provide his or her own transportation and fuel, and if the person appointed
to the job of water meter reader is unable to perform this job for any reason, the city clerk's office must be notified as soon as possible.
There will be no clothing allowance for the person appointed to the job of water meter reader. (Ord. 08-01, 5-14-2001)
8-1-19: TAP-ON FEES FOR NEW CONNECTIONS:
There shall be established as a tap-on (hookup) fee for water of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to be assessed on all new connections in
the following areas of the city of Colona:
A. Any lot existing in the area of the city limits of the city of Green Rock on May 1, 1997.
B. Any lot existing in the area of the village limits of the village of Colona on May 1, 1997.
The owner shall be responsible for completion of tap-on to city of Colona water line and the extension of service to owner's property at
owner's expense.
All connections made to city of Colona water system must be done through a licensed plumber who is bonded and insured. Any
connections shall also comply with all plumbing codes and building ordinances of the city of Colona.
All tap-on connections must be inspected and approved by the city of Colona at the time of connection and must not be covered until
such inspection is completed. (Ord. 15-04, 9-13-2004)
8-1-20: SERVICE LINE EXTENSIONS:
A. Any property owner seeking water service after the date hereof for future annexed or existing property which does not have a water
line adjacent to their property which requires extension of service line to their property shall be required to pay the city of Colona all
expenses incurred to bring the necessary service to the property.
B. The public works department or engineering firm will establish the extension costs and no hookup to water shall be allowed until full
payment of any hookup charge and reimbursement of extension cost have been received by the city of Colona.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 149/251
C. In addition to the payment to the city of Colona for extension costs the property owner shall pay a hookup fee as required under
existing city ordinance. (Ord. 11-08, 8-11-2008)
Chapter 2
SEWER REGULATIONS1
8-2-1: WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS COMBINED:
The City Council hereby determines that the waterworks and sewer systems operate in combination. (1997 Code)
8-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this Chapter shall be as follows:
CLARIFICATION OF WORD USAGE: Shall is mandatory; may is permissible.
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT:
Administrator: The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Federal Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) as amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control
Amendments of 1972 (Pub. L. 92-500) and (Pub. L. 93-243).
Federal Grant: The U.S. Government participation in the financing of the construction of treatment works.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT:
Approving Authority: The City Council or Public Works Director of the City.
City: The City of Colona, Henry County, Illinois.
NPDES PERMIT: Any permit or equivalent document or requirement issued by the Administrator, or where appropriated by the Director,
after enactment of the Federal Water Pollution Control Amendments of 1972, to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to section
402 of the Federal Act.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
SEWER TYPES AND APPURTENANCES:
Building Drain: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved point of discharge, beginning
five feet (5') (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
Building Sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
Combined Sewer: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater, storm, surface and groundwater drainage.
Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
Public Sewer: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the City. It shall also include sewers within or outside the City
boundaries that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the City sanitary sewer system even though those
sewers may not have been constructed with City funds.
Sanitary Sewer: A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which storm, surface and
groundwaters or unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
Sewer: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids, including storm, surface and groundwater drainage.
Sewerage: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping of sewage.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 150/251
Storm Sewer: A sewer that carries storm, surface and groundwater drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other
than unpolluted cooling water.
Stormwater Runoff: That portion of the precipitation that is drained into the sewers.
STATE GOVERNMENT:
Director: The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
State Act: The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.
State Grant: The State of Illinois participation in the financing of the construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois
Anti-Pollution Bond Act and for making such grants as filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Illinois.
TREATMENT:
Pretreatment: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction into the wastewater treatment works.
Wastewater Treatment Works: An arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge.
Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "pollution control plant".
TYPES OF CHARGES:
Basic User Charge: The basic assessment levied on all users of the public sewer system.
Debt Service Charge: The amount to be paid each billing period for payment of interest, principal and coverage of loan, which
includes payments to be made in the various reserve accounts as required by the bond ordinance and shall be computed by
dividing the annual debt service by the number of users connected to the wastewater facilities.
Replacement: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the
service life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and constructed.
The term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement.
Sewerage Fund: The principal accounting designation for all revenues received in the operation of the sewerage system.
Surcharge: The assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt service charge which is levied on those persons whose
wastes are greater in strength than the concentration values established in Section 8-2-4-1 of this Chapter.
Useful Life: The estimated period during which the collection system and/or treatment works will be operated and shall be thirty
(30) years from the date of start up of any wastewater facilities constructed with a State grant.
User Charge: A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of operation and maintenance.
Wastewater Service: The charge per quarter or month levied on all users charge of the wastewater facilities. The service charges
shall be computed as outlined in Section 8-2-4-1 of this Chapter and shall consist of the total of the basic user charge, the debt
service charge and a surcharge, if applicable.
USER TYPES:
Control Manhole: A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall
have an interior drop. The purpose of a "control manhole" is to provide access for the City representative to sample and/or
measure discharges.
Industrial User: Nongovernmental user of publicly-owned treatment works identified in the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following divisions:
Division A - Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing Division B - Mining
Division D - Manufacturing
Division E - Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services
Division I - Services
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 151/251
A user in the divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined by the City that it will introduce primarily segregated domestic
wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
Residential, Commercial Or Nonindustrial User: Any user of the treatment works not classified as an industrial user or excluded as
an industrial user as provided in this Chapter.
User Class: The type of user either "residential or commercial" (nonindustrial) or "industrial" as defined herein.
WASTEWATER AND ITS CHARACTERISTICS:
BOD (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter
under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20C) expressed in milligrams per liter.
Effluent Criteria: Defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
Floatable Oil: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not
interfere with the collection system.
Garbage: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling,
storage and sale of produce.
Industrial Waste: Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial
manufacturer, commercial or business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or processing of any natural
resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
Major Contributing Industry: An industrial user of the publicly-owned treatment works that: a) has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000)
gallons or more per average work day; or b) has a flow greater than ten percent (10%) of the flow carried by the Municipal system
receiving the waste; or c) has in its waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under section 307(a) of
the Federal Act; or d) is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with the issuance of the NPDES permit to the
publicly-owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment works.
Milligrams Per Liter: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater constituent. It is 0.001 g of the constituent in one thousand
(1,000) ml of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in
reporting the results of water and wastewater analyses.
pH: The logarithm (base 10) or the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in
"Standard Methods".
ppm: Parts per million by weight.
Population Equivalent: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or other waste on a treatment works or stream. One
population equivalent is one hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day containing 0.167 pounds of BOD and 0.209 pounds of
suspended solids.
Properly Shredded Garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater
than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
Sewage: Used interchangeably with "wastewater".
Slug: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow
exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour
concentration of flows during normal operation.
Standard Methods: The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater" published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works
Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
Suspended Solids: The solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste, and
which are removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solid shall be made in accordance
with procedures set forth in "Standard Methods".
Unpolluted Water: Water of a quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment
facilities provided.
Wastewater: The spent water of a community. From this standpoint of course, it may be a combination of the liquid and water6/
5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 152/251
carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any ground water, surface
water and storm water that may be present.
Water Quality Standards: The water pollution regulations of Illinois.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial
wastes and transport effluent to a watercourse.
WATERCOURSE AND CONNECTIONS:
Natural Outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.
Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. (1997 Code)
8-2-3: SEWER USE REGULATIONS:
8-2-3-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Administration: The construction, maintenance and repair of all sewage disposal systems, sewers and sewer service lines including
the connection to all sewers within the City shall be under the direction of and subject to the approval of the City whether constructed
or maintained by the City or by private firms, individuals or utilities.
B. Separate Systems: The sewer systems of the City shall consist of a separate storm water system and a sanitary sewer system. (1997
Code)
8-2-3-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
A. Prohibited Deposits: It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public
or private property within the City or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
objectionable waste.
B. Discharge Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
City, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent
provisions of this Chapter.
C. Construction Of Privy, Septic Tank, Cesspool: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy,
privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
D. Connection Required: The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other
purposes situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley, or right of way in which there is now located or may in the future
be located a public sanitary sewer of the City, is hereby required at owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to
connect such facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of
this Chapter, within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so; provided, that said public sewer is within two hundred feet
(200') (61 meters) of the property line. (1997 Code)
E. Inspection Fee; Sanitary Sewer System: All individuals, businesses and industry shall pay for an inspection fee by the City, or its
successors, prior to the hookup of said individual, business or industry connection to the sanitary sewer. The fees for such
inspections shall be set or amended from time to time by the City Council. Initially the fee shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) for each
residential, business and commercial hookup. (Ord. 04-97, 9-8-1997)
F. Improved Property: Property owners of improved property within the City shall be required to hook on to City sewer at the property
owner's expense within ninety (90) days of sewer service being available to the property or sixty (60) days after passage of this
subsection if sewer is available when this subsection is passed. The Public Works Director shall determine when sewer is available
to improved property.
1. The property owner shall be required to pay any inspection fees, permit fees, or hook-up fees required by ordinance and all
connections shall be pursuant to applicable codes.
2. Any property owner who violates this subsection F shall be liable for a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each
day the violation exists. (Ord. 97-06, 10-13-1997)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 153/251
8-2-3-3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
A. Public Sanitary Sewer Unavailable: Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of subsection 8-2-3-2D of this
Chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this Section.
B. Permit Required:
1. City And County Health Department: Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall
first obtain a written permit signed by the City and the County Health Department.
2. Application: The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the City (reference Appendix No. 2, on file with
the City Clerk) which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary
by the City.
3. Permit And Inspection Fee: A permit and inspection fee of thirty five dollars ($35.00) shall be paid to the City at the time the
application is filed.
C. Inspection: A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the
satisfaction of the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction;
in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the City when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground
portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within forty eight (48) hours of the receipt of written notice by the City.
D. Specifications: The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations
of the State Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code and with the State Environmental Protection Agency. No permit shall
be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less
than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet (1,858 square meters). No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any
natural outlet.
E. Public Sanitary Sewer Becomes Available: At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private
sewage disposal system, as provided in subsection 8-2-3-2D of this Chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer
in compliance with this Chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned.
F. Maintenance: The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, and at no
expense to the City.
G. Prohibited Locations: It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any cesspool, privy vault or septic tank under any of
the following circumstances:
1. Within two hundred feet (200') of the public sewer system or on property abutting such system;
2. Within forty feet (40') of any school, church or public building;
3. Within ten feet (10') of any dwelling;
4. Within five feet (5') of any side lot line;
5. Within fifty feet (50') of any well, cistern or water main;
6. On property which contains an area of less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet; or
7. On property which violates any of the requirements of the County Health Department.
H. Additional Requirements: No statement contained in this Section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that
may be imposed by the County Health Department.
I. Abandonment Of System: When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to said sewer within ninety
(90) days and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and all steel septic tanks shall be filled with sand, bank
run gravel or dirt; all other tanks shall be filled if they create a nuisance. (1997 Code)
8-2-3-4: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
A. Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with, or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public
sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the City.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 154/251
B. Application: All applications for permits required by subsection A hereof shall be submitted in duplicate on blanks furnished by the
City for that purpose and shall include complete details of the nature and location of the work to be done, the name of the person
contracting to have the work done and the name of the person who is to do the actual work. Where any sewer or water service
connections are to be made, a scale drawing showing the location of proposed and existing water and sewer lines, together with the
accurate elevations and slope of sewer lines shall accompany the application. A stamped, approved set of drawings and the permit
shall be kept on the job site at all times.
C. Compliance Required: All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those discharges in compliance with
Federal standards promulgated pursuant to the Federal Act and more stringent State and local standards.
D. Classes Of Permits; Fees: There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: 1) for residential and commercial service, and 2)
for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or owner's agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the City (reference Appendix No. 2, on file in the office of the City Clerk). The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the City. Fees for permits
shall be in accordance with the schedule of fees approved from time to time by the City Council and on file in the office of the City
Clerk. The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater constituents,
characteristics, and type of activity.
E. Adequacy Of System: A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall only be allowed if it can be
demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities have
sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load.
F. Bond Required: Each applicant for a permit required by this Chapter for work on public property shall file a bond in the amount of one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), with surety to be approved by the City Council, conditioned to indemnify the City for any
loss or damage resulting from the work undertaken or the manner of doing the same.
G. Insurance Required: Each applicant for a permit required by this Chapter for work on public property shall carry adequate public
liability and property damage insurance to indemnify the City in case of any accident or damage occurring in conjunction with or as a
result of the work being done under the permit. The City shall be named coinsured in any policy.
1. Form: The form of insurance required herein shall be subject to the approval of the City Attorney.
2. Policy Limits: Limits of liability shall be at least three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injury to any one person and one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for injury resulting from any one accident and one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) for
injury to any property.
3. Cancellation: The insurance required herein may not be canceled until completion of the work for which a permit is issued and
following final inspection and approval of the work by the City. Cancellation or lapse of the insurance required shall terminate any
permit for which the policy provides coverage.
H. Costs And Expense; Indemnification: All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be
borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer and connection.
I. Separate Sewer Required; Exception: A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except that
where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear
building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear
building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
J. Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, upon examination
and test by the City, to meet all requirements of this Chapter.
K. Construction Specifications: The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in
excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of Section 8-2-3-7 of
this Chapter.
L. Elevation: Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all
buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building
drain shall be lifted by a means which is approved by the City and discharged to the sewer service line.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 155/251
M. Surface Runoff, Ground Water Prohibited: No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, sump
pumps, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
N. Connection: The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of Section 8-2-3-7 of this
Chapter. All connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved by the City before installation.
O. Supervision; Inspection: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Public Works Director when the building sewer is
ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Public Works
Director or Public Works Director's representative.
P. Excavations:
1. Barricades2: All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect
the public from hazard.
2. Restoration Of Improvements: Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of work shall be
restored in a manner satisfactory to the City.
3. Separate Permit Required: A street excavation permit separate from the sewer construction permit shall be obtained and the
required inspection fees shall be paid.
Q. Indemnification Of City: Each applicant for a permit required by this Chapter for work on public or private property shall bear the
responsibility for accidental injury or death, property damage, or any other litigation that may arise in connection with this work and
shall in any case hold the City harmless from all damages. (1997 Code)
8-2-3-5: USE RESTRICTIONS; PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
A. Protection Of Sewage System: It shall be unlawful to introduce or make any sewer connection designed to or which could permit the
introduction of any storm water, rain water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling
water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
B. Unpolluted Drainage: Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically
designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Public Works Director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted
process waters may be discharged on approval of the Public Works Director to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
C. Prohibited Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any
public sewers:
1. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
3. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and five-tenths (5.5) or having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
4. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper
dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
D. Harmful Materials/Substances: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials,
waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the Public Works Director that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public
property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his/her opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Public Works Director will
give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of
wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The substances prohibited are:
1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150F) (65C).
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 156/251
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty two degrees and one hundred fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (32 and 150F) (0 and 65C).
3. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
three-fourths (3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the Public Works Director.
4. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
5. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or similar objectionable or toxic substances or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment
works exceeds the limits established by the City for such materials.
6. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits
which may be established by the City as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the
State, Federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
7. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the City in compliance
with applicable State or Federal regulations.
8. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of nine and five-tenths (9.5).
9. Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg at any time as permitted by the City in compliance with
applicable State and Federal regulations.
10. Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time except as permitted by the City in compliance with applicable State and Federal
regulations.
11. Materials which exert or cause:
a. Unusual concentrations or inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries), and lime residues or
of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
b. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);
c. Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the
sewage treatment works.
d. Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein.
12. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the
requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
E. Authority To Reject; Require Pretreatment, Or Control Quantity: If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection D of
this Section, and/or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in chapter 1, EPA Rules and Regulations,
subchapter D, Water Programs Part 128 - Pretreatment Standards, federal register volume 38, no. 215, Thursday, November 8,
1973, and any amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the city may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works,
processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may:
1. Reject the wastes;
2. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
3. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
4. Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges,
under the provisions of section 8-2-4-2 of this chapter.
If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the city and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. (1997
Code)
F. Discharge Of Certain Substances Prohibited:
1. Prohibited Substances: It shall be unlawful to permit or cause the flow of any of the following substances into the city sanitary
sewer system:
a. Any grease, fatty material, offal or garbage;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 157/251
b. Any stone, dust, sand, dirt, gravel, sawdust, metal filings, broken glass or any material that may cause or create an obstruction
in the sewer;
c. Gasoline, benzene, fuel oil or any petroleum products or volatile liquids, pesticides, paint or other chemical products;
d. Milk or any liquid milk waste products in quantities in excess of ten (10) gallons during each twenty four (24) hour period;
e. Any cyanide, phenols, or any other chemical or substance that interferes with or prevents the functioning of the sewage
treatment plant.
2. Catch Basins, Grease Traps And Interceptors Required: Each building or premises used or occupied by any sewer user where
any commercial or industrial operations are conducted or permitted which result in the discharge into the sanitary sewer system of
any of their products, waste products or other substances in the manner and to the extent prohibited in this subsection shall be
equipped with an adequate and suitable catch basin, grease trap, filter or other interceptor installed in such a manner that such
products or other substances will not flow into or be discharged into the sanitary sewer system. It shall be unlawful to permit the
flow of waste from such buildings or premises into the sanitary sewer system unless such interceptor is installed and in good
working order.
a. Cleaning; Inspections: One time a week on Mondays, owners shall wipe the grease interceptors, grease traps and catch basins
and shall use for reporting purposes the forms for such inspection supplied by the city of Colona. Once per month copies of the
inspections shall be sent to city hall.
b. Servicing Of Containers: Additionally the owner must be able to show proof of grease containers being serviced (dumped) on a
regular basis. In no event should such services be less than once every two (2) weeks.
c. Grease Interceptors: Where it has been determined that a grease interceptor is not being maintained and serviced as intended
by this code and the manufacturer's instructions, an approved interceptor monitoring system shall be provided or a maintenance
program shall be established with documentation submitted to the code official. The city inspector, public works director or his
designee shall be allowed to inspect at any time premises covered by this subsection. (Ord. 0-10-14, 7-28-2014)
G. Owner Expense: Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at owner's expense.
H. Control Manhole Required: When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial
wastes shall be required to install a control manhole and, when required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when
required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The
manhole shall be installed by the owner at owner's expense, and shall be maintained by owner so as to be safe and accessible at all
times.
When agreed upon by the city and the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes, a water meter
approved by the city shall be installed, at the expense of the owner if none exists for the purpose of measuring the volume of water
consumed by said user and subsequently discharged to the sewer system. The volume of water consumed as measured by the
water meter shall be used to compute the volume portion of the surcharge to be charged said owner in lieu of the requirement of the
necessary meter for measurement of actual wastes discharged. However, the requirement for a control manhole, and the necessary
appurtenances required to facilitate observation and sampling of wastes, shall not be construed as to be waived by the installation of
said water meter unless so stipulated by the city.
I. Requirements For Oil Separators:
1. Every garage or other storage, repair or servicing area where solid material or flammable liquids could be introduced into the
sewer system shall be equipped with oil or gasoline separators constructed in accordance with the requirements of the city.
2. All oil or gasoline separators shall be cleaned at such regular intervals as required to prevent the material from entering the sewer
system.
3. A list of all separators required by subsection I1 of this section shall be furnished to the fire chief who shall cause regular periodic
inspections to be made of the units to determine and assure their proper cleaning and maintenance.
J. Waste Sampling: At the request of the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall
provide laboratory measurement tests and analyses of waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge.
The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city but no less
than once per year, the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that
compliance with the Federal, State and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and
laboratory analyses to the City at such times and in such manner as prescribed by the City. The owner shall bear the expense of all
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 158/251
measurements, analyses and reporting required by the City. At such times as deemed necessary, the City reserves the right to take
measurements and samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
K. Measurement Of Water Characteristics: All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which
reference is made in this Chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole
provided or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the
control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building
sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the
sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular analysis involved will determine
whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs
are determined from periodic grab samples.)
L. Special Agreement And/Or Arrangements Authorized: No statement contained in this Section shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment therefor in accordance with Section 8-2-4-1 of this Chapter,
by the industrial concern, provided such payments are in accordance with Federal and State guidelines for user charge system and
industrial cost recovery system. (1997 Code)
8-2-3-6: PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this Section shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct or as a violation of this Chapter. (1997 Code)
8-2-3-7: SEWER CONSTRUCTION AND MATERIALS:
A. Compliance Required: All sanitary sewers, including sewer service lines, installed in the City or installed outside the City and
connected to the City sanitary sewer system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter.
B. Materials; Size:
1. Materials: All sanitary sewers, including sewer service lines, shall be constructed of vitrified clay sewer pipe manufactured in
accordance with and conforming to American Society for Testing Materials (ASTM) Standards for clay sewer pipe (ASTM
designation C-700 [extra-strength] pipe with joints conforming to ASTM designation C425, or latest revisions); approved cast-iron
or ductile-iron pipe conforming to American Standard Association (ASA) specifications A21-6 or A21-8, Class 150, with mechanical
or rubber ring joints; or approved composite pipe formed by extruding ABS resin into a truss shape forming inner and outer walls
supported by webs and then filling the voids with lightweight concrete, all meeting ASTM specification D-2680-70 (latest revisions).
Sewer service lines only may also be extra-strength solid wall polyvinyl chloride pipe (PVC) ASTM designation D-3034 (latest
revision) bearing National Sanitation Foundation Seal having a minimum SDR of 35.
2. Size: Sewer service lines shall be either four inches (4") or six inches (6") in diameter.
C. Sewer Service Line Defined: A sewer service line or building sewer shall consist of the sewer line from the City sewer to the building
or improvement being served.
D. Individual Service Lines Required: No property owner will be permitted to construct a sewer service line to serve more than one
parcel of property, but shall construct individual sewer service lines connecting each parcel of property to the public sewer line
abutting and serving said property.
E. Joints And Couplings: All pipe installed on private property and in any location adjacent to trees and subject to root exposure shall be
equipped with root-resistant joints as in subsection E1 below:
1. All joints in vitrified clay pipe shall be approved, factory made, precast joints, conforming to and meeting the requirements of
ASTM standards C-425 (latest revisions), using material Type I or III.
2. All joints in cast-iron pipe shall be either mechanical or rubber ring joints.
3. All joints in plastic pipe shall be chemically welded conforming to ASTM specification D-2680-72.
4. When two (2) sections of sewer pipe are to be joined where the bell and spigot has been removed or where two (2) pipes of the
same inside diameter but made of different materials are to be joined, a pipe coupling with stainless steel clamps, properly sized
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 159/251
transition bushing and shear ring must be used (equal to Clow adjustable repair coupling, ASTM specification C594 [latest
revisions] for compression couplings).
Where pipes of different sizes are to be joined, such as four inch (4") cast iron to six inch (6") clay, a reducer coupling must be
used (equal to Clow Mission couplings ASTM C594, latest revisions), concrete or other types of sealing are not acceptable.
F. Construction Of Lines:
1. All sewer lines shall be laid in trenches, the bottom of which are undisturbed soil. Approved granular backfill, properly compacted,
shall be used immediately under and up to the center line of all sewer lines. Additional granular backfill shall then be placed to a
depth of at least two (2) pipe diameters over the top of the pipe and additional backfill material sufficient to fill the trench shall be
added. For sewers on private property, the type of the last backfill material shall be at the option of the owner. Within a street or
alley right of way and within areas of present or future pavement or sidewalks as designated on the approved permit, thoroughly
compacted, approved, granular backfill shall be placed up to the surface. This backfill, unless otherwise approved by the Public
Works Director, shall be placed in the presence of an inspector of the City. Approved granular backfill shall be material meeting the
requirements of section 20-2.21C of Standard Specifications for Water Main and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois.
2. All sanitary sewer service lines serving a one-family unit shall have a minimum internal diameter of four inches (4"), shall slope a
minimum of one-fourth inch per foot (1/4" per 1'). All sanitary sewer service lines serving units greater than one-family shall have a
minimum internal diameter of six inches (6"), shall slope a minimum of one-eighth inch per foot (1/8" per 1') with a slope of at least
one-fourth inch per foot (1/4" per 1') being preferable.
3. No sanitary sewer line shall be constructed in the same trench with or within ten feet (10') of a water or storm sewer line.
4. If a sewer service line is constructed with changes in direction of the line approximately ninety degrees (90), any such change
shall be constructed using "loop sweep bends" of not greater than forty five degrees (45) change in direction. If an abrupt ninety
degree (90) bend cannot be avoided, a manhole or cleanout shall be constructed at that point to make possible rodding the sewer
in case of blockage.
G. Inspection, Approval Of Service Lines: No part of a sewer service line shall be covered until inspected and approved by an
authorized inspector of the City.
H. Service Lines Property Of Owner: Sewer service lines shall be and shall remain the property of the owner of the lot or parcel or real
estate being served, and any required repairs, maintenance or cleaning shall be the responsibility of said property owner. Should, at
some future time, the sewer service line be found to be defective, permitting the introduction of storm or ground water into the
system, the line shall be repaired at the property owner's expense so that such entry is stopped.
I. Method Of Connecting Sewer Lines: Connection of sewer service lines to the City sewers shall be at the tee or wye connection in the
line. Indiscriminate breaking into the sewer main will not be allowed. If there is no tee or wye set in the main line, one of the following
methods shall be used:
1. Circular saw-cut of sewer pipe by proper tools ("sewer-tap" machine or similar), and proper installation of hub wye saddle or hub
tee saddle in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations.
2. Remove an entire section of pipe and replace with a wye or tee branch section. Pipe section shall be removed by breaking only
the top of one bell. After the wye or tee branch is inserted, the connection shall be completed by the use of a pipe coupling with
stainless steel clamps as defined above.
3. Using pipe cutter, neatly and accurately cut out desired length of pipe for insertion of proper fitting. After the proper fitting is
inserted, the connection shall be completed by the use of a pipe coupling with stainless steel clamps as defined above.
4. Actual tapping of the line shall only be done when an inspector of the Public Works Department is present. If, in making a tap, a
section of sewer pipe is cracked, that section shall be replaced or, at the option of the inspector, shall be entirely encased in not
less than six inches (6") of Portland cement concrete.
J. Separate Connections Required: Separate connections shall be made for storm sewer lines and sanitary sewer line.
K. Cutting, Removing Pavement; Replacing; Notice: When an existing pavement or sidewalk is cut or removed in the course of making a
sewer connection, the sections shall be restored to meet the original condition in accordance with the requirements of the City. Such
street cuts shall be made only at such times and in such manner as approved by the City following at least twenty four (24) hours'
notice to the City.
L. Connection Of Property Contiguous To City And Not Located In Another Municipality: No property contiguous to the City limits and not
located within the corporate limits of another municipality shall be permitted to connect to the City sewer lines until said property shall
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 160/251
have been annexed to the City. After annexation, said property may be connected to the sanitary sewer lines of the City upon the
following conditions:
1. Connection At Owner's Expense: The owner of any such property which does not front on a street in which a City sewer line is
located shall be required to install, at owner's own expense, the necessary lateral sewer lines in accordance with City
specifications and requirements, and in addition thereto shall comply with all of the requirements hereinafter set forth.
2. Fees: For each property improved by a single-family residence, the fee for connecting to the City sewer line shall be in
accordance with the schedule of fees adopted from time to time by the City Council and on file in the office of the City Clerk.
3. Agreement In Lieu Of Annexation: If a property owner has made every effort possible to effect annexation to the satisfaction of the
City Council, the owner of the premises may secure sewer service to the premises if owner shall execute an agreement with the
City, providing that owner, owner's successors and assigns shall execute a petition to annex immediately when legal barriers are
removed, and the premises are or become contiguous to the City limits. The agreement shall provide that sewerage service may
be terminated upon failure to annex to the City when possible.
4. Special Arrangement, Agreement Or Contract: No provision of this Chapter shall be construed as preventing any special
arrangement, agreement or contract between the City and any municipality, person or industrial concern for sewerage service,
subject to the rate, cost or conditions as established by the City.
M. Connection Of Property Not Contiguous To City But Located In Another Municipality: Provided that the property to be served is within
two hundred feet (200') of a City sanitary sewer line and not contiguous to the City but located within the corporate limits of another
municipality, said property may be connected to the sanitary sewer lines of the City upon payment of a connection fee and upon
compliance with the following conditions:
1. Connection At Owner's Expense: The owner of any such property which does not front on a street in which a City sewer line is
located shall be required to install, at owner's own expense, the necessary lateral sewer lines in accordance with City
specifications and requirements, and in addition thereto shall comply with all of the requirements hereinafter set forth in subsection
M2, 3 and 4 of this Section.
2. Fee: For each property improved by a single-family residence, the fee shall be in accordance with the schedule of fees adopted
from time to time by the City Council and on file in the office of the City Clerk.
3. Building Other Than Single-Family Residence: For each property improved by any building other than a single-family residence,
the fee shall be such amount as may be determined by the City Council.
4. Sewer Rental Fee: The owner of each such property shall pay to the City, in addition to said connection fee, a sewer rental fee
assessed in accordance with the schedule of fees adopted from time to time by the City Council and on file in the office of the City
Clerk. (1997 Code)
N. Sewer Lateral Responsibility: The following list is adopted for the purpose of problem solving. This subsection is to provide conduct
and responsibilities of homeowners and that of the city of Colona.
1. The homeowner shall call the city on any problems noticed with the sewer system.
2. The city will inspect the sewer mains to see if there are any blockages or problems.
3. The city will contact the homeowner to inform homeowner of what the inspection reveals.
4. The homeowner then shall bear the responsibility of proving that any problem exists beyond their sewer pipe into the city's lateral
or main. To do this, a visual inspection must be conducted by the city.
5. If a problem does exist from the end of the riser to the main, then it would be the city's responsibility to fix the problem.
6. The city shall not be responsible for the cost or damage done to any property or service rendered by any other contractor if the
problem was on the city's part of the main. (Ord. 03-02, 4-8-2002)
8-2-3-8: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
A. Protection Of Processing Trade Secrets: The public works director and other duly authorized employees of the city, the Illinois
environmental protection agency, and the U.S. environmental protection agency, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall
be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. The public works director or public works director's representative shall have no authority to
inquire into any process, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste treatment.
B. Safety Rules Observed: While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection A of this section, the
public works director or duly authorized employees of the city, the Illinois environmental protection agency, and the U.S.
environmental protection agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 161/251
company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or
damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or
failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in subsection 8-2-3-5H of this chapter.
C. Right Of Entry: The public works director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification
shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within
said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (1997 Code)
8-2-4: WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES; INDUSTRIAL WASTE COST RECOVERY:
8-2-4-1: WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES:
A. Basis For Wastewater Service Charges:
1. Wastewater Service Charge: The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of
the city shall consist of a basic user charge for operation and maintenance plus replacement, a debt service charge, and a
surcharge if applicable.
2. Debt Service Charge: The debt service charge shall be the amount to be paid each billing period for payment of interest, principal
and coverage of bond which includes payments to be made in the various reserve accounts as required by the bond ordinance
and shall be computed by dividing the annual debt service by the number of users connected to the wastewater facilities.
3. Basic User Charge: The basic user charge shall be a monthly rate for each sanitary sewer connection having the following normal
concentrations:
- A five (5) day, twenty degree centigrade (20C) biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of two hundred milligrams per liter (200
mg/l).
- A suspended solids (SS) content of two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l).
It shall consist of operation and maintenance costs plus replacement and depreciation and shall be computed as follows:
- Estimate the projected annual revenues required to operate and maintain the wastewater facilities, including a replacement and
depreciation fund for the year, for all works categories.
- Proportion the estimated costs to wastewater facility categories by volume, suspended solids and BOD, if possible.
- Estimate wastewater volume, pounds of SS and pounds of BOD to be treated.
- Proportion the estimated costs to nonindustrial and industrial users by volume, suspended solids and BOD.
- Compute costs per one thousand (1,000) gallons for normal sewage strength.
- Compute surcharge costs per pound of BOD and SS in excess of normal sewage strength.
4. Surcharge: A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed the normal concentrations for BOD (200 mg/l) and SS
(250 mg/l). The surcharge will be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or concentration for BOD and SS
respectively. Subsection 8-2-4-2G of this chapter specifies the procedure to compute a surcharge.
5. Annual Review: The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed annually by certified public accountants for the
city in their annual audit report. The wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in debt service or a
change in operation and maintenance costs, including replacement and depreciation costs.
B. Measurement Of Flow (When Applicable): The volume of flow used for computing surcharges shall be metered water consumption
read to the lowest even increments of one hundred (100) gallons.
1. If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any part, or all, of his/her water from sources other than the
public waterworks system, all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person shall install and maintain, at
his/her expense, water meters of a type approved by the city for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from
these other sources.
2. Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by the city if these volumes cannot otherwise be
determined from the metered water consumption records.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 162/251
3. Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be installed, owned and maintained by the person. Following approval
and installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is canceled, without the consent of the city.
C. Debt Service Charge: A debt service charge of five dollars ($5.00) per month to each user of the wastewater facility of the city is
hereby established.
D. Connection Fee:
1. Connection Fee Shall Be Paid: Any person connecting to the city sewer system shall pay a connection fee as established herein.
2. Amount Set By City Council: There shall be a connection fee for connection of any sewer service to the city sewer system, the
amount of which shall be set from time to time by the city council. (1997 Code)
3. 1996 Sanitary Sewer Project: All individuals, businesses or industry being assessed the special assessment fee with respect to
the 1996 sanitary sewer project shall pay no fee for the sewer hook on permit and inspection. Those individuals, businesses or
industry that were capable of hooking on and being a part of the 1996 Colona sanitary sewer project, but who chose not to be part
of such project or be involved in the assessment for same shall pay a hook on permit and inspection fee of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) for the privilege of hooking onto Colona's sanitary sewer. That those lots that become subdivided for future
development, subsequent to the construction of the 1996 sanitary sewer project and thus were not individually in existence at the
time of said project, shall pay a sewer hook on fee and inspection fee per lot in such an amount as set from time to time by the
council for individuals, businesses and industry for the privilege of hooking onto said sewer system. (Ord. 98-12, 12-14-1998)
4. Costs Of Construction: In addition to the above connection fee, any person connecting to the city sewer shall also pay all costs of
construction across any street or roadway necessary to effect connection to the city sewer system.
E. Basic User Rate: All premises using city sewer service shall pay current rates and charges as established from time to time by the
city council. (1997 Code)
8-2-4-2: INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY:
A. Industrial Cost Recovery Required: Each industrial user shall pay that portion of any state grant which has been obtained for the
financing of the construction of wastewater treatment works allocable to the treatment of the wastewater from such user. Such user's
share shall not include an interest component.
B. Basis For Industrial Cost Recovery Charges: The ICR charge for the use of and for the service supplied by the wastewater facilities
shall consist of a unit charge for actual process flow (Vu); and unit charges for actual BOD (Bi) and SS (Si) contained in the process
flow.
The actual process flow shall be the volume of flow as determined in subsection 8-2-4-1B of this Chapter less an allowance for
employee flow and water consumed in production.
The actual concentration of BOD and SS used for computing the ICR charge shall be established by waste sampling in accordance
with subsections 8-2-3-5J and K of this Chapter.
C. Determination Of Unit Charges: The ICR unit charges, for all industrial users serviced by the wastewater facilities of the City shall be
determined as follows:
1. Allocate the EPA grant amount to the three (3) treatment parameters, flow, BOD and SS.
2. Divide the total for each parameter by the recovery period.
3. Divide the totals obtained in subsection C2 above by their respective annual element of plant design.
The ICR unit charges shall be as follows:
a. Unit Flow (Vu) ICR Charge:
$13,470.00/year
365,000,000 gal/yr = $0.037/1,000 gallons
b. Unit BOD (Bi) ICR Charge:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 163/251
$11,482.00/year
608,820 lbs/yr = $0.0190/lb.
c. Unit SS (Si) ICR Charge:
$12,570.00/year
761,000 = $0.0166/lb.
In addition to the above, the ICR unit charges, for all industrial users within the corporate limits of the City serviced by the City's
wastewater facilities shall be determined as follows:
a. Federal Grant Annual Cost =
$1,455,500.00 . 30 years = $48,516.67
b. Federal Grant Daily Cost =
$48,516.67 . 365 days = $132.92
c. Design Load =
Capacity of the 2 interceptor sewers are:
.70 MGD + 1.00 MGD = 1.7 MGD
d. Design Capacity Unit Cost =
$132.92 . 1,700,000 = $0.078/1,000 gal
Summary: The overall industrial cost recovery charge for industry served within the corporate limits of the City will, therefore, be:
Volume = $0.37/1,000 gal + $0.078/1,000 gal = $0.115/1,000 gal
BOD = $0.0190/lb.
SS = $0.0166/lb.
D.Cost For Industrial User: The cost to be recovered from an industrial user (ICR) shall be determined by the following formula:
ICR = Vu ($Qi) + Bi ($BODi) + Si ($SSi)
where: ICR = Industrial cost recovery charge to each industrial user
Vu = Wastewater volume, in 1,000 gallons, from industrial user for monthly billing period
Bi = BOD in pounds from industrial user process wastewater
Si = SS in pounds from industrial user process wastewater
$Q = Industrial cost recovery rate per 1,000 gallons of process wastewater volume = $0.037/1,000 gallons
$BODI = Industrial cost recovery rate per pound for BOD = $0.0190/lb.
$SSi = Industrial cost recovery rate per pound for SS = $0.0166/lb.
The BOD in pounds from process wastewater or "Bi" shall be computed as follows:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 164/251
Bi = Vu x BODu x 0.00834
where: BODu = Total BOD in mg/l, from process wastewater as determined by waste sampling
The SS in pounds from process wastewater or "Si" shall be computed as follows:
Si = Vu x SSu x 0.00834
where: SSu = Total SS in mg/l, from process wastewater as determined by waste sampling
E. Charge For Industrial Cost Recovery: Each year during the industrial cost recovery period, each industrial user of the treatment works
shall pay the cost recovery amount determined by subsection D above for such industry. Where an industry is connected to a public
sewer after the start up of the facilities constructed under a State grant, such industry shall only pay its portion of the State grant for
each month remaining in the recovery period. Such industry will not be required to pay for those months of the recovery period prior
to connection to a public sewer.
F. Length Of Industrial Cost Recovery Period: The industrial cost recovery period shall be equal to the useful life of the treatment works
which shall be thirty (30) years after the start up of the wastewater treatment facilities.
G. Payments And Billing Periods For Industrial Cost Recovery: For the purpose of industrial cost recovery, the year shall be divided into
monthly periods, such periods to correspond to the water billing periods and all industrial users of the City shall pay the cost as
determined by this Chapter for industrial cost recovery and such payments shall be made monthly on the ninth day of the month
immediately following the expiration of the monthly period for which service has been supplied, and such charge shall be payable
within fifteen (15) days after rendition thereof, and in the event such bills are not paid within said fifteen (15) days, a service charge
of ten percent (10%) shall be added thereto.
H. Delinquency And Termination Of Service: In the event the charges for industrial cost recovery are not paid within sixty (60) days after
the rendition of that bill, then such service charges shall be deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent, and thereafter such
delinquent charge shall constitute a lien upon the real estate for which such sewer services were supplied. The City Clerk is hereby
authorized and directed each month to file sworn statements showing such delinquencies in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Henry County, Illinois, and the filing of such statements shall be deemed notice of a lien for the payment of such charges for sewer
service. If the delinquency in the payment of the recovery cost continues for a period of more than sixty (60) days, the sewer service
shall be discontinued.
I. Time Of First Payment: The initial payment made by an industrial user which is connected to a public sewer after the start up of the
treatment works constructed with a State grant shall be made by the next scheduled due date as defined in subsection G of this
Section.
J. Adjustment Of Charge Due To Strength Of Volume Changes: If there is a change in the strength and/or volume introduced into the
treatment works by an industrial user as determined by waste sampling and/or the previous years' records, the City shall adjust the
user's waste characteristic used in calculating the ICR charge accordingly.
K. Adjustment Of Charge Due To Plant Improvement Utilizing State Grant Funds: If there is an expansion or upgrading of the treatment
works utilizing a State grant, each existing industrial user's share shall be adjusted accordingly.
L. No Charge For Unused Or Unreserved Capacity: An industrial user's portion of any State grant shall not include any portion of the
grant amount allocable to unused or reserved capacity.
M. Commitment For Increased Use: An industrial user's portion of any State grant shall include allowance for the cost of any firm
commitment to the City for any increased use by such user.
N. Payment To State Required: The City shall retain fifty percent (50%) of the amounts recovered from industrial users. The remainder,
together with any interest earned thereon, shall be returned to the State Anti-Pollution Fund on an annual basis.
O. Disposition Of Retained Amounts: Eighty percent (80%) of the retained amounts, together with interest earned thereon, shall be used
solely for eligible costs of the expansion or reconstruction of treatment works associated with the project and necessary to meet the
requirements of the Federal Act and the State. The City, prior to commitment of the retained amounts, shall obtain written approval of
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency for any expansion or reconstruction. The remainder of the retained amounts may be
used for such expenditures as the City deems appropriate.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 165/251
P. Investment Of Retained Amounts Required: Pending use, the City shall invest the retained amounts for reconstruction and expansion
in:
1. Obligations of the U.S. Government; or
2. Obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by the U.S. Government or any agency thereof; or
3. Deposit such amounts in accounts fully collateralized by obligations of the U.S. Government or by obligations fully guaranteed as
to principal and interest by the U.S. Government or any agency thereof.
Q. City Treasurer Responsibility:
1. The City Treasurer shall maintain the necessary records for determination of user share of the cost and shall provide the billing
and collection services as required by subsection 8-2-4-1A and section 8-2-4-3 of this chapter.
2. The City Treasurer shall be responsible for the investment and expenditure of all monies collected for industrial cost recovery in
accordance with subsections N, O and P of this section.
R. Monitoring Required: The City shall maintain a program of monitoring industrial user discharges as the City deems necessary;
provided, that any major contributing industry shall be monitored no less than twelve (12) times annually and all other industrial users
shall be monitored no less than once annually. The monitoring data collected shall be used to determine the ICR charge in
accordance with subsection D of this section. (1997 Code)
8-2-4-3: EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATES:
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter for the purpose of the operation of the sewerage system, the calendar year shall be
divided into twelve (12) monthly periods, such periods to begin on the fifteenth day of each month. The rates or charges for service shall
be payable bimonthly on or before the twelfth day of the month immediately following the end of the bimonthly period for which service
has been supplied. (1997 Code)
8-2-5: BILLING; ACCOUNTS; REVENUES:
8-2-5-1: BILLS, DELINQUENCIES:
A. Payment Of Bills:
1. Bimonthly: (Rep. by Ord. 0-16-11, 8-8-2016)
2. Responsibility For Payment: The owner of the premises, whether or not the user of the service, or the occupant shall be liable to
pay for the service to such premises and the service is furnished to the premises by the City.
3. Due Date; Penalty: All sewer bills are due and payable twenty (20) days after being sent out. A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall
be added to all bills not paid by the twentieth day after they have been rendered.
B. Rendition Of Bills: Bills for sewer service shall be sent out by the City Clerk by the first day of the month succeeding the period for
which the service is billed.
C. Delinquent Bills: If the charges for such services are not paid within sixty (60) days after the rendition of the bill for such services,
water service shall be discontinued without further notice and shall not be reinstated until all past due balances, the current balance,
penalties, red tag fees, and turn on/off fees have been paid. (Ord. 0-16-11, 8-8-2016)
8-2-5-2: UNPAID BILLS; LIEN:
A. Lien; Notice Of Delinquency:
1. Statement Of Lien Claim: Whenever a bill for sewer services remains unpaid for two (2) billing cycles after it has been rendered,
the City Clerk shall have the option to file with the County Recorder of Deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement shall
contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the City claims a lien for this
amount as well as for all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
2. Notice To Owner: If the utility bill is unpaid after twenty (20) days, the City Clerk shall send notice to the owner of the premises.
(Ord. 0-16-11, 8-8-2016)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 166/251
3. Right To Foreclose: The failure of the City Clerk to record such lien or to mail such notice or the failure of the owner to receive
such notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in the following subsection.
B. Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the
sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure
shall be by bill-in-equity in the name of the City. The City Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such proceedings in
the name of the City in any court having jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid
twenty one (21) days in the case of a monthly bill after it has been rendered. (1997 Code)
8-2-5-3: REVENUES:
A. Separate Account; Delivery To Treasurer: All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewerage system shall be
deposited in the sewerage account of the Sewerage Fund. All such revenues and monies shall be held by the City Clerk separate
and apart from all funds of the City and all of said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the City Treasurer not
more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the
Mayor and City Council.
B. Sewerage Fund: The City Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the sewerage system and all other funds and monies
incident to the operation of such system as the same may be delivered to the Treasurer and deposit the same in the accounts
designated as the "Sewerage Fund of the City of Colona" in accordance with the bond ordinance. Such Treasurer shall administer
such funds as created in every respect in the manner provided by statute3. (1997 Code)
8-2-5-4: ACCOUNTS:
A. System Of Accounts; Audit: The City Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records and
accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system, and at regular
annual intervals the Treasurer shall cause to be made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts
and disbursements of the sewerage system.
B. Annual Audit: In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating
expenses of the wastewater facilities, including replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service charges under the waste cost
recovery system and capital amounts required to be recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do in fact meet these
regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit report shall include the following:
1. Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for the current fiscal year.
2. Billing data to show total number of gallons billed.
3. Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
4. Number of users connected to the system.
5. Number of nonmetered users.
6. A list of users discharging nondomestic wastes (industrial users) and volume of waste discharged. (1997 Code)
8-2-5-5: NOTICE OF RATES:
A copy of the provisions of this chapter properly certified by the City Clerk shall be filed in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Henry
County and shall be deemed notice to all owners of real estate of the charges of the sewerage system of the City on their properties.
(1997 Code)
8-2-5-6: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and
records of the City which are applicable to the City system of user charges or industrial cost recovery for the purpose of making audit,
examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to any State
grant. (1997 Code)
8-2-5-7: PENALTY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 167/251
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section 8-2-5 shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code.
(1997 Code)
8-2-6: PENALTY:
A. Notice Of Violation: Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter except section 8-2-3-4 of this chapter shall be
served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The City may
revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of this chapter.
B. Misdemeanor: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection A of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be subject to penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code for each
violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. Liability For Violation: Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the City by reason of such
violation. (1997 Code)
Chapter 3
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
8-3-1: COMPLIANCE WITH EXISTING LAWS:
All plumbing installed within the city of Colona east and west, shall be installed in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code, 77 Illinois
administrative code 890. If in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code or in the judgment of the superintendent of water, an approved
backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the superintendent of water will give notice to
the water customer to install such an approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at his own expense, install such an
approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code and all applicable local regulations, and
shall have inspections and tests made of such approved devices upon installation and as required by the Illinois plumbing code and
local regulations. (Ord. 18-04, 9-27-2004, eff. 9-27-2004)
8-3-2: CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby
a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the city of Colona east and west enter the
supply or distribution system of said municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of
connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the superintendent of water and the Illinois environmental protection
agency. (Ord. 18-04, 9-27-2004, eff. 9-27-2004)
8-3-3: INVESTIGATION AND INSPECTION:
A. Investigation: It shall be the duty of the superintendent of water to cause surveys and investigations to be made of industrial and
other properties served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water supply may
exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two (2) years, or
as often as the superintendent of water shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be maintained and available for review
for a period of at least five (5) years.
B. Inspection: The approved cross connection control device inspector shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property
served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the city of Colona east and west for the purpose of
verifying the presence or absence of cross connections, and that the water superintendent or his authorized agent shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the city
of Colona east and west for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer regarding the required cross connection
control inspection. On demand the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the superintendent of
water any information which he may request regarding the piping system or systems or water use on such property. The refusal of
such information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the superintendent of water, be deemed evidence of the presence
of improper connections as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 18-04, 9-27-2004, eff. 9-27-2004)
8-3-4: DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 168/251
The superintendent of water of the city of Colona east and west is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue, after reasonable
notice to the occupant thereof, the water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this chapter is
known to exist, and to take such other precautionary measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of
the public water supply distribution mains. Water service to such property shall not be restored until such conditions have been
eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and until a reconnection fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) is paid to
the city of Colona east and west. Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the superintendent of water is
assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by
written notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate disconnection without notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual
or anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water supply, provided that, in the reasonable opinion of the superintendent of
water or the Illinois environmental protection agency, such action is required to prevent actual or potential contamination or pollution of
the public water supply. Neither the public water supply, the superintendent of water, or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any
customer for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with
the terms of this chapter, whether or not said termination was with or without notice. (Ord. 18-04, 9-27-2004, eff. 9-27-2004)
8-3-5: CONTAMINATION; COST OF CLEANUP:
The consumer responsible for back siphoned material or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply
system occurs through an illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been
bypassed, must bear the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system. (Ord. 18-04, 9-27-2004, eff. 9-27-2004)
Title 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
BUILDING CODES1
9-1-1: ADOPTED CODES:
A. Adoption: In order to establish rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and
occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and structures within the city which are in substantial conformity with present day
building practices, the international building code, 2012 edition, including appendix chapters C, E, G, I and J (see international
building code section 101.2.1, 2012 edition), as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
building code of the city of Colona, in the state of Illinois for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions
essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and
structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
building code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in this section and the most recent editions of the following related codes also
recommended by the International Conference Of Building Officials: (1997 Code; amd. Ord. 02-08, 2-11-2008; Ord. 0-09-13, 2-10-
2014)
1. International building code, 2012 edition, including appendix chapters C, E, G, I and J (see international building code section
101.2.1, 2012 edition), as published by the International Code Council; (Ord. 0-09-13, 2-10-2014)
2. International property maintenance code, 2012 edition, as published by the International Code Council; (Ord. 0-12-13, 2-10-2014,
eff. 2-10-2014)
3. Illinois plumbing code. (1997 Code)
B. Exemptions: The parties of the 2012 Illinois building code in reference to residential sprinkler systems section 310 group are
exempted from this adoption and are not to be considered adopted.
Section 105 Permits, [A] 105.2 Work Exempt From Permit, is not adopted as to portion under building: sub paragraphs 1, 2, 3, and 6
which are exempted from adoption. Below are the sections as quoted:
1. One-story detached accessory structures used as a tool and storage shed, playhouses, and similar uses, provided the floor area
is not greater than 120 square feet.
2. Fences not over 7 feet high.
3. Oil derricks.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 169/251
6. Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and are not
part of an accessible route.
C. Amendments To Adopted Codes: The following are amended sections of the codes adopted in subsection A of this section:
1. International building code:
Section 101.1. Insert: city of Colona, Illinois
Section 1612.3. Insert: city of Colona, Illinois
Section 1612.3. Insert: September 17, 1980
Section 3412.2. Insert: October 27, 1997
(Ord. 0-09-13, 2-10-2014)
2. International property maintenance code:
Section 101.1. Insert: city of Colona, an Illinois municipal corporation
Section 103.5. Not applicable (no schedule)
Section 112.4. Insert: Not less than $200.00 nor more than $700.00
Section 302.4. Insert: Eight (8) inches
Section 304.14. Insert: April 1 to November 1
Section 602.3. Insert: November 1 to April 1
Section 602.4. Insert: November 1 to April 1
D. Copies On File: Three (3) copies of the building code and related codes adopted above shall remain on file with the city for use and
examination by the public. (Ord. 0-12-13, 2-10-2014, eff. 2-10-2014)
9-1-2: NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE:
A. Adoption: The national electrical code, 2011 edition, including all chapters, articles, information annexes, and tables as copyrighted
by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA); providing for issuance of permits, collections of fees therefor, and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of said national electrical code (NEC) are hereby referred to, adopted,
and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section with additions, insertions, deletions, and changes; if any as set forth
hereafter.
B. Exemptions: Section 210-12, "ARC - Fault Circuit - Interrupter Protection" and section 406-12 "Tamper Resistant Receptacles For
Dwelling Units" are to be exempted from adoption at time of passage hereof.
Section subparagraphs which are exempted from adoption. Below are the sections as quoted:
1. Section 210-12 ARC - Fault Circuit - Interrupter Protection.
2. Section 406-12 Tamper Resistant Receptacles For Dwelling Units.
C. Copies On File: Three (3) copies of such electrical code shall at all times be on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 0-14-13, 2-10-
2014)
9-1-3: FIRE PREVENTION CODE:
A. Adoption: There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and
property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the fire prevention code recommended by the American Insurance
Association, being particularly the most current edition thereof, and the whole thereof is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as
if set out at length herein and shall be controlling.
B. Copies On File: Not less than three (3) copies of such fire prevention code shall be on file in the office of the city clerk.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 170/251
C. Enforcement: The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the proper authority of the city under the supervision of the fire district.
(1997 Code)
9-1-4: BUILDING INSPECTOR:
A. Enforcement Of The Building Code: The international building code shall be enforced by the building inspector or the public works
director. (Ord. 0-23-10, 1-10-2011)
B. Compensation: The compensation of the building inspector shall be set by the city council as per the annual budget. (1997 Code)
9-1-5: PERMIT FEES:
A. Permits:
1. Before any person shall commence construction, alteration or removal of any building or structure in the City, such person shall
first secure a building permit from the Clerk's Office and shall pay such permit, investigation and inspection fees as determined
from time to time by the City Council. (1997 Code; amd. Ord. 0-18-06, 2-12-2018)
2. Permits are required to erect any fence and plans showing lot lines and where fence will be erected on property must be
submitted and approved before any permit is given. (Ord. 0-18-06, 2-12-2018)
B. Penalty: Building permit fees are to be doubled, when a building permit has not been acquired by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the
first day of construction. The property owner shall be directly liable for such permit costs.
C. Building Valuation Scale: The valuation of construction projects for purpose of permit fees shall be as follows:
Project
Cost
(Per Sq. Ft.)
Manufacturing warehouse, etc. $28.00
Masonry construction - garages, sheds, etc. 18.00
New home construction 78.00
Open carport 7.00
Storage warehouse, etc. 17.00
Wood frame - garages, sheds, etc. (new construction) 15.00
The building inspector or Zoning Officer may adjust these costs with the approval of the City Council. These valuations will be reviewed
annually by the Council to determine if building cost permits need to be raised or lowered. (Ord. 0-18-10, 5-10-2010)
9-1-6: ERECTION OF BUILDINGS:
A. Frontage Restrictions: Refer to title 12 of this Code.
B. Setback Lines: Refer to title 12 of this Code. (1997 Code)
C. Property Pins: The owner of the property must know where their property pins lie before any type of construction or fence erecting is
allowed and must keep their fence on their own property. (Ord. 0-18-06, 2-12-2018)
9-1-7: DRIVEWAY OR WALKWAY CONSTRUCTION:
A. Permit Required: No driveway or walkway connecting any lot or tract with a public street or alley upon which such lot abuts shall be
constructed unless a permit therefor has been first obtained.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 171/251
B. Application: Any person wishing to obtain a permit for the construction of a driveway or walkway shall file a written application
therefor in the Office of the City Clerk.
C. Issuance: A permit shall be issued by the Clerk when the City Council has approved the same. This permit shall be in addition to all
other building permits required hereunder. (1997 Code)
D. Construction: Construction of such driveways or walkways shall be as follows:
1. Culverts:
a. Minimum Length: The minimum length of culvert pipe at driveways shall be twenty feet (20') and at walkways shall be ten feet
(10').
b. Type; Diameter: Culverts shall be of corrugated metal construction or reinforced concrete bell tile and the inside diameter shall
be not less than twelve inches (12").
c. Placement: Culverts shall be placed at a depth to permit uninterrupted flow of water through ditches.
d. Installation And Maintenance; Cost: The installation and maintenance of such culverts shall be under the direction and control of
the City, but at the expense of the lot owner.
2. Driveways: Driveway construction of any new or expanded driveway must be approved by Director of Public Works or building
inspector. Concrete must be a minimum of four inches (4") thick with six inches (6") thick by twelve inches (12") wide at the
abutment of any street, and no greater than thirty feet (30') wide without obtaining a variance. Asphalt must be a minimum of two
inches (2") thick with a rock base of four inches (4") thick and a minimum of eight feet (8') wide without obtaining a variance.
3. Parking Spaces: Will be allowed along the frontage lots if approved by the Public Works Director or building inspector providing all
drainage is adequate, and the spaces do not interfere with traffic and snow removal. (Ord. 0-15-019, 10-26-2015)
9-1-8: MOVING BUILDINGS:
Buildings or structures moved into or within the City shall comply with this Code; provided, however, any person seeking to move any
house, structure or building into the City must first obtain the written consent of the City Council and shall provide the City with a
performance bond in an amount to be determined by the Council, not to exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), wherein the City
shall be named obligee and which bond shall ensure full compliance with all provisions of the Building Code and any other written
specific agreement. (1997 Code)
9-1-9: TRAILER COACHES:
A. Definition: The term "trailer coach" as used in this section shall mean and indicate any vehicle or similar portable structure
constructed so as to permit its being used as a conveyance on a public street and so as to permit the occupancy thereof as a
dwelling by one or more persons.
B. Use Restricted: It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any trailer coach used for human habitation upon any plot of ground in
the City in violation of this Code.
C. Removal Of Wheels Or Transporting Device: It shall be unlawful for any person to remove the wheels or other transporting device
from any trailer coach or otherwise to affix said trailer coach permanently to the ground so as to prevent ready removal of any such
trailer coach unless a permit to do so is obtained as required for the construction of a new building. Any such alteration shall be
construed as converting the trailer coach into a building and subject to the requirements of titles 10 and 12 of this Code.
D. Occupancy: It shall be unlawful to occupy for sleeping or other residence purposes any trailer coach which has been rendered
immobile by the removal of wheels or placing the same on a foundation or on the ground unless such trailer coach in question and
location complies with the provisions of this Code and other regulations applicable to single-family dwellings. (1997 Code)
9-1-10: CONTRACTORS:
A. In order to be allowed to do business in the City of Colona, all contractors must register with the City. All contractors must provide
proof of license for their profession and proof of insurance/bonding.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 172/251
B. All contractors doing business in the City of Colona shall pay an annual registration fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per calendar year.
(Ord. 0-18-10, 5-10-2010)
9-1-11: ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE:
A. Adoption: The International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is
hereby adopted as the Energy Conservation Code of the City of Colona, in the State of Illinois for regulating and governing energy
efficient building envelopes and installation of energy efficient mechanical, lighting and power systems in the City of Colona;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Energy Conservation Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B of this section.
B. Amendments: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section C101.1 and R101.1 Insert: city of Colona, Illinois
Section C108.4 and R108.4 Insert: $50.00 to $750.00 in two places
C. Copies On File: Three (3) copies of such Energy Conservation Code are on file in the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 0-10-13, 2-10-
2014)
9-1-12: RESIDENTIAL CODE:
A. Adoption: The International Residential Code, 2012 edition, including appendix chapters C, E, G, I and J (see International
Residential Code section 101.2.1, 2012 edition), as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
Residential Code of the City of Colona, in the State of Illinois for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all
property, residential and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and
conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of residential
and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of
said Residential Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B of this section.
B. Amendments: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: city of Colona, Illinois
Section 1612.3. Insert: city of Colona, Illinois
Section 1612.3. Insert: September 17, 1980
Section 3410.2. Insert: October 27, 1997
C. Copies On File: Three (3) copies of such Residential Code are on file in the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 0-11-13, 2-10-2014)
Chapter 2
RENTAL HOUSING1
9-2-1: POLICY; PURPOSE; APPLICABILITY:
A. Declaration Of Policy: The City Council declares that the purpose of this Chapter is to protect and preserve the physical and mental
health of the people and to promote the general safety and welfare of the people by establishing minimum standards for basic
equipment and facilities for light, ventilation and heating; and to provide safety from fire; and to determine the use and location and
amount of space for human occupancy and for safe, sanitary maintenance of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, hotels and
motels; and by determining the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants of dwellings; and providing for the administration
and enforcement thereof. Any inconsistency or conflict between the provisions of this Chapter and any other provision of this Code
or other existing ordinance shall not repeal such provision or ordinance, but the provisions of the Chapter shall be cumulative
thereto.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 173/251
B. Purpose: The ultimate purpose of this Chapter is to prevent blight and deterioration of neighborhoods into slums. More immediately,
the purpose of this Chapter is to establish minimum standards for maintaining both private and commercial residential property so as
to, on one hand, provide occupants and neighbors with a healthful and safe environment in which to live and, on the other hand, to
permit the fullest use of residential properties for residential purposes at the lowest reasonable cost to owner-occupants and to
landlords and tenants.
C. Applicability: Every building or portion thereof used for rental purposes such as a dwelling, dwelling unit, two-family dwelling, multiplefamily
dwelling, multiple use dwelling, hotel, motel, habitable room, rooming unit or rooming house, shall conform to the requirements
of this Chapter, irrespective of the class to which such building or portion thereof may otherwise belong and irrespective of which
such building or portion thereof may have been reconstructed, altered or repaired. This Chapter also applies to single-family
dwellings that are not owner-occupied and used for rental purposes, provided one or more of the following conditions of subsections
9-2-5-1A through G or I are encountered. (1997 Code)
9-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
A. Construction: Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural
number includes the singular. The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel". The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is
permissive. Whenever the words "dwelling", "dwelling unit", "rooming house", "rooming unit", or "premises", are used in this Code,
they shall be interpreted as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof".
B. Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases are hereby defined as follows and shall be interpreted as such throughout these
regulations. Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them:
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE: Any building or use which is on the same lot with and of a nature customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal building or use.
AGRICULTURAL USES, BONA FIDE: The growing of crops in the open, raising of stock and poultry, forestry, mushroom growing,
flower gardening, operation of apiaries and aviaries, nurseries, orchards, fur farms, roadside stands, signs and billboards relating to
the sale or use of products produced thereon, and necessary structures and farm dwellings for such uses.
ALLEY: A trafficway dedicated to public use which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties
otherwise abutting a street, and which is less than twenty feet (20') wide.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: One or more buildings on premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires and automobile
accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail, and incidental repair and maintenance may be obtained. Uses permissible at a
filling station do not include major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, storage of automobiles
not in operating condition, or other work involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke, or other characteristics to an extent greater than
normally found in filling stations. A filling station is not a repair garage or body shop. All activities incidental to the sale of gasoline or
oil shall be conducted within a building and there shall be no storage or accumulation of equipment or motor vehicles disassembled
or otherwise outside of the principal structure.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building which is partly below and partly above grade and having at least one-half (1/2) its height
above grade.
BATHROOM: A room containing bathing and sanitary facilities consisting of a water closet, a tub or shower and a lavatory. A
bathroom shall be provided within each living unit and shall afford complete privacy.
BILLBOARD: A type of sign having more than one hundred (100) square feet of display surface which is either erected on the
ground or attached to or supported by a building or structure.
BOARD OF APPEALS: The Zoning Board of Appeals of the City.
BOARDING AND LODGING HOUSE: A dwelling other than a hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite
periods, meals or lodging and meals are provided for three (3) or more, but not exceeding twenty (20) persons on a weekly basis.
BUILDING: Any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of people, animals, chattels or property of
any kind. Any structure with interior areas not normally accessible for human use shall not be considered as a building.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a
mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridges for gable, hip or gambrel roofs.
BUILDING INSPECTOR: The Building Inspector shall be the officer charged with the administration and enforcement of this Chapter.
CAR WASH: A building or portion thereof, containing facilities for washing more than two (2) automobiles; using production-line
methods with a chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device, or other mechanical devices; or providing space, water, equipment or
soap for the complete or partial hand-washing of such automobiles, whether by operator or by customer.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 174/251
CELLAR: That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade and having at least one-half (1/2) of its height below
grade.
CHILD CARE CENTER: Any place, home or institution which receives three (3) or more children under the age of sixteen (16) years
and not of common parentage, for care apart from their natural parents, legal guardians or custodians when received for regular
periods of time for compensation.
CITY: The City of Colona, Illinois.
CITY CLERK: The City Clerk of the City.
CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of the City.
CLINIC: An establishment where patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination or treatment by a physician
and/or practitioners practicing together.
DETERIORATION: The condition or appearance of a building or part thereof, characterized by breaks, holes, rot, crumbling,
cracking, peeling, rusting or other evidence of physical decay or neglect or excessive use of or lack of maintenance shall define
deterioration.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT OR REFRESHMENT STAND: Any place or premises principally used for the sale, dispensing or serving of
food, refreshments or beverages in automobiles, including those establishments where customers may serve themselves and may
eat or drink the food, refreshments or beverages on or off the premises.
DWELLING: A dwelling is a building designed or used principally for residential occupancy, including without limitation, single-family
dwellings, two-family dwellings and multiple-family dwellings.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A multiple-family dwelling is a building containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-USE: A building containing a business, commercial or manufacturing use and one or more dwelling or
rooming units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A single-family dwelling is a building containing one dwelling unit only.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A two-family dwelling is a building containing two (2) dwelling units only.
DWELLING UNIT: A dwelling unit is one or more rooms arranged or designed for the use of one family living together as a single
housekeeping unit with cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities in a self-contained unit, so that access to the street in any
additional facilities (such as laundry, heating units, etc.) can be gained without passing through any other residential or commercial
unit.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: The erection, alteration or maintenance, by public utilities or Municipal or other governmental agencies, of
underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or
disposal systems, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories
in connection therewith reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities for Municipal or other
governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare, but not including buildings.
EXTERMINATION: Extermination shall mean the control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their
harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating or
trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the Building Inspector.
FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, together with his/her or their domestic servants, maintaining a
common household in a dwelling.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building designed or used for the storage of motor driven vehicles owned and used by the
occupants of the building to which it is an accessory. Not more than one of the vehicles may be a commercial vehicle exceeding one
and one-half (11/2) ton capacity.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building or portion thereof, other than a private or storage garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing,
repairing, hiring, selling or storing motor driven vehicles.
GARBAGE: Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, wastes from the handling and
storage of produce and paper necessarily used for wrapping.
HABITABLE BUILDING: Any structure or part thereof that shall be used as a home or place of abode by one or more persons shall
be defined as a habitable building.
HABITABLE ROOM: Any room meeting the requirements of this Chapter for sleeping, living, cooking or dining purposes, excluding
such enclosed places as closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, hallways, laundries, storage spaces, utility rooms and similar spaces.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation or activity incidental to residential use, when carried on in the main building by one member
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 175/251
of the immediate family residing on the premises, in connection with which there is used no sign other than a nonilluminated name
plate not more than one square foot in area or no display used that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being used for
any purpose other than that of a dwelling. There is no commodity sold on the premises, no person is employed other than a member
of the immediate family residing on the premises, and no mechanical equipment is used except of the type that is similar in character
to that normally used for purely domestic or household purposes. Home occupation shall include the use of premises by a physician,
surgeon, dentists, lawyer, clergyman, barber, beautician, or other professional person.
HOT WATER: Hot water means water at a temperature of not less than one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120F).
HOTEL (MOTEL): An establishment which is open to transient guests, in contradistinction to a boarding house, lodging house or
apartment-hotel, and is commonly known as a hotel (motel) in the community in which it is located; and which provides customary
hotel services such as mail service, the furnishing and laundering of linen, telephone and secretarial or desk service, the use and
upkeep of furniture and bellhop service.
INOPERATIVE VEHICLE: See Section 6-7-13 of this Code regarding inoperative motor vehicles.
INSTITUTION: A nonprofit corporation or a nonprofit establishment for public use.
JUNKYARD: A lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used primarily for the collection, storage and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap
metal or discarded materials or for the collection, storage, dismantling and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running
condition and for the sale of parts thereof. The term "junkyard" shall include auto wrecking yards.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises on which are kept four (4) or more dogs more than six (6) months of age for compensation or sale.
KITCHEN: A space of not less than seventy (70) square feet and shall mean any room used for the storage and preparation of foods
and containing the following equipment: sink or other device for dishwashing, stove or other device for cooking, refrigeration or other
device for cool storage of food, cabinets or shelves for storage of equipment and utensils, and counter or table for food preparation.
Only one kitchen is allowed per dwelling unit.
LAUNDROMAT: An establishment providing hometype washing, drying or ironing machines for hire to be used by customers on the
premises.
LOT: When used alone shall mean a "zoning lot" unless the context of this Chapter clearly indicates otherwise.
LOT AREA: The total horizontal area included within lot lines.
LOT, CORNER: A lot which has at least two (2) adjacent sides abutting for their full length on a street, provided the interior angle at
the intersection of such two (2) sides is less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135).
LOT DEPTH: The depth of a lot which shall be considered to be the distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting
foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.
LOT FRONTAGE: That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street excluding the side dimension of a corner lot.
LOT, INTERIOR: Any lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage street.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Henry County; or a parcel of land, the deed of which was recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Henry County prior to the
adoption of the Zoning Ordinance as hereinafter defined.
LOT WIDTH: The width of a lot which shall be considered to be the distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines
at each side of the lot. Where side lot lines are not continuously parallel or at right angles to the abutting street, the average of the
rear and front widths shall be used.
LOT ZONING: A single tract of land located within a single block, which (at the time of filing for a building permit) is designated by its
owner or developer as tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. Therefore, a "zoning lot"
may or may not coincide with a "lot of record".
MOBILE HOME: A portable or mobile living unit used or designed for human occupancy on a permanent basis. A travel trailer is not
to be considered a mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel of land under single ownership which has been designed or improved or intended to be used or
rented for occupancy by one or more mobile homes.
MOTOR COURT OR MOTEL: A building or group of buildings used primarily for the temporary residence of motorists or travelers.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the time of the enactment of the Zoning Ordinance as
hereinafter defined, which does not conform after passage of the Zoning Ordinance with the use regulations of the district in which it
is situated.
OCCUPANT: Occupant shall mean any person living, sleeping, cooking, eating in or having possession or use of a dwelling unit or
rooming unit.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 176/251
OWNER: Any person, firm or corporation which alone, jointly or severally with others, shall be in actual possession of, or have
charge, care or control of, any dwelling unit or rooming unit within the City as owner, employee or agent of the owner, or as trustee or
guardian of the estate or person of the title holder, shall be defined as an owner. Any person acting in the capacity of an owner shall
be bound to comply with the provisions of this Chapter to the same extent as if such person were the owner.
OPERATOR: Any legally responsible person who has charge, care or control of a building or part thereof, in which dwelling units or
rooming units are leased or let.
PERMIT: The words "permit" and "license" shall be interchangeable.
PERSON: Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization or any other group acting as a unit as well as an
individual. It shall also include an executor, administrator, trustee or receiver or other representative appointed according to law.
Whenever the word "person" is used in any Section of this Chapter prescribing a penalty or fine, as to partnerships or associations,
the word shall include the officer, agents or members thereof who are responsible for any violation of such Section.
PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD: The Planning and Zoning Board of the City.
PLUMBING: All of the following facilities and equipment are included in this definition: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water
pipes, steam pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, toilets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths,
installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents and any other similar fixtures, together with all connections to water,
sewer or gas lines.
PRIVACY: The existence of conditions which will permit an individual or individuals to carry out an activity commenced without
interruption or interference, either by sight or sound by unwanted individuals.
PROVIDED: Any material furnished, supplied, paid for or under the control of the owner or operator shall be said to be provided.
PUBLIC HALL: A hall, corridor or passageway for egress from a dwelling not within the exclusive control of one family shall be
defined as a public hall.
RENTAL HOUSING: Any nonowner-occupied dwelling or dwelling unit in which an occupants may or may not pay an agreed fee to
occupy such unit.
ROOMING HOUSE: Any residential building, or any part thereof, containing one dwelling unit, which is let by the owner or operator
to more than four (4) persons who do not constitute a family.
ROOMING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but
not for cooking or eating purposes.
RUBBISH: Combustible or noncombustible waste materials except garbage. The term shall include the residue from the burning of
coal, wood, coke, or other combustible materials; paper, rags, cartons, and boxes, wood, excelsior rubber, leather, tree branches,
yard trimmings, tinned cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, ceramics, dust or other similar like materials.
SIGN: A name, identification, description, display or illumination which is affixed to, or represented directly or indirectly upon a
building, structure or piece of land, and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization
or business. However, a "sign" shall not include any display of official court or public office notices nor shall it include the flag,
emblem or insignia of a nation, political unit, school or religious group.
SIGN, OFF-SITE: A sign other than an "on-site" sign.
SIGN, ON-SITE: A sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located or to products, accommodations, services
or activities on the premises. On-site signs do not include billboards.
SMOKE DETECTOR: An approved device that senses visible or invisible particles of combustion.
STAIRWAYS: One or more flights of stairs and the necessary landings and platforms connecting them to form a continuous and
uninterrupted passage from one floor to another.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, or
the ceiling or roof next above such floor; provided that, for the purpose of determining the required dimensions of yards and courts,
when the average story height of a building exceeds twelve feet (12'), each twelve feet (12') or fraction thereof of the total building
height shall be considered a separate full story or fractional story respectively, except the first story which may be fifteen feet (15')
high.
STORY, HALF: A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which, on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls
are not more than four feet (4') above the floor of such story; provided however, that any partial story used for residence purposes,
other than a janitor or caretaker and his/her family, shall be deemed a full story.
STREET: A general term used to describe a public right of way which is twenty feet (20') or more and provides a channel for
vehicular and pedestrian movement and may provide for vehicular and pedestrian access to properties adjacent to it, and which may
also provide space for the location of utilities, both above and below ground. The word "street" shall include the meanings of road,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 177/251
highway and thoroughfare.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which is attached to something having location on the ground, including a fence or
free-standing wall or a sign, billboard or other advertising medium, detached or projecting, shall be defined as a structure.
SUBSTANDARD: Substandard shall mean all buildings used for purposes of human habitation which do not conform to the minimum
standards established by this Chapter or by any other provision of this Code or ordinances of the City.
SUPPLIED: Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of the owner or operator.
TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and
recreational purposes, having a body width not exceeding eight feet (8') and a length not to exceed twenty four feet (24').
YARD: A required open space at grade unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure, other than
projections of uncovered steps, uncovered balconies, or uncovered porches; provided, however, that fences, walls, poles, posts and
other customary yard accessories, ornaments, and furniture may be permitted in any yard subject to height and visibility
requirements. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, depth of a front yard or rear yard, the
minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used.
YARD, FRONT: An open space extending the full width of the lot between a building and the front lot line, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as hereinafter specified.
YARD, REAR: An open space extending the full width of a lot between a building and the rear lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward, except as hereinafter specified.
YARD, SIDE: An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between a building and side lot line, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as hereinafter specified.
ZONING OFFICER: The person appointed to occupy the office created herein, in which office is vested the chief administrative and
enforcement duties as outlined in Title 12 of this Code.
ZONING ORDINANCE: As applied to "lot of record" and "nonconforming use" as used in this Chapter regarding date of recording or
use in existence at the time of passage of the Zoning Ordinance, it shall mean the Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Colona dated
August 5, 1982, as amended, or Ordinance 88-3 of the City of Green Rock dated February 22, 1983, as amended, whichever applies
to the real property in question. All other references shall be to Title 12 of this Code. (1997 Code)
9-2-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, keep, manage or operate or cause to be conducted, kept, managed or
operated, any duplex, apartment, rooming house, multiple-use dwelling, single-family dwelling, hotel or motel, without a license
therefor.
B. Application:
1. Form: A written application for the license or permit required by subsection A above shall be submitted on a form furnished by the
City Clerk's office. Said application shall be filed with the Building Inspector on or before August 1.
2. Required Information: Applications shall accurately state the full name and address of the applicant and the person in whose
name such license is to be issued. The full name and address of the owner of the building and premises where such multiple-use
dwelling, single-family rental, duplex, apartment, hotel, motel or rooming house is proposed to be carried on, the number of rooms
or units in such buildings and which of such rooms in said buildings are to be occupied as sleeping rooms and the number of
persons proposed to be accommodated or allowed in each room in a rooming house or multiple-use dwelling or the number of
dwelling units in a multiple-family dwelling or multiple-use dwelling.
C. Inspection; Approval: Upon receipt of the application required by this Chapter, the Building Inspector or the Fire Inspector shall
authorize proper inspection if required, and no such permit shall be issued until the Building Inspector has given written approval.
D. Term: Licenses shall be renewed biennially from the date of inspection.
E. Transferability: No license issued under this Section shall be transferable. Operating permits are not transferable from one party to
another upon the sale of any house, apartment house, multiple-use dwelling, duplex, hotel, motel or rooming house. At the time of
sale of a house, apartment house, multiple-use dwelling, duplex, hotel, motel or rooming house, it will be necessary for the new
owner to acquire a new permit subject to the same conditions as the original permit. (1997 Code)
9-2-4: FEES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 178/251
A. License Or Permit Fees: The permit or license required by this Chapter shall be issued, upon approval, by the City Clerk's office.
Fees for such permit or license shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) biennially for each building.
B. Delinquent Penalty: After renewal due date, there shall be an additional monthly charge of fifteen dollars ($15.00), provided that
failure to have a license is a violation of subsection 9-2-13A, despite the possibility of a late fee for a license renewal.
C. Lost Application Fee: In the event an applicant for a license loses or misplaces his or her application, there shall be a five dollar
($5.00) charge imposed to receive a new application.
D. Missed Inspection Appointment Fee: For owners and/or managers who have confirmed appointments and who do not show up for
their appointments, a ten dollar ($10.00) fee shall be imposed.
E. Reinspection Fee: Where an inspection reveals defects or deficiencies which preclude approval of the license, thereby forcing or
necessitating a reinspection, a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per reinspection may be charged to the license holder. Such fees are
separate and apart and in addition to any other fee provided by ordinance. (1997 Code)
9-2-5: MINIMUM STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
The provisions of this Chapter 9-2-5 shall be held to be the minimum requirements with respect to houses, apartments, multiple-use
dwellings, duplexes, hotels, motels and rooming houses for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, life and
general welfare. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-1: MINIMUM STANDARDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to let or hold out to another for occupancy, any dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein, which is
not safe, clean and fit for human occupancy, and which does not comply with the particular requirements of the following:
A. Foundations, Exterior Walls And Roofs: The foundation, exterior walls and exterior roof shall be substantially watertight and protected
against rodents and shall be kept in sound condition and repair. The foundation elements shall adequately support the building at all
points. Every exterior wall shall be free of deterioration, holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other condition
which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the exterior spaces of the dwelling. The roof shall be
tight and have no defects which admit rain, and roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent rain water from causing dampness in the
walls. All cornices, rustications, quoins, moldings, belt courses, lintels, sills, oriels, windows, pediments and similar projections shall
be kept in good repair and free from cracks and defects which make them hazardous and dangerous.
B. Floors, Interior Walls And Ceilings: Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be adequately protected against the passage and
harborage of vermin and rodents, and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Every floor shall be free of holes and cracks.
Every floor shall be free of loose, warped, protruding or rotting floor boards. Every interior wall and ceiling shall be free of holes and
large cracks and shall be maintained in a tight, weatherproof condition. Every interior wall and ceiling shall be free of loose plaster or
other structural material. Plaster, paint and all other surface materials shall be of such character as to be easily cleanable, and shall
be reasonably smooth, clean and tight. Every toilet room and bathroom floor surface shall be substantially impervious to water and
be capable of being maintained easily in a clean and sanitary condition.
C. Windows, Doors And Hatchways: Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be substantially tight, and shall be kept
in sound condition and repair. Every window shall be fully supplied with window panes, which are without cracks or holes. Every
window shall be in good condition and shall fit reasonably tight, capable of locking, fastening or otherwise closing in a locked
manner, the window from the inside, and every window, other than a fixed window, shall be capable of being opened and held in
such an open position by appropriate hardware. Every exterior door, door hinge and door latch shall be in good condition. Every
exterior door, when closed, shall fit reasonably within its frame.
D. Screens: Screens shall be supplied, maintained and installed to the following extent:
1. Every basement or cellar window which is openable shall be supplied with a framed heavy wire screen or hardware cloth of not
less than four (4) mesh per inch (1") which fits tightly and which is securely fastened to the frame, or with any other material
affording equivalent protection against the entry of rodents.
2. From April 15 to November 15 of each year, every door opening directly from any dwelling unit to the outdoors and every window
or other outside opening used for ventilation purposes, shall be supplied with a screen of not less than sixteen (16) mesh per inch
(1") and every screen door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition on it.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 179/251
E. Stairways And Porches: Every stairway, inside or outside of the dwelling, and every porch shall be kept in safe condition and sound
repair. Every flight of stairs and every porch floor shall be free of deterioration. Every stairwell and every flight of stairs which is more
than four (4) risers high shall have rails not less than two and one-half feet (21/2') high, measured vertically from the nose of the
tread to the top of the rail; and every porch which is more than four (4) risers high shall have rails not less than two and one-half feet
(21/2') above the floor of the porch. Every rail and balustrade shall be firmly fastened and maintained in good condition. No flight of
stairs shall have settled more than one inch (1") out of its intended position or have pulled away from supporting or adjacent
structures. No flight of stairs shall have rotting, loose or deteriorating supports. The treads and risers of every flight of stairs shall be
uniform in width and height. Every stair tread shall be strong enough to bear a concentrated load of at least four hundred (400)
pounds without danger of breaking. Every porch shall have a sound floor. No porch shall have rotting, loose or deteriorating
supports.
F. Basements And Cellars: Every basement and every cellar shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition with the required
minimum window area entirely aboveground level. The floors and walls must be constructed in a manner to prevent the entry of
moisture and must be so insulated so as to prevent the condensation of moisture within the room. Water shall not be permitted to
accumulate or to stand on the floor. All sewer connections shall be properly trapped. All cellar and slab drains shall be covered with
grating. Junk, rubbish and waste shall not be permitted to accumulate to such an extent as to create fire hazards or to endanger
health or safety.
G. Facilities, Equipment And Chimneys: Every supplied facility, fixture, system, piece of equipment or utility, and every chimney and
chimney flue shall be installed and maintained in a safe, sound and sanitary working condition, consistent with the requirements of
this Chapter or the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the City.
H. Grading And Drainage Of Lots: Every yard, court, vent, passageway, driveway and any other portion of the lot on which the dwelling
stands shall be graded and drained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water on any such surface. Driveways shall be
maintained in a safe condition, free of safety hazards to the general public.
I. Infestation: Each dwelling and all exterior appurtenances on the premises shall be adequately protected against rats, mice, termites
and other vermin infestation. Remedial steps shall be taken by the owner to correct any problem such as building defects which
permit the entrance of rats, mice, termites and vermin. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-2: SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall let to another for occupancy, any dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements:
A. Minimum Floor Area: Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall have a minimum floor area of seventy (70)
square feet; every room occupied for sleeping purposes by two (2) occupants shall have a minimum floor area of one hundred (100)
square feet; and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by three (3) occupants shall have a minimum floor area of one hundred
fifty (150) square feet and shall contain an additional fifty (50) square feet per each additional person.
B. Bathroom Access: Every room used as a bedroom shall have access to at least one bathroom so that an occupant may enter the
bathroom without passing through another room used as a bedroom.
C. Ceiling Heights: Habitable rooms shall have the following ceiling heights:
1. Basements: Seven feet (7') clear under joists.
2. Main Floor: Any living unit must have eight feet (8') clear for at least seventy five percent (75%) of the floor area.
3. Second Floor: Any living unit must have seven feet (7') clear.
4. Under Sloping Roofs: Ceiling height must be seven feet (7') for not less than fifty percent (50%) of the floor area having four feet
six inches (4'6") or more headroom.
5. Exemption: Existing uses at the date of adoption of this Code, which are exempt from this requirement.
6. Exception: Beams and girders or simulated beams and girders, spaced not less than four feet (4') on center, may not project more
than six inches (6") below the required ceiling height.
D. Combined Living Room/Dining Room: Combined living room/dining room spaces will meet the requirements of this Section if the total
area is equal to that required for separate rooms and if the space is so located that it may function as a combination living
room/dining room. (1997 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 180/251
9-2-5-3: ARTIFICIAL ILLUMINATION:
A. Habitable Room: Every habitable room shall have at least one ceiling or wall-type electrical light fixture or outlet which can be
operated and controlled by an occupant at the entrance to the room.
B. Hallway; Stairway: Every hallway and stairway in a multiple-family dwelling shall be lighted at all times by natural or electric light so as
to provide in all parts thereof at least five (5) foot-candles of light at the tread or floor level. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-4: ELECTRICAL SERVICE:
A. Compliance Required: It shall be unlawful to occupy or permit another to occupy any dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein
which is not adequately and safely provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of the National Electrical
Code adopted by the City.
B. Request For Review: Wherever it is found, in the judgment of the Building Inspector, that the electrical system in the building
constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the building by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, improper or inadequate
grounding of the system, insufficient outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the
Building Inspector shall request a review of said conditions.
C. Prohibited Installations: In addition to the hazards established by the Building Inspector, the following installations are prohibited and
their presence shall be deemed a hazard:
1. Flush or semi-flush mounted floor convenience outlets, unless provided with an approved waterproof cover.
2. Extension cords for other than short-term, temporary use.
3. Conductor-supported pendant switches or conductor supported pendant light fixtures.
4. Loose or hanging wires.
5. Frayed or bare wires.
6. Inadequately grounded, grounded-type convenience outlets. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-5: HEATING:
A. Minimum Requirements: Every dwelling unit shall have heating facilities which are capable of safely and adequately heating all
habitable rooms, bathrooms and water-closet compartments within its walls to a temperature of at least seventy degrees Fahrenheit
(70F) when the outside temperature is ten degrees below zero Fahrenheit (-10F). Gas appliances designed primarily for cooking or
water-heating purposes shall not be considered as heating facilities within the meaning of this Section.
B. Portable Heating Equipment: Portable heating equipment employing flame and the use of fossil fuels does not meet the requirements
of this Section and is prohibitive.
C. Owner Responsibility: The above shall be the sole responsibility of the owner and failure to provide the foregoing shall be a violation
of this Chapter. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-6: WATER HEATING FACILITIES:
A. Minimum Requirements: Every dwelling unit shall have supplied water heating facilities which are properly installed, which are
maintained in safe and good working condition, which are properly connected with the hot water lines required under the provisions
of this Chapter and which are capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn
at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than one hundred twenty degrees
Fahrenheit (120F).
B. Independent From Heating Facilities: Such supplied water heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this
subsection when the dwelling or dwelling unit or rooming unit heating facilities required under the provisions of Section 9-2-5-5 of this
Chapter are not in operation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 181/251
C. Owner Responsibility: The above shall be the sole responsibility of the owner and failure to provide the foregoing shall be a violation
of this Chapter. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-7: VENTILATION:
A. Generally: Every habitable room shall have a ventilation system adequate for the purpose for which the room is used. Natural
ventilation shall be deemed to be adequate for habitation when the total area openable to the outside air (by means of windows,
louvers, monitors or other direct openings excluding doors) is five percent (5%) of the floor area of the habitable room, except that
when:
1. Any portion of the room is more than sixteen feet (16') from a required opening, the aggregate clear area of openings shall be not
less than six percent (6%).
2. A room has openable areas on two (2) or more sides thereof, the total openable area shall be at least four percent (4%) of the
total floor area of such room.
3. The openable area faces a wall or other obstruction at a distance of less than ten feet (10'), the effective area shall be computed
at not more than eighty percent (80%) of the actual openable area.
4. The openable area opens onto an enclosed porch, the enclosed porch shall have an openable area of at least three (3) times the
total required area of the openings onto such porch.
B. Kitchen With Floor Area Of Less Than Seventy Square Feet: A kitchen with a floor area of less than seventy (70) square feet may be
without either mechanical or natural ventilation if there is an opening of not less than thirty two (32) square feet between the kitchen
and another room in the same family unit and if the room into which the kitchen opens has the ventilation requirements of subsection
A above.
C. Toilet And Bathroom: Every toilet room and bathroom shall have adequate ventilation which may be either an openable window with
an openable area of five percent (5%) of the floor area, mechanical ventilation in compliance with the foregoing requirements of this
Section, or a gravity vent flue constructed with incombustible material leading to the roof of the building or a combination of any of
these. The gravity vent shall be computed at an aggregate clear area of not less than five percent (5%) of the floor area of the room
with a minimum area of at least one hundred twenty (120) square inches. Gravity vents shall be provided with a weather cap,
directional vane or rotary-type ventilation on tile roof. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-8: SINKS:
A. Kitchen Sink: Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good repair, free of chips, cracks or other defects which may be a
sanitary hazard, and it shall be in working condition, properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the Building
Inspector.
B. Hot And Cold Water: Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required under the provisions of this Chapter shall be
properly connected with both hot and cold water lines. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-9: BATHROOMS:
A. Required: Every dwelling unit shall contain a bathroom which affords privacy to a person within said room and which is equipped with
a flush water closet, a tub or shower, and a lavatory basin.
B. Additional Facilities: Every dwelling unit with more than eight (8) occupants shall contain additional bathroom facilities at the rate of
one for each additional six (6) occupants or fraction thereof. This requirement shall be mandatory in all dwelling units.
C. Fixtures: All fixtures shall be in good repair and in working condition, properly connected to the public water system and to a public
sewer system. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-10: OUTSIDE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Prohibited Acts:
1. Well, Cistern, Excavation: No owner shall permit any well, cistern, excavation or other depression to exist in a dangerous or
unprotected condition.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 182/251
2. Parking Truck Or Trailer: No owner or occupant shall permit any truck or trailer of one and one-half (11/2) ton capacity or greater,
to be parked on the premises in a residential zone, except for loading or unloading.
3. Storage Of Wood Or Lumber: No wood, lumber or any other material or object shall be stored, kept or permitted to remain except
temporarily on the premises in such a manner that will afford harborage to rats.
4. Exception: This subsection will not apply to recreational vehicles or campers.
B. Wood Exteriors: All exterior wood surfaces on all dwellings shall be reasonably protected from the elements and against decay by a
suitable protective material and must conform with requirements set forth in the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the City
governing exterior weather board and veneers.
C. Garages, Tool Sheds, Outbuildings: All garages, tool sheds and all other outbuildings shall be kept in good repair so as not to be
unsafe or become a harborage for rats and other rodents. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-11: REFUSE, GARBAGE AND RUBBISH:
Every dwelling unit shall have adequate refuse, garbage or rubbish storage facilities provided by the owner of said premises. These
facilities shall comply to the health and garbage ordinances of the City. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-12: DUAL EGRESS:
All dwelling or rooming units in multiple-family dwellings, multiple-use dwellings, duplexes and rooming houses shall be provided with
two (2) separate useable, unobstructed means of egress for each dwelling or dwelling unit. The exit facilities from such dwelling or
rooming units shall lead to a public thoroughfare, either directly or through a court or yard and passage to such exits shall not lead
through another dwelling or rooming unit or through a space that might be locked. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-13: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
A. Accessory structures shall not obstruct light and air of doors and windows of any dwelling unit, or obstruct a safe means of access to
any dwelling unit or create fire and safety hazards or provide rat or vermin harborage. Accessory structures shall be functional and
shall be maintained in a state of good repair and alignment.
B. All exterior appurtenances or accessory structures which serve no useful purpose and which are in a deteriorated condition which is
not economically repairable, shall be removed. Such structures include porches, terraces, entrance platforms, garages, driveways,
carports, walls, fences and miscellaneous sheds. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-14: NUMBER OF ROOMS LIMITED BY ZONING TITLE:
Rooming houses, duplex, apartment and multiple-use dwellings shall contain not more than the number of dwelling or rooming units
authorized by the Zoning Title of this Code2, nor shall any rooming or dwelling unit be occupied by more than the number of persons
which the Zoning Title permits to occupy such a unit. (1997 Code)
9-2-6: OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITIES:
The owner of a multiple-use dwelling, multiple-family dwelling, two-family dwelling, single-family dwelling, hotel or motel has the duty
and responsibility to do or cause to be done the following:
A. Maintenance Of Grounds: To cut, mow, trim and maintain all grass, weeds and other ground cover in such a way that it does not
exceed eight inches (8") in height.
B. Garbage: To provide and maintain receptacles for the collection and disposal of garbage, refuse and debris and similar material of
sufficient size and in sufficient quantity to accommodate the refuse reasonably expected from the occupants of the premises and to
provide for the collection and disposal of the contents thereof.
C. Maintenance: To maintain in operable condition or otherwise in a manner required by law or ordinance all fixtures, equipment and
appurtenances installed in or provided with the premises.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 183/251
D. Screens And Screen Doors: To install and maintain screens and screen doors in accordance with subsection 9-2-5-1D of this
Chapter.
E. Applications And Permits: To file all applications and obtain all required permits and to pay any and all fees required in connection
with the operation of the respective establishments per Section 9-2-3 of this Chapter.
F. Parking Areas And Driveways: To install and maintain all parking areas and driveways.
G. Street Numbers: To affix and maintain on the front of the establishment, street numbers of not less than four inches (4") in height and
of a color contrasting with that of the area to which it is affixed.
H. Smoke Detectors: To install smoke detectors.
1. Definition: The term "smoke detectors" is defined as an approved device that senses visible or invisible particles of combustion.
2. Sleeping Rooms: Smoke detectors are required within each sleeping room of a dwelling unit. The detectors placed in sleeping
rooms are in addition to those required in other locations. Placing smoke detectors within each room will provide the early warning
that occupants of the room need when a fire begins within the sleeping room. Section 1210(a) of the Uniform Building Code states,
"in dwelling units, a detector shall be installed in each sleeping room and at a point centrally located in the corridor (hallway) or
area giving access to each separate sleeping area (room)".
3. Multiple Stories: When the dwelling unit has more than one story and in dwellings with basements, a detector shall be installed on
each story and in the basement.
4. Split Levels: In dwelling units where a story or basement is split into two (2) or more levels, the smoke detector shall be installed
on the upper level except that when the lower level contains a sleeping area, a detector shall be placed at the ceiling of the upper
level in close proximity to the stairway.
5. Sound Of Alarm: Detectors shall sound an alarm audible in all sleeping areas of the dwelling unit in which they are located.
6. Addition, Alteration, Repair: When the valuation of an addition, alteration or repair exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
when one or more sleeping rooms are added or created in existing dwellings, the entire building shall be provided with smoke
detectors located as required for new dwellings. (See UBC sec. 1210A)
I. Maintenance: To maintain all installed smoke detector devices in operable condition.
J. Compliance Required: To operate and maintain the establishment in complete compliance with all codes of the City. (1997 Code)
9-2-7: OCCUPANT'S RESPONSIBILITIES:
Every occupant of a multi-use dwelling, multiple-family dwelling, two-family dwelling, single-family dwelling, hotel or motel and rooming
house shall be responsible for the following as applied to the portion of the living unit that they occupy or have access to:
A. Reasonable Care; Proper Use: To exercise reasonable care and make proper use of the living unit and its facilities.
B. Clean And Sanitary: To keep the occupied area and all plumbing equipment and cooking facilities and any other equipment or
facilities that are provided operating in a clean and sanitary fashion.
C. Rubbish And Garbage: To dispose of rubbish and garbage or to store such waste in the proper containers as provided by the owners
in a neat and sanitary manner.
D. Compliance Required: To operate and maintain the living unit in complete compliance with all codes of the City. (1997 Code)
9-2-8: INSPECTION:
A. Authority To Inspect: The Building Inspector or Fire Inspector is authorized and directed to make inspections to determine whether
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, accessory structures and premises, hotels and motels located within this City conform to
requirements of this Chapter and other applicable Chapters of the City Code.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 184/251
B. Right Of Entry:
1. Free Access: For the purpose of making such inspections, the Building Inspector or Fire Inspector is authorized to enter, examine
and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, accessory structures and premises, hotels and
motels. The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, accessory structure and its premises, hotels and
motels shall grant the Building Inspector or Fire Inspector free access thereto at all reasonable times for the purpose of such
inspection, examination and survey.
2. Denied Access: In the event the owner or occupant shall refuse access to any premises, then the Building Inspector or Fire
Inspector shall have authority to enter any of such premises after written notice has been given to the owner, occupant or his/her
agent. (1997 Code)
9-2-9: NONCOMPLIANCE:
A. Notice Of Violation: Whenever the Building Inspector or Fire Inspector determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that
there has been a violation of any provision of this Chapter, the Building Inspector or Fire Inspector will give notice of such alleged
violation to the person responsible therefor, which shall:
1. Be in writing;
2. Contain a statement of the reason for which it is being issued;
3. Contain an outline of remedial action, which if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this Chapter;
4. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act which it requires;
B. Service Of Notice; Posting: Such notice shall be served upon the owner or owner's agent, or the occupant, as the case may require.
Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or agent, or upon any such occupant if a copy thereof is:
1. Served upon the owner, owner's agent or occupant personally; or
2. Sent by regular first class mail, postage prepaid, to such owner, owner's agent, or occupant's last known address; or
3. Posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by notice. (1997 Code)
9-2-10: CONDEMNATION AND DEMOLITION:
The designation of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, hotels, and motels as unfit for human habitation and the procedure for the
condemnation, placarding and demolition of such unfit dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, hotels and motels shall be carried out in
compliance with the following requirements. (1997 Code)
9-2-10-1: PLACARD ON BUILDING:
The designation of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, hotels, or motels, as unfit for human habitation and the procedure for such
declaration and placarding is as follows:
A. Any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, hotel or motel which shall be found to have any of the following defects shall be declared
unfit for human habitation and shall be so designated and placarded by the Building Inspector or Fire Inspector:
1. One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or vermin infested that it creates a serious hazard to the
health and safety of the occupants or of the public.
2. One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the
public.
3. One which because of its general condition or location is unsanitary or otherwise dangerous to the health or safety of the
occupants or of the public.
4. Where the person responsible has failed to correct, in a timely manner, the condition described in a notice issued in accordance
with Section 9-2-9 of this Chapter. (1997 Code)
9-2-10-2: VACATION OF BUILDING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 185/251
A. Time Limitation: Any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, hotel or motel condemned as unfit for human habitation, and so designated
and placarded by the Building Inspector or Fire Inspector shall be vacated within a reasonable time, not to exceed sixty (60) days, as
ordered by the Building Inspector or Fire Inspector.
B. Rehabitation: No dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, hotel or motel which has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human
habitation shall again be used for human habitation until written approval is secured from and such placard is removed by the
Building Inspector or Fire Inspector. The Inspector shall remove such placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the
condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated.
C. Court Order: Where a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, hotel or motel is condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation,
and is not vacated within time specified in such vacation order, the Building Inspector or Fire Inspector shall seek a court order in a
court of competent jurisdiction for the vacation of such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, hotel or motel. (1997 Code)
9-2-10-3: REMOVAL OF PLACARD PROHIBITED:
No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, hotel or motel which has been condemned
as unfit for human habitation and placarded as such, except as provided in Section 9-2-10-2 above. (1997 Code)
9-2-10-4: RIGHT OF APPEAL:
A. Notice Of Appeal: Any person affected by any notice or order relating to the condemnation or placarding of a dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming unit, hotel or motel as unfit for human habitation, or any interpretation of this Chapter, may appeal and request in writing,
within ten (10) days of such notice, a hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals in the manner described in the Title 12 of this
Code.
B. Hearing: Upon receipt of such notice of appeal, a hearing shall be held and decision rendered.
C. Stay Of Proceedings: Any such appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Building
Inspector or Fire Inspector shall certify to the Zoning Board of Appeals subsequent to the filing of any notice of appeal that, by
reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not
be stayed other than by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. (1997 Code)
9-2-10-5: NONCOMPLIANCE; REMEDY OF DEFECTS:
A. Time Limitations: The owner of any building shall have the period of time specified in the letter of notice required to be sent by
subsection 9-2-9A of this Chapter, in which to remedy the condition therein described, except when an emergency situation requires
immediate action, as provided in Section 9-2-12 of this Chapter. The Building Inspector or Fire Inspector may extend the time for
compliance with any such notice.
B. Failure To Comply: It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any order of the Building Inspector or Fire Inspector
contained in a notice described in Section 9-2-9 or Section 9-2-12 of this Chapter. (1997 Code)
9-2-10-6: CONDEMNED BUILDINGS:
A. Removal By Owner:
1. Order To Demolish: A dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, hotel or motel which subject to condemnation and placarding as unfit
for human habitation may be ordered demolished by the Building Inspector if it is determined by the Building Inspector that such
defects upon which the condemnation order is based cannot be economically remedied.
2. Demolition: Demolition according to requirements listed below may be required of the owner within a reasonable period of time,
said period of time to be not less than thirty (30) days after notice is served on said owner. Such demolition shall have the effect of
fulfilling the requirements of removing defects if the dwelling structure is razed to ground level and any subsurface area is filled
with solid material to ground level.
B. Removal By City: A dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, hotel or motel which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and
ordered demolished and which has not been demolished by the owner within the time specified in such demolition order, may be
demolished at the expense of the owner, according to the following procedure:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 186/251
1. In accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings and pursuant to 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-31-1, the corporate authorities shall apply to the Circuit Court of Henry County for an order authorizing the
demolition of said dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, hotel or motel unfit for human habitation.
2. After order of demolition is entered in the Circuit Court of Henry County, the corporate authorities shall then proceed to demolish
said building or dwelling, dwelling unit, hotel or motel, or rooming house at the owner's expense.
3. Cost Of Removal; Lien: All expenses incurred, including attorney fees, shall be the responsibility of the owner of record, and said
expenses, including attorney fees, shall further be a lien on the real estate.
C. Accessory Buildings: All accessory buildings must be removed at the time of removal of the principal building. (1997 Code)
9-2-10-7: VACATED BUILDINGS MADE SECURE:
The owner of every dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, hotel or motel which is declared unfit for human habitation or for continued
occupancy shall make the dwelling unit, rooming unit, dwelling, hotel or motel, safe and secure under the terms so that it shall not be
dangerous to human life and shall not constitute a fire hazard or public nuisance. Any such vacant dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit,
hotel or motel, open at doors or windows, if unguarded, shall be deemed to be dangerous to human life as a fire hazard and as a public
nuisance with the meaning of this provision. (1997 Code)
9-2-11: BROKEN GLASS; BOARDING UP:
A. Broken Glass; Replacement: Every window, glazed exterior door, exterior transom or exterior sidelight, shall be provided with properly
installed glass or other approved glazing material. In the event of breakage, the owner shall cause the immediate removal of broken
glass from the premises and shall temporarily board up the affected openings with suitable material to provide protection from the
elements and to prevent entry of insects, birds or animals and to provide security to occupants or contents of the building.
B. Ventilation; Lighting: Adequate ventilation and artificial lighting shall be provided for all occupied dwellings, dwelling units, rooming
units, hotels or motels.
C. Notice To Repair: Whenever any exterior openings are found boarded up, it shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to notify the
owner or agent of this requirement by giving the owner or owner's agent a period of not more than ten (10) working days in which to
properly replace the broken glass, or the dwelling unit, rooming unit, dwelling, hotel or motel shall be vacated. This notice shall be
given in the manner required by Section 9-2-9, and it shall be unlawful for any owner or agent to fail to comply with the order of the
Building Inspector contained in such notice.
D. Boarding Up:
1. Specifications: Since the presence of boarded up buildings, particularly those where the boarding is unpainted or applied in an
insecure, careless or unpresentable fashion, invites vandalism and creates a blighting influence which adversely affects the
general welfare of the people of this City, it is hereby required that all boarding up of exterior openings be accomplished in a neat,
workmanlike manner, with not less than one-half inch (1/2") thick, weather resistant plywood cut to fit within openings, fastened in
place as securely as possible and suitably coated with an appropriate neutral color blending with or harmonizing with the exterior
colors of the building as inconspicuously as possible.
2. Notice Of Noncompliance: It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to notify the owner or agent of any boarded up dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming unit, hotel or motel not complying with the above requirements, of the necessity of compliance by giving the
owner or agent a period of not more than ten (10) working days in which to replace the broken glass, or in which to repair, replace
or paint the boarding. This notice shall be given in the manner required in Section 9-2-9, and it shall be unlawful for any owner or
agent to fail to comply with the order of the Building Inspector contained in such notice. (1997 Code)
9-2-12: EMERGENCY MEASURES:
A. Revocation Of Permit; Order To Vacate: When any dwelling unit, rooming unit, dwelling, hotel or motel, has become so damaged by
fire, wind or other causes, or has become so unsafe, unhealthful or unsanitary, that in the opinion of the Building Inspector, life or
health is immediately endangered by the occupation of the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, hotel or motel, the Building Inspector
is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke without notice, any occupancy permits for such dwellings, dwelling units, rooming
units, hotels or motels, and to order and require the occupants to vacate the same forthwith and to order the owner or agent to
proceed immediately with the corrective work and repairs required to make the dwelling, dwelling units, rooming unit, hotel or motel
temporarily safe and fit for human habitation, whether or not a notice of violation has been given as described in this Chapter, and
whether or not legal procedures described by ordinances of the City have been instituted.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 187/251
B. Failure To Comply: It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any emergency order of the Building Inspector.
C. Declaration Of Emergency: Whenever the Building Inspector finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to
protect the health and safety of the residents or of the public, the Building Inspector may issue an order citing the existence of an
emergency and requiring immediate action to be taken as deemed necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding other
provisions of this Chapter, such order shall take effect immediately. (1997 Code)
9-2-13: PENALTY:
A. Violation Declared Nuisance: The existence or use of any rooming house, duplex, apartment, single-family dwelling, multiple-use
dwelling, hotel or motel as defined in this Chapter in violation of any provision of this Chapter is hereby declared to be and shall
constitute a public nuisance.
B. Violation; Penalty: Any owner, lessee, agent, tenant or other person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Chapter, upon
being found guilty, shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section 1-4-1 of this Code for each violation.
C. Continuing Violation: Each day that any such violation or failure continues shall be considered a separate and distinct offense and
shall be punishable as such. (1997 Code)
Chapter 3
HOUSE NUMBERING1
9-3-1: UNIFORM PLAN:
All houses in the City shall be numbered in accordance with a uniform plan set out in the plat of the City. All numbers must be in a color
contrasting to the color of the house and a minimum size of three inches (3") high. Such number shall be placed in front of or on the
front part of each house is the City. It shall be unlawful for any house to display a number other than the one herein authorized. (1997
Code)
9-3-2: COPY ON FILE:
The City Clerk shall keep a copy of said plan on file in the Clerk's office for the purpose of advising owners the numbers to be displayed
on their homes. (1997 Code)
Chapter 4
FENCES1
9-4-1: HEIGHT:
A. Rear yard: No fence shall be over six feet (6') above the ground level.
B. Side yard: No fence shall be higher than forty eight inches (48") between the front and rear of principal building.
C. Front yard: No fence shall be higher than forty eight inches (48") and fence shall be open spaced at least two inches (2") or equal to
pickets, or chain linked. (Ord. 0-18-06, 2-12-2018)
9-4-2: FRONT YARD:
No fence shall be erected in any front yard so as to obstruct the view of adjacent property within two hundred fifty feet (250'). (1997
Code)
9-4-3: BARBED WIRE, ELECTRIC FENCES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 188/251
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any electric fence or any fence constructed in whole or in part of barbed wire or to
use barbed wire as a guard to any parking lot, stairway, entrance to a building or parcel of land. (1997 Code)
9-4-4: PROPERTY PINS:
Property pins must be visible before permits for any type of construction or fence erecting is allowed. (Ord. 0-19-10, 5-10-2010)
Chapter 5
SWIMMING POOLS1
9-5-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain, install or enlarge any swimming pool in the city except in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. (1997 Code)
9-5-2: DEFINITION:
The term "swimming pool" is hereby defined as a receptacle for water or an artificial pool of water having a depth at any point of more
than two feet (2'), intended for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion of human beings, and including all appurtenant equipment.
(1997 Code)
9-5-3: LOCATION:
No portion of a swimming pool outside a building shall be located at a distance less than eight feet (8') from any side or rear property
line or building line. Pumps, filters and pool water disinfection equipment installations shall be located at a distance not less than eight
feet (8') from any side property line. No swimming pool may be located in the front yard as defined in section 9-2-2 of this title. (Ord. 00-
16, 5-22-2000)
9-5-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction, enlargement or alteration of any private, residential swimming pool and
appurtenances within the city unless permits therefor shall have been first obtained from the building inspector. (1997 Code)
9-5-5: DRAWINGS, PLANS AND PERMITS:
A. Submission; Approval: All drawings and plans for the construction, installation, enlargement or alteration of any swimming pool and
appurtenances shall first be presented to the building inspector for examination and approval as to proper location and construction.
B. Specifications: All plans and drawings shall be drawn to scale of not less than one-eighth inch (1/8") to one foot (1'), on paper or cloth,
in ink or by some process that will not fade or obliterate. All distances and dimensions shall be accurately figured and drawings
made explicit and complete, showing the lot line and including information pertaining to the pool, walk and fence construction, water
supply system, drainage and water disposal systems and all appurtenances pertaining to the swimming pool. Detail plans and
vertical elevations shall also be provided in accordance with the building code.
C. Conformity With Approved Plans: All private, residential swimming pools, appurtenances, water supply and drainage systems shall
be constructed in conformity with the approved plans. (1997 Code)
9-5-6: RECIRCULATION:
All swimming pools shall be of the recirculation type in which circulation of the water is maintained through the pool by pumps, the water
drawn from the pool being chlorinated and disinfected before being returned to the pool. (1997 Code)
9-5-7: CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 189/251
Swimming pool walls and floors shall be constructed of any impervious material which will provide a tight tank with white or light colored
finish and easily cleaned surfaces. The floor or bottom surface of the pool shall have a nonslip finish as smooth as possible. The side
and end walls of a pool shall present a smooth finish and shall be vertical to a depth of at least six feet (6') or shall have a slope or
curvature meeting one of the following conditions:
A. The pool walls may be vertical for thirty inches (30") from the water level, below which the wall may be curved to the bottom with a
radius at any point equal to the difference between the depth at that point and thirty inches (30").
B. To a depth of six feet (6'), except as in subsection A of this section, the wall's slope shall not be less than one foot (1') horizontal in six
feet (6') vertical. (1997 Code)
9-5-8: STRUCTURAL DESIGN:
Swimming pools shall be designed to withstand the water pressure from within and resist the pressure of the earth when the pool is
empty, to a pressure of two thousand two hundred (2,200) pounds per square foot. The slope of the bottom of any part of a pool in which
the water is less than five feet (5') in depth shall not be more than one foot (1') in each ten feet (10'). The maximum slope where water is
five feet (5') or more in depth shall not exceed one foot (1') in two feet (2'). (1997 Code)
9-5-9: WALK AREAS:
Unobstructed walk areas not less than thirty six inches (36") wide shall be provided to extend entirely around the pool. The walk area
shall be constructed of impervious material and the surfaces shall be of such as to be smooth and easily cleaned and of nonslip
construction. The slope of the walks shall have a pitch of at least one-fourth inch (1/4") to the foot, designed so as to prevent backing
drainage from entering the pool. (1997 Code)
9-5-10: FENCES:
A. Fence Required: All outdoor swimming pools having a water depth of three feet (3') or more shall be completely enclosed by a fence.
In determining if a pool has three feet (3') depth the manufacturer's established stated depth for the facility shall be conclusive of the
pool's considered depth for water, notwithstanding any measured active depth at any given time. (Ord. 0-10-10, 11-9-2009)
B. Gates: All fence openings or points of entry into pool area enclosure shall be equipped with gates. All gates shall be equipped with
self-closing and self-latching devices placed at the top of the gate. (1997 Code)
C. Specifications: The fence and gates shall not be less than four (4) or more than six feet (6') in height above the grade level and shall
be constructed of a minimum number of gauge woven wire mesh, corrosion resistant material or similar material. However, a private
swimming pool fence may be constructed of treated CCA cedar or redwood. (Ord. 0-10-10, 11-9-2009)
D. Fence Posts: Fence posts shall be decay or corrosion resistant and shall be set in concrete bases.
E. Maintenance: All fences shall be maintained in a safe condition. (1997 Code)
F. Acceptable Enclosures: Pool enclosures which are attached to the top of the pool, according to the manufacturer's recommendations,
and which have a locking gate will be considered an acceptable enclosure. This will only be considered an acceptable enclosure as
long as any stairs going up to the pool are removed or have a locking gate at the bottom of the entrance to the stairs accessing the
pool. (Ord. 0-06-12, 6-11-2012)
9-5-11: STEPS AND LADDERS:
There must be one or more means of egress in the forms of steps or ladders provided for all swimming pools. Treads of steps and
ladders shall be constructed of nonslip material and at least three inches (3") wide for the full length. Steps and ladders shall have a
handrail on both sides. (Ord. 0-10-10, 11-9-2009)
9-5-12: SKIMMERS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 190/251
In every swimming pool at least one skimming device shall be provided for each eight hundred (800) square feet of surface area or
fraction thereof. Skimmers shall be located at least thirty feet (30') apart. Handholds shall be provided and consist of all bullnosed
coping not over two and one-half inches (21/2") thick for the two inches (2") or an equivalent approved handhold. The handhold must be
no more than nine inches (9") above the normal water line. Skimming devices shall be built into the pool wall, shall adequately remove
floated oils and waste and shall meet the following general specifications:
A. Flow Through Rate: Each skimmer shall be designed for a flow through rate of at least thirty (30) gallons per minute and a total
capacity of all skimmers on any pool shall be at least fifty percent (50%) of the required flow of the recirculation system.
B. Automatically Adjustable: They shall be automatically adjustable with variations in water level over a range of at least three inches
(3").
C. Basket Or Screen: An easily removable and cleanable basket or screen through which all overflow water must pass shall be provided
to trap large solids.
D. Airlock Prevention: The skimmer shall be provided with a device to prevent airlock in the suction line. If an equalizer pipe is used, it
shall provide an adequate amount of make up water for pump suction should the water of the pool drop below the air level. This pipe
shall be at least two inches (2") in diameter and shall be located at least one foot (1') below the lowest overflow level of the skimmer.
E. Equalizer Line: An equalizer line shall be provided with a valve that will remain tightly closed under normal operating conditions, but
will automatically open at a differential of not more than four inches (4") between the pool level and the level of the overflow tank.
F. Overflow Weir: The overflow weir shall be of sufficient length to maintain a rate of flow of at least twenty (20) gallons per minute per
linear foot of weir lip. (1997 Code)
9-5-13: WATER SUPPLY:
No source of water other than that secured from the city waterworks distribution system shall be used in swimming pools. (1997 Code)
9-5-14: INLETS:
A. Location: Swimming pool water recirculation system inlets shall be located so as to produce, so far as possible, uniform circulation of
water throughout the pool without the existence of dead spots and to carry pool bottom deposits to the outlets and shall discharge at
a minimum depth of ten inches (10") below the pool overflow level. Minimum of one recirculation system inlet shall be provided for
every six hundred fifteen (615) square feet of surface area of the pool.
B. Make Up Water: Pools shall be equipped with suitable facilities for adding make up water as needed. There shall be no physical
connection between the water supply line and the pool system. If the make up water is added directly to the pool, the outlet shall be
at least six inches (6") above the upper rim of the pool. If the make up water line discharges to a surge or balancing tank, the point of
discharge shall be at least six inches (6") above the rim of the tank. If a hose connection from a sill cock or other plumbing fixture is
to be used for supplying make up water, then an approved vacuum breaker shall be installed between the sill cock or control valve at
the fixture and the hose connection. The vacuum breaker shall be installed at a height not less than seven feet six inches (7'6")
above floor, platform or ground, upon which a person would stand when operating the sill cock or control valve. Minimum size of the
fill pipe is two inches (2").
C. Conformance With Ordinances: The systems supplying recirculated water and make up water to the pool shall be constructed in
conformance with the ordinances relating to plumbing. (1997 Code)
9-5-15: OUTLETS:
A. Location:
1. Pool Thirty Feet Wide Or Less: In swimming pools thirty feet (30') in width or less, water circulation system outlets shall be located
so as to provide at least one outlet at the deepest point in the pool.
2. Pool More Than Thirty Feet Wide: If the pool width is more than thirty feet (30'), multiple outlets shall be provided and spaced not
more than thirty feet (30') apart, nor closer than four feet (4') to any wall.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 191/251
3. Gratings: All pool drain outlets shall be equipped with gratings having an area of openings not less than four (4) times the cross
sectional area of the outlet pipe. The gratings shall be of such design so they cannot be readily removable by bathers and will not
injure bathers' fingers.
4. Number Required: One outlet shall be provided for each eight hundred (800) square feet of surface area.
B. Facility To Empty Pool: Pools shall be equipped with facilities for completely emptying the pool and the discharge of the pool water to
the storm sewer shall be at a rate not exceeding two hundred (200) gallons per minute. No direct connection shall be made to the
sewer.
C. Discharge Into Storm Sewer: Water drained from the pool shall not be discharged to the storm sewer system during periods of rain or
storms. At no time shall the rate of drain water discharge exceed a flow of two hundred (200) gallons per minute. (1997 Code)
9-5-16: RECIRCULATION SYSTEM AND APPURTENANCES:
A. Components: The swimming pool's recirculation system shall consist of plumbing equipment, hair and lint catcher, filters together with
the necessary pipe connections to the pool inlets and outlets, facilities and pipe connections necessary for backwashing filters and
facilities and equipment for disinfecting the pool water.
B. Capacity:
1. Hourly: Every swimming pool shall have a recirculating system with an hourly capacity equal to the pool volume divided by eight
(8).
2. Turnover: The recirculation system pump shall have sufficient capacity to discharge the volume of water required for an eight (8)
hour turnover of the pool against the maximum head in the recirculation system.
C. Pump: The pump used for backwashing filters shall have sufficient capacity to provide a filter backwash rate of at least twelve (12)
gallons per minute per square foot of filter area.
D. Hair And Lint Catcher; Strainer: A hair and lint catcher or strainer shall be installed on the suction side of the circulation pump to
prevent hair, lint and other extraneous matter from reaching the pump and filters. Hair and lint catchers shall be so designed that
they can be easily dismantled for cleaning and inspection and shall be so located as to be easily accessible for cleaning. The design
features shall be as follows:
1. Water passes through the strainer from the outside;
2. The strainer is made of noncorrosive material, the width or diameter of strainer openings shall be not more than one-eighth inch
(1/8");
3. The area of the strainer openings shall be at least five (5) times the cross sectional area of the inlet pipe to the strainer.
E. Rapid Pressure Filters: Recirculating systems shall contain rapid pressure filters. Sufficient filter area shall be provided to filter the
entire contents of the pool in eighteen (18) hours at the rate of not more than three (3) gallons per square foot of filter area per
minute. The filter backwashing facilities shall be sufficient to backwash at a rate of twelve (12) gallons per minute per square foot of
filter area.
F. Backwash Water And Effluents: All backwash water and effluents shall be discharged to the sewer through an indirect connection.
Pressure filters shall be equipped with readily accessible air relief valves, loss of head or pressure gauges on the inlet and outlet
pipes and an access head or hold large enough to permit inspection, maintenance and repair work. Sight glasses that can be easily
removed for cleaning shall be provided in the effluent line from the filter units.
G. Disinfection: Equipment shall be provided for the disinfection of all pool water. Any disinfection method using materials other than
chlorine compounds shall be subject to the approval of the building inspector. Disinfection equipment installed for the use of chlorine
compounds shall have sufficient capacity to maintain a minimum free chlorine residual of five-tenths (0.5) parts per million. The
disinfection shall be introduced into the recirculation system ahead of the filters.
H. Gaseous Chlorination Systems Prohibited: Gaseous chlorination systems shall not be made use of as a disinfection method for pool
water. (1997 Code)
9-5-17: ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 192/251
A. Compliance Required: All electrical installations provided for, installed and used in conjunction with private, residential swimming
pools, shall be in conformance with the ordinances regulating electrical installations.
B. Location Of Conductors: No current carrying electrical conductors shall cross private, residential swimming pools, either overhead or
underground or within fifteen feet (15') of such pools.
C. Grounding: All metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to swimming pools, which might become electrically alive as a
result of contact with broken overhead conductors or from any other cause, shall be effectively grounded. (1997 Code)
9-5-18: SAFETY PRECAUTIONS:
Every swimming pool shall be equipped with one or more throwing ring buoys not more than fifteen inches (15") in diameter and having
sixty feet (60') of three-sixteenths inch (3/16") manila line attached and one or more light but strong poles with blunted ends and not less
than twelve feet (12') in length, for making reach assists or rescues. (1997 Code)
9-5-19: INSPECTION:
The building inspector, any member of the police department or the public works director shall have the authority to inspect all swimming
pools to determine whether or not the provisions of this code regarding health, sanitation and safety applicable hereto are being
complied with. (Ord. 0-10-10, 11-9-2009)
9-5-20: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall subject the violator to a penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1997 Code)
9-5-21: POOL MAINTENANCE:
During the time between May 15 and October 1 of each year owners of swimming pools must maintain the pools in a sanitary, clear and
clean manner. Water must be clear of algae, kept from being stagnate in order to avoid mosquito breeding and to avoid noxious smells
which are considered to be adverse to public health, safety and welfare.
Unless a pool is closed for the season the owners must continue to clean, aerate and chemically treat to keep the contained water in a
sightly, healthy and environmentally safe fashion. (Ord. 0-10-10, 11-9-2009)
Chapter 6
DEMOLITIONS
9-6-1: DEMOLITIONS:
A. All demolitions of any structure require a permit.
B. The price of the permit shall be set from time to time by the city council.
C. The permit is valid for sixty (60) days.
D. The demolition area shall be fenced off so that the demolition is not a hazard to pedestrians or children. The fencing shall be installed
to the satisfaction of the building inspector.
E. Demolition shall not involve burning of the structure or any parts thereof without the approval of the building inspector or the city
council. (Ord. 00-22, 10-9-2000)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 193/251
Chapter 7
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
9-7-1: PURPOSE:
The city of Colona recognizes that the city desires to encourage the orderly development of wireless communication technologies for the
benefit of the city and its citizens.
As a matter of public policy, the city of Colona aims to encourage the delivery of new wireless technologies throughout the city while
controlling the proliferation of communication towers. Such development activities will promote and protect the health, safety, prosperity
and general welfare of those residents living in the city of Colona.
Specifically, this wireless communication facility telecommunication chapter is designed to achieve the following:
A. Provide a range of locations for wireless communication facilities in various zoning districts;
B. Encourage the location of wireless communication facilities onto existing structures to reduce the number of new communication
towers needed within the city of Colona;
C. Encourage collocation and site sharing of new and existing wireless communication facilities;
D. Control the type of tower facility constructed, when towers are permitted;
E. Establish adequate development and design criteria to enhance the ability of providers of telecommunications services to provide
service to the community quickly and efficiently;
F. Protect residential, historic preservation areas, and scenic corridors from the uncontrolled development of wireless communications
facilities by requiring reasonable siting conditions;
G. Promote the use of suitable sites (public and private) for the location of wireless antenna towers, and/or wireless communication
facilities;
H. Ensure the harmonious orderly and efficient growth and development of the city of Colona;
I. Stabilize the economy of the city of Colona through the continued use of the city's suitable public resources;
J. Provide areas in which the zoning regulations permit the development of wireless communication facilities which are consistent with
the requirements of the telecommunications act of 1996 and in the best interest of the future of the city of Colona;
K. Provide clear performance standards addressing the sitting of wireless communication facilities; and
L. Streamline and expedite the permitting procedures to effect compliance with the federal telecommunications act of 1996. (Ord. 15-01,
9-10-2001)
9-7-2: CERTAIN USES NOT COVERED BY THIS CHAPTER:
Nothing in this chapter shall reduce any of the permitted uses of any zoned property within the city of Colona. Nothing in this chapter
shall affect the right of a property owner to use or develop their property consistent with existing zoning regulations. Nothing in this
chapter shall affect the right of a property owner to continue any legal nonconforming use. (Ord. 15-01, 9-10-2001)
9-7-3: INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS:
A. Construction Of Other Ordinances: To the extent this chapter conflicts with the zoning ordinance, sign ordinance or any other
ordinance of the city of Colona, this chapter shall control.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 194/251
B. Definitions: For the purposes of this chapter, certain words, phrases and terms used herein shall be interpreted as stated in this
section. The zoning enforcement officer shall define any word, phrase or term not defined herein. All definitions defined herein are in
addition to those definitions in the city of Colona zoning ordinance.
ANTENNA ARRAY: One or more rods, panels, discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency
signals, which may include omnidirectional antenna (rod), directional antenna (panel) and parabolic antenna (disc). The antenna
array does not include the support structure.
ATTACHED WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY: An antenna array that is attached to an existing building or structure
(attachment structure), structures shall include, but not be limited to, utility poles, signs, water towers, rooftops, towers with any
accompanying pole or device (attachment device) which attaches the antenna array to the existing building or structure and
associated connection cables, and an equipment facility which may be located either inside or outside of the attachment structure.
COLLOCATION/SITE SHARING: Use of a common site by more than one wireless communication facility or common site by more
than one wireless communication license holder or by one wireless license holder for more than one type of communications
technology and/or placement of a wireless communication facility on a structure owned or operated by a utility or other public entity.
EQUIPMENT FACILITY: Any structure used to contain ancillary equipment for a wireless communication facility that includes
cabinets, shelters, a build out of an existing structure, pedestals, and other similar structures.
FAA: Federal aviation administration.
FCC: Federal communications commission.
FTA: Federal telecommunications act of 1996.
HEIGHT: When referring to a wireless communication facility, height shall mean the distance measured from ground level to the
highest point on the wireless communication facility, excluding the antenna array.
SETBACK: The required distance from the property line of the parcel on which the wireless communication facility is located to the
base of the support structure and equipment shelter or cabinet where applicable, or, in the case of guy-wire supports, the guy
anchors.
SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A structure designed and constructed specifically to support an antenna array, and may include a
monopole, self-supporting (lattice) tower, guy-wire support tower and other similar structures. Any device (attachment device) that is
used to attach an attached wireless communication facility to an existing building or structure (attachment structure) shall be
excluded from the definition of and regulations applicable to support structures.
TEMPORARY WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY: A wireless communication facility to be in use for ninety (90) or fewer
days.
TOWER USE PERMIT (TUP): A permit issued by the city of Colona specifically for the location, construction and use of a wireless
communication facility subject to an approved site plan with any special conditions determined by the zoning administrator to be
appropriate under the provision of this chapter.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY: A wireless communication facility is any unstaffed facility used for the transmission and/or
reception of wireless telecommunications services, usually consisting of an antenna array, connection cables, an equipment facility,
and support structure to achieve the necessary elevation.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS: Any personal wireless services as defined in the telecommunications act of 1996, which includes
FCC licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services including cellular, personal communication services (PCS),
specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESNM), paging, and similar services that currently exist. (Ord.
15-01, 9-10-2001)
9-7-4: DESIGNATION AND APPLICABILITY:
The city of Colona shall designate certain areas to allow wireless communication facilities. Said areas shall be determined from time to
time by the city council and be in accordance with the zoning code and comprehensive plan of the city of Colona and any statutes that
may apply. Facilities requiring support structures may not be permitted within the same location as those without support structures.
A. Permit Required: No person, firm or corporation shall install or construct any wireless communication facility unless and until a tower
use permit (TUP) has been issued pursuant to the requirements of this chapter.
B. Preexisting Wireless Communication Facility: Wireless communications facilities for which a permit has been issued prior to the
effective date hereof shall be considered nonconforming and shall be required to meet the requirements of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 195/251
C. Amateur Radio Exclusion: This chapter shall not govern the installation of any amateur radio facility that is owned and operated by a
federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for "receive only" antennas. Such installations shall comply
with any other applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance.
D. Relationship To Other Ordinances: This chapter shall supersede all conflicting requirements of other ordinances regarding the
locating and permitting of wireless communication facilities.
E. Building Codes: Construction of all wireless communication facilities shall comply with the requirements of the city of Colona building
code and permitting process in addition to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 15-01, 9-10-2001)
9-7-5: ALLOWABLE USES; DEVELOPMENT CRITERIA:
Allowable uses, subject to the limitations within each overlay district, will include the underlying zoning districts plus wireless
communication facilities in compliance with the following development criteria:
A. Height Standards: The following height standards shall apply to all wireless communications facility installations:
1. Attached Wireless Communications Facilities: Attached wireless communication facilities shall not add more than twenty feet (20')
to the height of the existing building or structure to which that it is attached (attachment structure). However, antenna attachments
to existing communication towers shall not increase the height of tower above the maximum permitted height of that tower.
2. Wireless Communication Facilities With Support Structures: Wireless communication facilities with support structures shall not
have a maximum height of tower above the maximum permitted height of that tower.
B. Setback Standards: The following setback standards shall apply to all wireless communication facility installation:
1. Attached Wireless Communications Facilities: Attached wireless communications facilities shall meet the setback provisions of the
zoning code in which they are located. However, an attached wireless communication facility antenna array may extend up to thirty
inches (30") horizontally beyond the edge of the attachment structure so long as the antenna array does not encroach upon an
adjoining parcel.
2. Wireless Communications Facilities Monopole Support Structures: Wireless communications facilities with monopole support
structure shall meet the setback requirements for principal structures of the zoning code in which they are located.
C. Landscaping: The following landscaping requirements shall apply to all wireless communications facility installations:
1. New Construction: New wireless communications facilities with support structures and attached wireless communication facilities
with new building construction shall be landscaped in accordance with the applicable provisions of the landscape ordinance that
may now or hereafter be adopted.
2. Land Form Preservation: Existing mature tree growth and natural land form on the site shall be preserved as feasible; provided
however, vegetation that causes interference with the antennas or inhibits access to the equipment facility may be trimmed or
removed.
3. Existing Vegetation: Existing vegetation on a wireless communication facility site may be used in lieu of required landscaping
where approved by the zoning enforcement officer.
D. Aesthetics, Placement, Materials And Colors: Wireless communications facilities shall be designated so as to be compatible with the
existing structures and surroundings, including placement in a location which is consistent with proper functioning of the wireless
communication facility, the use of compatible or neutral colors, or camouflage technology.
E. Lighting And Signage: The following lighting and signage requirements shall apply to all wireless communications facilities
installations:
1. Artificial Illumination: Wireless communication facilities shall not be artificially illuminated, directly or indirectly, except for:
a. Security and safety lighting of equipment buildings if such lighting is appropriately down shielded to keep light within the
boundaries of the site; and
b. Such illumination of the wireless communications facility as may be required by the FAA or other applicable authority installed in
a manner to minimize impacts on adjacent residences.
c. Unless otherwise required by the FAA or other applicable authority, the required light shall be red and shielded upward.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 196/251
2. Signage: Wireless communications facilities shall not display any signage, logos, decals, symbols or any messages of a
commercial or noncommercial nature, except for a small message containing provider identification and emergency telephone
numbers and such other information as may be required by local, state or federal regulations governing wireless communications
facilities.
F. Fencing: Wireless communications facilities with support structures shall be enclosed by an opaque fence (excluding slatted
chainlink) not less than six feet (6') in height. Security may be incorporated into the buffer and landscaping requirements for the site.
Nothing herein shall prevent fencing that is necessary to meet requirements of state or federal agencies.
G. Radio Frequency Emissions/Sound: The following radio frequency emissions standards shall apply to all wireless communications
facility installations:
1. Radio Frequency Impact: The FTA gives the FCC jurisdiction of the regulation of radio frequency (RF) emissions, and wireless
communications facility that do not exceed the FCC standards shall not be conditioned or denied on the basis of RF impact.
2. FCC Compliance: In order to provide information to its citizens, copies of ongoing FCC information concerning wireless
communication facilities and RF emissions standards may be requested. Applicants for wireless communications facilities shall be
required to provide information with the application on the measurement of effective radiated power of the facility and how this
meets the FCC standards.
3. Sounds Prohibited: No unusual sound emissions such as alarms, bells, buzzers or the like are permitted.
H. Structural Integrity: Wireless communications facilities with support structures shall be constructed to the electronics industries
association/telecommunications industries association (EIA/TIA) 222 revision F standard entitled "Structural Standards for Steel
Antennas Towers and Antenna Support Structures" (or equivalent), as it may be updated and amended. Each support structure shall
be capable of supporting multiple antenna arrays.
I. Collocation Agreement: All applicants for wireless communications facilities are required to submit a statement with the application
agreeing to allow and reasonably market collocation opportunities to other wireless communications facility users. The statement
shall include the applicant's policy regarding collocation of other providers and the methodology to be used by the applicant in
determining reasonable rates to be charged other providers. The collocation agreement shall be considered a condition of issuance
of a TUP (tower use permit). A TUP shall not be issued unless the applicant complies with collocation policy outlined in section 9-7-8
of this chapter. (Ord. 15-01, 9-10-2001)
9-7-6: REVIEW PROCESS:
A. Development Criteria: The applicable development criteria referred to herein are those set forth in section 9-7-5 of this chapter.
B. Permitting Procedures: Attached wireless communications facilities with or without new building construction that meet the
development criteria may be permitted by administrative review in all zoning districts. All monopole-type wireless communications
facilities with support structures that meet the development criteria may be permitted by administrative review except hereinafter
specified. All others, regardless of type or location shall be subject to the planning board hearing process and may not be approved
by the administrative review process.
C. Wireless Communications Facilities As A Part Of A Coordinated Development Approval: Wireless communications facilities as part of
a proposed residential or nonresidential subdivision, planned unit development, site plan, conditional rezoning, or other coordinated
development approval shall be reviewed and approved through those processes.
D. Wireless Communications Facilities For Temporary Term: Temporary wireless communications facilities may be permitted by
administrative approval for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days. Once granted, a temporary wireless communications facility permit
may be extended for an additional ninety (90) days upon evidence of need by the applicant. In case of emergency (e.g., storm
damage to an existing tower or other circumstances resulting in the interruption of existing service), the administrative review shall
be expedited as feasible. (Ord. 15-01, 9-10-2001)
9-7-7: APPROVAL PROCESS:
A. Application Submission: All requests for a tower use permit regardless of wireless communication facility type shall submit an
application in accordance with the requirements of this section.
1. Application Contents: Each applicant requesting a TUP under this chapter shall resubmit a sealed complete set of drawings
prepared by a licensed architect and engineer that will include a site plan, elevation view and other supporting drawings,
calculations and other documentation showing the location and dimensions of the wireless communications facility and all
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 197/251
improvements associated therewith including information concerning specifications, antenna locations, equipment facility and
shelters, landscaping, parking, access, fencing and, if relevant as determined by staff, topography, adjacent uses and existing
vegetation. Applicants proposing to collocate on an existing wireless communication facility shall include a radio frequency
intermodulation study with their application.
2. Submission Requirements: Application for a TUP shall be submitted to the city of Colona on forms prescribed by the city of
Colona. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan containing the information described above and a copy of appropriate
FCC license. If planning commission review is required, the application and site plan shall be placed on the next available
commission agenda in accordance with the agenda deadlines established by the commission.
3. Application Fees: A plan review fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and a radio frequency intermodulation study review fee of
five hundred dollars ($500.00) (collocation applicants only) shall accompany each application. These fees may be used by the city
to engage an engineer(s) or other qualified consultant(s) to review the technical aspects of the application and radio frequency
intermodulation study (if required).
4. Technical Assistance: In the course of its consideration of an application, the city of Colona, the zoning enforcement officer, the
planning commission or city council may deem it necessary, in complex situations, to employ an engineer(s) or other consultant(s)
qualified in the design and installation of wireless communication facilities to assist the city in the technical aspects of the
application. In such cases, any additional reasonable costs incurred by the city not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00) for the technical review and recommendation shall be reimbursed by the applicant prior to the final hearing on the
TUP.
B. Administrative Review: The following administrative review process shall apply to all wireless communications facility applications
eligible for administrative review:
1. Review Authority: Review of wireless communication facilities under this section shall be conducted by the zoning enforcement
officer or his designee upon filing a wireless communication facility application.
2. Review Criteria: Each application shall be reviewed for compliance with the development criteria specified in section 9-7-5 of this
chapter.
3. Timing Of Decision: The zoning enforcement officer shall render a decision within thirty (30) days.
4. Deferral: The zoning enforcement officer may defer administrative approval of wireless communication facilities for any reason.
Deferral of administrative approval shall require submission to the planning commission.
5. Application Denial: If administrative approval is not obtained or is denied due to noncompliance with the development criteria, the
applicant may appeal the denial by applying for planning commission review.
6. Application Approval: If the TUP application is in compliance with the development criteria and otherwise meets the requirements
of this section, the zoning enforcement officer shall issue a tower use permit.
C. Planning Commission Review: The following shall apply to all tower use permit applications requiring submission to the planning
board:
1. Review Authority: The planning commission shall be review authority for TUP applications requiring submission to the planning
commission.
2. Notice: Notice of the application and the public hearing by the planning commission shall be accomplished in the same manner as
a special use permit under the zoning ordinance.
3. Hearing: The planning commission shall review and consider the TUP application at a public hearing. At the hearing, interested
persons may appear and offer information in support or opposition to the proposed application. The planning commission shall
consider the following in reaching a decision:
a. Development Criteria: The tower use permit application shall be reviewed for compliance with the development criteria set forth
in section 9-7-5 of this chapter; provided that the applicable development criteria may be amended or waived so long as the
approval of the wireless communication facility meets the goals and purposes of this chapter. The planning commission
recommends an alternative development criteria by specific inclusion in a motion for approval.
b. Tower Siting Conditions: The planning commission may impose conditions and restrictions on the application or on the premises
benefited by the TUP as it deems necessary to reduce or minimize any adverse effects and to enhance the compatibility of the
wireless communication facility with surrounding property, in accordance with the purposes and intent of this chapter. The
violation of any condition shall be grounds for revocation of the TUP. The planning commission may recommend such conditions
in addition to the development criteria upon the following findings:
(1) The wireless communication facility would result in significant adverse visual impact on nearby residences.
(2) The conditions are based upon the purpose and goals of this chapter.
(3) The conditions are reasonable and capable of being accomplished.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 198/251
c. Action: Following the public hearing and presentation of evidence, the planning commission shall take one of the following
actions:
(1) Recommend the application as submitted;
(2) Recommend the application with conditions or modifications;
(3) Defer the application for additional information or neighbor input; or
(4) Deny the application in writing.
4. Findings: All decisions rendered by the planning commission concerning a tower use permit shall be supported by written findings
of fact and conclusions of law based upon substantial evidence of record.
5. Timing Of Decision: The planning commission shall render its decision within sixty (60) days or less of the final submission of all
required application documents and technical review; however, this time may be increased due to deferrals by either the applicant
or planning commission.
6. Appeals: The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council under the following circumstances:
a. An appeal shall be filed no later than thirty (30) days after the final action by the zoning enforcement officer or the planning
commission. Only the applicant and those who registered an objection to the TUP in the record of the planning commission shall
have standing to appeal.
b. Only such evidence or testimony in support of or opposition to the issuance of the TUP which was provided to the planning
commission may be presented to the city council unless the city council, by majority vote, decides to hear new information.
c. Notice of appeal shall be accomplished by the appellant in the same manner as a special use permit under the zoning code.
(Ord. 15-01, 9-10-2001)
9-7-8: SHARED FACILITIES AND COLLOCATION POLICY:
A. Collocation: All new wireless communication facilities shall be engineered, designed and constructed to be capable of sharing the
facility with other providers, to collocate with other existing wireless communication facilities and to accommodate the future
collocation of other wireless communication facilities. A TUP shall not be issued until the applicant proposing a wireless
communications facility shall demonstrate that it has made a reasonable good faith attempt to locate its wireless communication
facility onto an existing structure. Competitive conflict and financial burden are not deemed to be adequate reasons against
collocation.
B. Number Of Antenna Array: All wireless communication facilities with support structure up to a height of one hundred fifty feet (150')
shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate at least three (3) antenna array. All wireless communication facilities with
support structure up to a height of more than one hundred fifty feet (150') shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate at
least four (4) antenna array. (Ord. 15-01, 9-10-2001)
9-7-9: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES:
Any wireless communication facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned,
and the city, at its election, may require the wireless communication facility owner to remove the wireless communication facility within
ninety (90) days after notice. The city may remove the structure and recover its costs from the wireless communication facility owner. If
there are two (2) or more users of single wireless communication facility, this provision shall be effective until all providers cease to use
the wireless communication facility. If the owner of an abandoned wireless communication facility cannot be located or is no longer in
business, the requirements of this section shall be the responsibility of the landowner on whose property the wireless communication
facility is located. (Ord. 15-01, 9-10-2001)
9-7-10: NONCONFORMING WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES:
Wireless communication facilities in existence on the date of the adoption of the ordinance codified herein which do not comply with the
requirements of this chapter (nonconforming wireless communications facility) are subject to the following provisions:
A. Expansion: Nonconforming wireless communication facilities may continue in use for the purpose now used, but may not be
expanded without complying with this chapter except as further provided in this section.
B. Additions: Nonconforming wireless communications facilities may add additional antennas (belonging to the same provider or other
providers) subject to administrative review under this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 199/251
C. Repairs Or Reconstruction: Nonconforming wireless communications facilities, that become damaged due to any reason or cause,
may be repaired and restored to its former use, location, and physical dimensions subject to the provisions of this chapter. Provided,
however, that if the damage to the wireless communication facility exceeds fifty percent (50%) of replacement costs, said wireless
communication facility may only be reconstructed or repaired in compliance with this chapter.
D. Abandoned Facility: Any wireless communications facility not in use for six (6) months shall be deemed abandoned and all rights as a
nonconforming use shall cease. (Ord. 15-01, 9-10-2001)
9-7-11: REVOCATION OF TOWER USE PERMITS:
Any TUP issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked after a hearing as provided hereinafter. If the zoning officer finds that any
permit holder has violated any provision of this chapter, or has failed to make good faith reasonable efforts to provide or seek
collocation, the zoning enforcement officer shall notify the permit holder in writing that TUP is revocable due to the permit holder's
noncompliance with the conditions of the permit. The zoning enforcement officer shall convene a meeting with the permit holder no later
than thirty (30) working days from the date of the letter. The zoning officer may require the permit holder to correct the violation within a
reasonable amount of time or the zoning official may recommend to the city council that the TUP be revoked. After the appropriate
public hearing, the mayor and city council may revoke the tower use permit (TUP) upon such terms and conditions, if any, that the
mayor and city council may determine. Prior to initiation of revocation proceedings, the city shall notify the permit holder, in writing, of
specific areas of noncompliance and specify the date by which such deficiencies must be corrected. The time for correction of
deficiencies shall not exceed sixty (60) working days. The permit holder shall provide the city with evidence that the required corrective
action has been taken. Should the permit holder fail to correct any deficiencies in the time required, the mayor and city council shall
convene a public hearing to consider revocation of the TUP. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to notice of publication in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city of Colona not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing and by written notice to the permit
holder. At any such hearing, the permit holder may be represented by an attorney and may cross-examine opposing witnesses. Other
interested persons may comment. The mayor and city council may impose reasonable restrictions with respect to time and procedure.
The proceedings shall be recorded; provided, however, that stenographic services, if desired, shall be provided by the requesting party
at that party's expense. (Ord. 15-01, 9-10-2001)
9-7-12: ANNUAL REVIEW:
The mayor and city council shall review this chapter on an annual basis and shall alter or amend the same as required in a manner
provided by law. (Ord. 15-01, 9-10-2001)
9-7-13: PENALTY:
The fine or penalty for violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction in the municipal court, not exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for any one specified offense or violation. Further, that if anything prohibited or rendered unlawful is, in nature,
continuous in respect to time, the fine or penalty for allowing the continuance thereof in violation of this chapter shall not exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day that it may be unlawfully continued. (Ord. 15-01, 9-10-2001)
Title 10
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
Chapter 1
DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS1
10-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Title, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A building subordinate to and smaller than a principal building or mobile home, that contributes to the
comfort, convenience or necessity of the occupants of the principal building or mobile home.
DEPENDENT TRAILER OR COACH OR DEPENDANT MOBILE HOME: A trailer coach which does not have a toilet and bath or
shower facilities. Use of a dependent trailer or coach or dependent mobile home is prohibited in mobile home parks.
INDEPENDENT TRAILER COACH OR INDEPENDENT MOBILE HOME: A transportable nonpermanent single-family dwelling unit on
wheels suitable for year-round occupancy and containing within the same water supply, waste disposal, heating and air conditioning,
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 200/251
electrical conveniences and with self-contained toilet and bath or shower facilities as conventional housing meeting "American Standard
Association" construction requirements of the most current listing. This definition is not intended to include travel trailers or camper
buses.
LICENSE: Permission to operate a mobile home park granted pursuant to this Title.
PERMIT: Written permission issued by the City Council or its designated representative allowing the owner to construct or alter a mobile
home park under this Title and the regulations promulgated.
SAFETY BUILDING: A building housing a manager's office, laundry facilities, maintenance equipment, toilet facilities for employees, and
emergency sanitary accommodations.
SAFETY CODE: The code promulgated by the American National Standards Institute and identified as the most recently published.
TRAILER COACH OR MOBILE HOME: Any vehicle or similar portable structure used or so constructed as to permit its being used as a
conveyance upon the public streets or highways and designed to permit the occupancy as a dwelling place for one or more persons.
TRAILER COACH OR MOBILE HOME LOT: A parcel of land designated for the exclusive use of the occupants of a single mobile home,
also termed mobile home space.
TRAILER PARK OR MOBILE HOME PARK: An area of land upon which two (2) or more occupied trailer coaches or mobile homes are
harbored either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and shall include any building, structure, tent, vehicle, or enclosure used or
intended for use as a part of the equipment of such trailer coach park. (1997 Code)
10-1-2: EXEMPTION:
Nothing in this Title shall be construed to include the State parks; and the term "trailer coach park" or "mobile home park" shall not be
construed to include buildings, tents or other structures maintained by any individual or company on their own premises and used
exclusively to house their own farm labor; or any military establishment of the United States or of the State where a trailer coach or
coaches may be located or harbored; or any park on State or County fairgrounds for a period during, immediately prior to and
immediately subsequent to the holding of the fair not to exceed a total of two (2) weeks in all; or the area or premises on any farm upon
which are harbored trailer coaches occupied by persons employed upon the farm for not more than ninety (90) days in any calendar
year in the production, harvesting or processing of agricultural or horticultural products produced on such farms. (1997 Code)
10-1-3: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. Manufactured: No person shall park any mobile home with a manufacture date over fifteen (15) years unless it complies with the
Safety Code. (Ord. 0-18-07, 3-12-2018)
B. Compliance Required: All building, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical alterations or repairs to mobile homes shall be
made in compliance with the Safety Code.
C. Permanent Additions: No permanent additions shall be built onto or become a part of any mobile home. (1997 Code)
10-1-4: MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY:
Occupancy of a mobile home shall be limited to the design capacity of the mobile home; this is established by the number of sleeping
spaces provided in the mobile home. (1997 Code)
Chapter 2
LICENSES
10-2-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall establish, maintain, conduct or operate a trailer coach park without first obtaining a license from the City Council. (1997
Code)
10-2-2: APPLICATION; SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 201/251
An applicant for a license required by this Chapter shall file with the City Clerk or his/her designated representative a written application
setting forth:
A. Name And Address: The full name and address of the applicant, or the names and addresses of the partners if the applicant is a
partnership or the names and addresses of the officers if the applicant is a corporation, and the present (or last) occupation of the
applicant at the time of the filing of the application.
B. Location, Legal Description: The location and legal description of the tract of land, certified on a plat of a survey by an Illinois
registered land surveyor, drawn to scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), or larger.
C. Proposed, Existing Facilities: The proposed and existing facilities in the park for water supply, sewerage, garbage and waste
disposal, fire protection, and for a sanitary community building which will include a description of toilets, urinals, sinks, wash basins,
slop sinks, showers, drains, and laundry facilities, the proposed alterations and the maintenance.
D. Lighting: The proposed method of lighting the structures and land upon which the park is to be located.
E. Corners, Points Of Tangency: All corners and points of tangency are to be marked by galvanized or wrought iron pipe or iron or steel
bars at least eighteen inches (18") in length and not less than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter. The top of the pipe or bar is to be set
level with the established grade of the ground.
F. Plot Plans: The plot plans of the park drawn on a scale of one hundred feet to an inch (100' to 1") or larger, building plans and
specifications for existing buildings and facilities and the plans and specifications for new buildings and facilities or the proposed
alterations in existing facilities, all showing compliance with the provisions of this Title. The plot plans shall be drawn on a scale of
one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), or larger, and shall contain, among other things, the following:
1. The date on which such plot plans were prepared.
2. An arrow indicating north.
3. All trailer coach sites shall be properly numbered on the plot plans.
4. Complete information regarding storm sewers.
5. Storm water runoff shall be shown on a separate plat.
6. Contour lines at one foot (1') intervals shall be shown on a separate plat. United States Geological Survey data shall be used for
the preparation of such plat.
7. Grades of driveways and all ditches shall be shown on a separate plat.
G. Firefighting Facilities: A statement of the firefighting facilities, public or private, which are available to the trailer coach park.
H. Affidavit: An affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the matters contained in the application shall be attached. (1997 Code)
10-2-3: FEES:
A. Application Fee: Each application for an original license required by this chapter shall be accompanied by an application fee of twenty
five dollars ($25.00) for each ten (10) acres of land, or fraction, proposed to be used as a trailer park. Each application fee shall be
paid to the city clerk or the clerk's designated representative in the amount of the application fee only, and the application fee, once
paid to the city clerk, shall not be refunded. (1997 Code)
B. Annual License Fee: The annual fee for a license required by this chapter shall be annually figured at five dollars ($5.00) per month,
per trailer existing on the premises of mobile homes/trailer parks on April 30 of the preceding year.
Payment may be made quarterly to the city clerk of Colona. Payments should be made July 31, October 31, January 31, and final
payment April 30 each year beginning with the year 2004.
If payments are not made on time, any late payments shall carry a delinquency charge of one percent (1%) per month for such
delinquency. (Ord. 05-04, 4-12-2004)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 202/251
10-2-4: CONFORMITY WITH COUNTY ORDINANCES:
No license required by this chapter shall be issued if the trailer park is, at such time, in violation of any ordinances of the county. (1997
Code)
10-2-5: ISSUANCE/DENIAL OF LICENSE:
Upon receipt of an application for a license required by this chapter, the city council, or its designated representative, shall, if the park is
in conformity with this title issue an original license. If the application for license is declined, the city council shall give the reasons in
writing to the applicant; and if the objection can be corrected, the applicant may amend his/her application and resubmit it for approval.
The city council will notify the applicant of approval or rejection within forty five (45) days of receipt of application. (1997 Code)
10-2-6: TERM:
A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be for one year and shall expire on April 30 of each year. The license shall be renewed
from year to year upon payment of the annual license fee. (1997 Code)
10-2-7: RENEWAL:
A. Fee: Each license issued under this chapter shall, upon payment of the fee required, be renewed on an annual basis, provided the
city council or its designated representative finds that the trailer park continues to be in full compliance with the requirements of this
title. Any applicant aggrieved by a decision of the city council under this section shall have the right to appeal such decision within
thirty (30) days to the city council.
B. Full Compliance: In no event shall an operating license issued under the provisions of this chapter be renewed unless the trailer park
is in full compliance with the requirements of this title.
C. As Built Drawings: All trailer parks shall submit a full set of as built drawings showing water, sewer, gas and telephone lines as
extended. (1997 Code)
10-2-8: TRANSFERABILITY:
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter apply only to the premises described in the application and in the license issued, and only one
location shall be so described in each license. A license which has been issued to a person may not be transferred to any other person
without the consent of the city council; provided, that the city council shall not withhold consent where the provisions of this title have
been met. A license which has been issued for a particular premises may not be removed to any other premises. (1997 Code)
10-2-9: DISPLAY:
Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be prominently displayed in the office of the trailer park for which it was issued. (1997
Code)
10-2-10: RULES OF OPERATION:
A. Covenant For Maintenance: A covenant shall be filed by the owners in a form satisfactory to the city council to perpetuate
maintenance of all mobile home or trailer park improvements including sanitary systems, interior roads, streets, and driveways, the
covenants to run with the land.
B. Resident Rules And Regulations: A copy of the rules and regulations for residents of the trailer court shall also be filed with the city
council. (1997 Code)
10-2-11: PENALTY:
Operation of a trailer coach or mobile home park without a license shall constitute a class B misdemeanor with each day's continued
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 203/251
operation without such license or other violation constituting a separate violation. In addition to other remedies the city may bring an
action for or injunction to restrain such violation. (1997 Code)
Chapter 3
PERMITS
10-3-1: WHEN REQUIRED:
A. Construction Or Expansion: No person shall construct or expand a trailer park by means of improvement of previously undeveloped
mobile home lots in the City without first obtaining a permit as provided in this Chapter.
B. Change In Facilities: No change in any sanitary facilities, methods of water supply, sewerage, drainage, garbage or waste disposal,
and no change in the plot plan shall be made without first obtaining a permit from the City Council. (1997 Code)
10-3-2: APPLICATION:
A. Form; Supporting Documents: Application for a permit required by this Chapter shall be in the same form and shall be accompanied
by such supporting documents as are required for license applications.
B. Combined Application: Where a permit required by this Chapter, as well as an original license to operate a trailer park is sought by
the applicant, request shall be made in the same application. (1997 Code)
10-3-3: FEES:
A. Application For Construction: Each application for a permit to construct a trailer park shall be accompanied by an application fee of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each ten (10) acres of land, or fraction, proposed to used as a trailer park. Each application fee shall
be paid to the City Clerk in the amount of the application fee only, and the application fee, once paid to the City Clerk, shall not be
refunded.
B. Application To Alter Or Expand: An application to alter a trailer park including one to expand a mobile home park to include trailer
coach or mobile home lots not developed, shall be accompanied by an application fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each ten (10) acres
or fraction used to harbor trailer coaches. However, no application fee shall be required to accompany an application for a permit to
alter a park where such alteration involves only a reduction in the number of trailer spaces to a number less than that for which the
park is currently listed. (1997 Code)
10-3-4: ISSUANCE/DENIAL OF PERMIT:
Upon receipt of an application for a permit required by this Chapter, the City Council or its designated representative shall, if the park will
be in conformity with this Title, issue the permit. If the application for the permit is declined, the City Council or its designated
representative shall give the reasons in writing to the applicant within forty five (45) days of receipt of the application; and if the
objections can be corrected, the applicant may amend his/her application and resubmit it for approval. (1997 Code)
10-3-5: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A permit issued pursuant to this Chapter does not relieve the permittee from securing any other permit required or from complying with
any other provision of this Code or other ordinances of the City. (1997 Code)
10-3-6: INSPECTION:
If a permit to construct a trailer park has been issued pursuant to this Chapter, the permittee shall, upon completion, notify the City
Council or its designated representative. The City Council or its designated representative shall then inspect the park and, if completed
in accordance with the accepted application the permit as required by this Chapter will be issued. (1997 Code)
10-3-7: DISPLAY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 204/251
Each permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be prominently displayed in the office of the trailer park for which it was issued. (1997
Code)
10-3-8: TRANSFERABILITY:
No permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be transferable. (1997 Code)
Chapter 4
ENFORCEMENT
10-4-1: POWER AND AUTHORITY OF CITY COUNCIL:
A. Enforcement: The City Council or its designated representative shall enforce the provisions of this Title.
B. Inspection:
1. Annual Inspection: The City Council or its designated representative shall inspect, at least once each year, each trailer coach park
or mobile home park and all the accommodations and facilities.
2. Right Of Entry: The City Council or its designated representative is granted the power and authority to enter upon the premises of
a trailer coach park or mobile home park at any reasonable time for the purposes of this Title.
C. Written Regulations: The City Council is authorized to make and, after public hearing, to adopt such written regulations as may be
necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this Title. Such regulations shall have the same force and effect as the
provisions of this Title and the penalty for violation of the provisions of this Title. (1997 Code)
10-4-2: NOTICE OF VIOLATION; SERVICE:
Whenever the City Council determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of
this Title, or of any regulation adopted, it shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person to whom a license was issued pursuant
to Chapter 2 of this Title, which notice shall:
A. Be in writing.
B. Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance.
C. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
D. Be served upon the owner or owner's agent as the case may require. However, the notice or order shall be deemed to have been
properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy has been sent by certified mail to owner or agent's last known address, or
when owner or agent has been served with the notice by any other method authorized or required by the laws of the State.
E. Contain an outline of remedial action, which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this Title and the regulations
adopted pursuant thereto. (1997 Code)
10-4-3: EMERGENCY ORDERS:
Whenever the City Council finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, it may, without
notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such emergency and requiring that such action be taken as it may deem
necessary to meet the emergency including suspension of the license. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Title, the order shall
be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply immediately, but upon petition to the City Council
shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. The provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to the hearing and the order issued.
(1997 Code)
10-4-4: HEARING:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 205/251
A. Right To Review Hearing: Any person affected by a notice of violation which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of
any provision of this Title, or any regulation adopted, or whose application for a license or permit has been denied, or whose license
or permit has been suspended or revoked, may request and shall be entitled to appeal the decision on hearing before the City
Council.
B. Application For Review Hearing: A person desiring an appeal hearing before the City Council pursuant to this Chapter shall file with
the Mayor or Mayor's designated representative a written petition requesting the appeal hearing and setting forth a statement of the
grounds for such hearing within ten (10) days after the day the notice of violation was served. The filing of the request for a review
hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice of violation except in the case of an order issued pursuant to Section 10-4-3 of this
Chapter.
C. Setting Date For Review Hearing: Upon receipt of a petition for hearing as provided by this Chapter, the City Council shall set a time
and place for the hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice. The hearing shall be commenced at the earliest reasonable
date after the day on which the petition was filed. However, upon application of the petitioner, the City Council may postpone the
date of the hearing for a reasonable time when in its judgment, the petitioner has submitted good and sufficient reasons for such
postponement.
D. Notice Of Hearing: No hearing shall be held before the City Council until notice of the time and place of the hearing has been
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date, and a brief statement as
the reason the hearing is being held. Expense of such publication and costs of the hearing shall be borne by the petitioner.
E. Public Hearing: All hearings before the City Council shall be open to the public.
F. Scope Of Hearing: At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why the notice of violation
should be modified or withdrawn.
G. Findings; Final Order: After the hearing, the City Council shall make findings as to compliance with the provisions of this Title and the
regulations issued, and shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying, or withdrawing the notice, which shall be served as
provided for notices of violations. Upon failure to comply with any order sustaining or modifying a notice, the license of the mobile
home park affected by the order shall be revoked.
H. Record Of Proceedings: The proceedings at the hearing, including the findings and decisions of the City Council, together with a
copy of every notice of violation and final order, shall be entered as a matter of public record in the office of the City Clerk. (1997
Code)
10-4-5: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Council may seek relief in any court of competent jurisdiction as provided by
Administrative Review Act of the State1. (1997 Code)
10-4-6: NOTICE OF NEW MOBILE HOMES PARKED:
A licensee under this Title shall notify the Mayor or Mayor's designated representative in writing of each new mobile home parked on the
licensed premises within ten (10) days. (1997 Code)
Chapter 5
DESIGN STANDARDS
10-5-1: ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS:
Each trailer park licensed or to be constructed under the provisions of this Title shall provide for the following in the manner specified:
A. Flood Protection: All land proposed for trailer parks lying at or below an elevation as exactly set forth by the Report on Regulation of
Construction within the Flood Plain of the Lower Rock River as recorded by the Illinois Division of Urban Resources shall be
adequately protected against flooding. Engineering data shall be submitted to show protection against flood water rising to this
elevation.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 206/251
B. Hazard Or Nuisance: The trailer park shall not be subject to any hazard or nuisance such as excessive noise, vibration, smoke, toxic
matter, radiation, heat or glare.
C. Pollution: The trailer park shall not be subject to any source of pollution, such as drainage from garbage disposal areas.
D. Adverse Influence: The trailer park shall not be subject to any adverse influence from adjoining streets and area. (1997 Code)
10-5-2: SITE DRAINAGE:
Each trailer park to be licensed or constructed pursuant to this Title shall meet the following site drainage requirements:
A. Grading; Surface Water Drainage: The ground surface in all parts of the trailer park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface
water in a safe, efficient manner.
B. Endangerment To Water Supply: No trailer park shall be so located that the drainage of the park area will endanger any water supply.
C. Location: All trailer parks shall be well drained and shall be located in areas free from ponds, swamps and similar places in which
mosquitoes may breed.
D. Treatment Of Surface Water Collectors: Surface water collectors and other bodies of standing water which may breed mosquitoes
and other vectors shall be treated in an approved manner.
E. Waste Water: Waste water from any plumbing fixture or sanitary sewer line shall be deposited directly into the City sanitary sewerage
system or approved sanitary facility. (1997 Code)
10-5-3: SOIL AND GROUND COVER:
Each trailer park to be licensed or constructed pursuant to this Title shall meet the following soil and ground cover requirements:
A. Soil Erosion; Dust: Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of each trailer park shall be paved, covered with stone screening, or other
solid materials or protected with a sturdy and healthy grass growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and the emanation of
dust during dry weather.
B. Soil, Slope Stabilization: Where the topography has a slope of twenty five percent (25%) or more, a rip wall cribbing or other
approved system of soil and slope stabilization shall be installed and maintained.
C. Poisonous Vegetation, Trees: Trailer park grounds shall be maintained free of vegetative growth and trees which are poisonous.
(1997 Code)
10-5-4: PROTECTION AGAINST PHYSICAL HAZARDS:
Each trailer park to be licensed or constructed pursuant to this Title shall meet the following requirements for protection against physical
hazards:
A. Protective Barriers: Adequate protective barriers shall be provided and maintained where there is a slope in excess of forty five
degrees (45) and a change in elevation of six feet (6'). Such barriers may include, but are not limited to, continuous shrubs or
fences.
B. Swimming Pools:
1. Fence Required: Swimming pools shall be fenced.
2. Construction; Maintenance: Swimming pools shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of the
State Department of Public Health. (1997 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 207/251
10-5-5: MINIMUM SEPARATION:
Each trailer park sought to be licensed or constructed pursuant to this Title shall meet the following requirements for separation between
trailer coaches:
A. Minimum Distance; Lot Size: Trailer coaches shall be separated from each other and from other buildings and structures by a least
twenty feet (20') except each trailer coach lot shall contain a minimum of three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet.
B. Accessory Structure: An accessory structure which has a horizontal area exceeding twenty five (25) square feet, attached to a trailer
coach, and which has an opaque top or roof that is higher than adjacent window sills of the trailer coach, shall, for purposes of the
requirements of subsection A above, be considered to be part of the trailer coach. Roofed-over patios, carports and individual
storage facilities shall be included as part of the trailer coaches in determining yard widths between trailer coaches. (1997 Code)
10-5-6: SETBACK, BUFFER AND SCREENING:
Each trailer coach park sought to be licensed or constructed pursuant to this Title shall meet the following setback and screening
requirements:
A. Setback; Maximum Density: All trailer coaches shall be located at least twenty five feet (25') from any park property boundary line
abutting a public street or highway and at least ten feet (10') from other park property boundary lines. There shall be a minimum
distance of twenty feet (20') between an individual trailer coach with a maximum density of seven and nine-tenths (7.9) trailer
coaches per acre, including any accessory structures and adjoining pavement of a park street, or common parking area, or common
areas accessible to park residents.
B. Screening Buffer Strip: All trailer parks shall be provided with a screening buffer strip along all property boundary lines. Where
effective visual barriers do not already exist along such property boundary lines, the buffer strip shall be furnished with screening at
least five feet (5') high and consisting of wooden natural finish fences or natural growth, such growth consisting of a compact and
dense growth of shrubbery, hedges, evergreens or other suitable plantings sufficient to serve as an effective and attractive visual
screen. (1997 Code)
10-5-7: RECREATION AREAS:
A. Required: In all trailer parks accommodating or designed to accommodate twenty five (25) or more trailer coaches there shall be one
or more recreation areas which shall be easily accessible to all park residents.
1. Size: The size of such recreation areas shall be based upon a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet for each space in the
park that is designed to accommodate a trailer coach. No outdoor recreation area shall contain less than four thousand (4,000)
square feet.
2. Location: Recreation areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic hazards and should, where topography permits, be centrally
located.
B. Hardwood Trees Required: All recreation areas shall be planted with at least one hardwood tree of good and healthy desirability and
type of at least six feet (6') high when first planted, for each five hundred (500) square feet of recreational area; provided, that if a
swimming pool, baseball diamond, tennis or basketball court, or other organized recreational facility shall occupy any five hundred
(500) square feet or portion of the area, such tree requirement shall be waived for such five hundred (500) square feet. (1997 Code)
10-5-8: PARK STREET SYSTEM:
A. Street System Requirements: Each trailer park to be licensed or constructed pursuant to this Title shall meet the following street
system requirements.
1. General Requirements: All trailer parks shall provide safe, continuous and convenient vehicular access from abutting public
streets or roads to each mobile home space. For purposes of this Title, all streets or roads providing such vehicular access shall
be referred to as the "park street system" and shall be maintained by the owner.
2. Primary Entrance Road: The primary entrance road connecting the park street system with a public street or road shall have a
minimum road pavement width of thirty six feet (36') where guest parking is permitted on both sides, or a minimum road pavement
width of twenty seven feet (27') where guest parking is limited to one side. Where the primary entrance road is more than one
hundred feet (100') long and does not provide access to abutting property within such distance, the minimum road width may be
twenty four feet (24') if parking is prohibited on both sides.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 208/251
3. Secondary Entrance Road: In addition to the required primary entrance road, all parks containing twenty five (25) or more acres in
total area or providing for the accommodation of two hundred (200) or more trailer coaches, shall have at least one secondary
entrance road connecting the park street system with a public street or road. The secondary roads shall have a minimum
pavement width of twenty four feet (24'). Where primary and secondary entrance roads connect to the same public street or road,
there shall be a minimum separation of one hundred fifty feet (150') between such access points; where this is not feasible or
possible, clearly marked one-way entrance and exit lanes with at least a fifteen foot (15') wide median strip, are acceptable
provided the pavement width of each one-way road is at least twenty two feet (22') wide with parking prohibited on both sides.
4. Interior Streets: All interior streets in the park street system shall have a minimum pavement width of eighteen feet (18') on a
twenty four foot (24') right of way, with parking prohibited on both sides. Dead-end streets shall be limited in length to one
thousand feet (1,000') and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least
sixty five feet (65') with parking prohibited within it. One-way minor streets shall be acceptable only if less than five hundred feet
(500') long and serving less than twenty five (25) trailer coaches.
B. Street Construction And Design Standards: Each trailer park to be licensed or constructed pursuant to this Title shall meet the
following requirements for street construction and design:
1. Pavement Materials: All streets shall be provided with seven inch (7") reinforced, Portland cement concrete or asphalt B-4 mix,
three inches (3") thick on top of eight inches (8") of crushed stone.
2. Pavement Design: Primary and secondary entrance roads which exceed twenty feet (20') in width shall have the standard City
cross section, with curbs.
3. Grades: Grades of all streets shall be sufficient to ensure adequate surface drainage, but shall not be more than eight percent
(8%). Short runs with a maximum grade of twelve percent (12%) may be permitted, if traffic safety is assured by appropriate
paving, adequate leveling areas, and avoidance of lateral curves.
4. Intersections: Within one hundred feet (100') of an intersection, streets shall be at approximately right angles. A distance of at
least one hundred fifty feet (150') shall be maintained between center lines of offset intersecting streets. Intersections of more than
two (2) streets at one point shall be avoided. (1997 Code)
10-5-9: OFF-STREET PARKING:
A. Number Of Spaces Required; Location: Paved, off-street parking areas shall be provided in all parks for the use of park residents and
guests; such areas shall be furnished at the rate of at least two (2) car spaces for each mobile home. Parking areas shall be located
at either end of each mobile home and shall not extend alongside.
B. Use As Temporary Parking Only: The parking areas required by this Section shall be used solely for the temporary parking of
passenger-type motor vehicles owned by residents of the park or their guests. (1997 Code)
10-5-10: PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS OR SIDEWALKS:
Where provided, common pedestrian walkways shall be a minimum of three and one-half feet (31/2') in width. Pedestrian walkways
constructed on an individual lot for the private use of the residents thereof shall be a minimum of two feet (2') in width. (1997 Code)
10-5-11: ILLUMINATION:
All trailer parks shall be furnished with sufficient electrical system and lighting units at the owner's expense, so spaced and equipped
with luminaries placed at such mounting heights as will provide the following average maintained levels of illumination for the safe
movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night:
A. Street System: All parts of the park street systems: four-tenths (0.4) of a foot-candle with a minimum of two-tenths (0.2) of a footcandle.
B. Potentially Hazardous Locations: Potentially hazardous locations such as major street intersections and steps or stepped ramps;
individually illuminated with a minimum of four-tenths (0.4) of a foot-candle. (1997 Code)
10-5-12: PIERS AND ANCHORS:
Piers of poured concrete sixteen inches by sixteen inches by forty two inches (16" x 16" x 42") below surface spaced eight feet (8') apart
shall be provided for each lot. Anchors or tiedowns shall be installed at the corners of each mobile home for protection against high
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 209/251
winds. Each anchor or tiedown shall be capable of withstanding a vertical tension force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds.
(1997 Code)
10-5-13: SKIRTING:
Each mobile home shall be skirted around its entire perimeter including the hitch portion, unless removed, by skirting material of
fireproof composition such as sheet metal. (1997 Code)
10-5-14: STAIRWAYS:
A stairway serving as an entrance to a mobile home shall be constructed of incombustible material, and shall have sufficient strength
and stability to support safely its intended load. Each stairway of more than three (3) risers shall be equipped with handrails no less than
thirty inches (30") nor more than thirty four inches (34") as measured vertically from the nosing of stair treads. (1997 Code)
10-5-15: UTILITY FACILITIES:
All utility facilities shall be installed beneath the surface of the ground in conformity with accepted engineering practices and the rules
and regulations of the authority having jurisdiction where such addition is designed to accommodate more than five (5) mobile homes.
(1997 Code)
Chapter 6
WATER SUPPLY
10-6-1: WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM:
A. Required: Each trailer park shall have a water supply system capable of providing a sufficient supply of potable water under adequate
pressure, to water supply facilities for trailer coaches, service buildings, fire hydrants, drinking fountains and other accessory
facilities, as required by this Chapter for the well-being of park residents and for park maintenance.
B. Compliance Required: The system shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with State standards of the
Department of Public Health and the provisions of this Code, other City ordinances and other local laws and shall conform with
regulations of the authorities having jurisdiction and shall conform with pertinent City ordinances. Where conflicts exist, the most
restrictive requirement shall prevail. (1997 Code)
10-6-2: SOURCE OF SUPPLY:
A. Public System Available: When a public water supply system is available and within five hundred feet (500') of a trailer park, the
trailer park must connect to the public water supply within one year. No private water supply system shall be cross-connected with
any public water supply system.
B. Public System Unavailable: Where a public water supply source is not available, the trailer park's source of water supply, including
the construction, equipment and distribution system for withdrawing or processing and distributing water shall be approved by the
City Council and other authorities having jurisdiction. The chemical and bacteriological quality of the potable water distributed in any
trailer park, including water treatment processes employed, shall conform to the standards established by the health authority having
jurisdiction.
C. Capacity: The water source shall be capable of producing an adequate volume of water to supply all trailer coach spaces in any
trailer park, but in no case shall such capacity be less than one hundred fifty (150) gallons per space per day in any trailer park.
D. Well; Construction, Location: When an independent or nonpublic water system is used to serve the trailer park with water obtained
from wells, the well shall be located and constructed in such a manner that neither underground nor surface contamination will reach
the water supply from any source. A minimum distance of one hundred feet (100') shall be maintained between the water supply and
any other possible source of contamination except that sewers or pipes through which sewage may back up shall be located at least
fifty feet (50') from any well or water suction pipeline.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 210/251
E. Well Casings, Pumps, Etc.: No well casings, pumps, pumping machinery or suction pipes used to supply water to a trailer park shall
be located in any pit, room or space extending below ground level, nor in any room or space aboveground which is walled in or
otherwise enclosed, unless such rooms, whether aboveground or belowground, have free drainage by gravity to the surface of the
ground. The floor or rooms aboveground shall be at least six inches (6") above the ground surface. All floors shall be watertight and
sloped from well casing to the drain. The well casing shall be not less than twelve inches (12") above the floor.
F. Water Metering Pits: All water metering pits shall be free of surface water and provided with a sump pump and sealed entrance with
easy access (depth of 2 feet or more requires steps). (1997 Code)
10-6-3: WATER STORAGE FACILITIES:
All water storage reservoirs for the supply of water to trailer parks shall be watertight and constructed of impervious material; all
overflows and vents of such reservoirs shall be effectively screened. Open reservoirs are prohibited. Manholes shall be constructed with
overlapping covers so as to prevent the entrance of contaminated material, and so designed that they may be locked. All of the overflow
pipes from a reservoir shall be connected with back siphonage protection to any pipe in which polluted water may back up. (1997 Code)
10-6-4: DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM:
A. Construction: The water distribution system in a trailer park shall be constructed of piping, fixtures and other equipment of approved
materials and shall be so designed and maintained to comply with pertinent provisions of this code, and to provide a pressure of not
less than twenty (20) pounds per square inch, under normal operating conditions, at each trailer coach. Service shall not be
interconnected or cross connected with any drainage, venting or other system conveying nonpotable water, nor shall such piping be
subject to hazards of backflow or any back siphonage. (1997 Code)
B. Master Meter: Water and sewer usage shall be billed to the owners of the trailer parks within the city of the total water and sewer
used during each billing period. The owners of each facility shall be responsible to pay the bill for water and sewer usage which shall
be rendered from the master meter feeding into the private system of the park.
1. In the event that a reading from any master meter would include usage not incurred by a park the reading shall be adjusted by
reducing usage recorded by the master meter by the outside users, and a bill would be rendered from the adjusted usage figure.
2. In the event of the necessity to shut off services because of failure to receive payment when due, a notice of intent to shut off
water service to the entire park shall be mailed to the park owners or managers which shall provide a minimum of sixty (60) days
prior to the actual shutoff. In the event of shutoff there shall be additional charges for costs of shutoff and turn on when
necessitated. (Ord. 12-03, 11-10-2003)
10-6-5: INDIVIDUAL CONNECTIONS:
A. Water Service Connections: Individual water service connections shall be provided at each trailer coach lot in the trailer park. All
water service connections shall be watertight and located at a minimum distance of five feet (5') from sanitary sewer connections
belowground. The minimum pipe size of connections shall be three-fourths inch (3/4"). Outlets shall be so constructed as to be free
of possible contamination from surface drainage and possible damage during installation of a mobile home and shall be four inches
(4") above grade. At this point a gate valve must be installed.
B. Protection Of Risers From Freezing: Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of riser pipes and thawing, to protect
risers from heaving and thawing actions of ground during freezing weather.
C. Stop And Waste Cocks: Underground stop and waste cocks shall not be installed on any connection.
D. Code Compliance: All potable water connections and suppliers to all fixture outlets within the trailer coach unit shall comply with
applicable provisions of this code in regard to the protection of potable water supply from contamination. (1997 Code)
10-6-6: WATER FOR PROTECTION:
A. Public System: Where a public water supply system with a water main of four inches (4") or larger is available, all trailer parks
accommodating or designed to accommodate ten (10) or more mobile homes, or both, shall provide the following water supply
facilities:
1. The system shall permit the operation of a minimum of two (2), 11/2-inch hose streams on a fire in any trailer coach, service
building, or other accessory structure in the park.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 211/251
2. Fire hydrants shall be located within five hundred feet (500') of such structures and shall be of a type prescribed by the water
department of the city.
3. Water supply and associated facilities shall be sufficient to provide a delivery of at least seventy five (75) gallons per minute at
each of the two (2) nozzles, held four feet (4') above the ground, at a flowing pressure of at least thirty (30) pounds per square inch
when measured at the highest elevation in the trailer park.
B. Private Source: In the event a public water supply system is not available, all trailer parks accommodating or designed to
accommodate ten (10) or more mobile homes shall provide from a well or similar private source service sufficient water at sufficient
pressure to comply with the requirements of subsection A of this section. Fire hydrants shall also be placed as directed by
subsection A of this section. A public water supply system shall be deemed available when the system is within five hundred feet
(500') of the trailer park, measured along a street or other public easement, and a connection shall be made lawfully within one year
of when such public system reaches within five hundred feet (500') of the trailer park. (1997 Code)
Chapter 7
SEWAGE DISPOSAL
10-7-1: USE OF CITY SYSTEM REQUIRED:
All sewage and other water-carried wastes shall be disposed of into the City sewerage system, or, if the City sewerage system is not
available, then into a private sewage system designed and built in accordance with the standards and regulations of the State
Environmental Protection Agency. The City sewerage system shall be deemed available when the system is within five hundred feet
(500') of the trailer park, measured along a street or other public easement, and a connection shall be made lawfully within one year of
when such public system reaches within five hundred feet (500') of the trailer park. The system will have master meters for both water
and sewer. (1997 Code)
10-7-2: INDIVIDUAL CONNECTIONS:
Each trailer coach site shall be provided with a sewer connection for the combined liquid waste outlet or outlets of each trailer coach. It
shall be the duty of the owner or operator of the trailer park to provide an approved type of water and odortight connection from the
trailer coach water drainage to the sewer connection. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator to make the connection and keep all
occupied trailer coaches connected to the sewer while located in the trailer park. Sewer connections in unoccupied trailer coach sites
shall be so closed that they will emit no odors or cause a breeding place for flies. (1997 Code)
10-7-3: WASTE WATER:
No waste water from trailer coaches shall be deposited on the surface of the ground. (1997 Code)
Chapter 8
REFUSE DISPOSAL
10-8-1: GENERALLY:
The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in a trailer park shall be so managed as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage,
insect-breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution. (1997 Code)
10-8-2: LOCATION, TYPE AND SIZE OF CONTAINERS:
All garbage refuse shall be stored in commercial-type or large bulk-type containers which shall be located not more than one hundred
fifty feet (150') from any mobile home space. Containers shall be provided by the licensee in sufficient number and capacity to contain
all refuse in a sanitary manner. Containers shall not be placed outside for collection until the day designated therefor. (1997 Code)
10-8-3: PLATFORMS FOR CONTAINERS:
Refuse collection stands shall be provided for all refuse containers in trailer parks. Such containers stands shall be so designated as to
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 212/251
prevent containers from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration, and to facilitate cleaning around them. (1997
Code)
10-8-4: COLLECTION:
All refuse shall be collected at least once a week or as often as necessary to keep the park litterless and sanitary. If garbage bags are
used in lieu of commercial-type or large bulk-type containers, refuse shall be collected at least twice a week. The mobile home park
operator shall provide collection service. All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles. (1997 Code)
10-8-5: INCINERATION:
A. Burning Prohibited; Exception: No garbage or refuse shall be burned on the premises of a trailer park, except in approved
incinerators.
B. Construction Of Incinerator1: Refuse incinerators shall be constructed only with the approval of the City Council or its designated
representative. Such approval shall be based on a review of the plans and specifications for the incinerators and approval of the site
where they will be located. The approval shall specify the type of material which may be placed in the incinerator.
C. Operation: Incinerators shall be operated only when attended by some person specifically authorized by the owner or operator of the
trailer park. (1997 Code)
Chapter 9
VERMIN AND WEED CONTROL
10-9-1: GENERALLY:
Grounds, buildings and structures in trailer parks shall be maintained free of insect, vermin and rodent harborage and infestation.
Extermination methods and other measures to control insects, vermin and rodents shall conform with requirements of the health
authority. (1997 Code)
10-9-2: INSECT CONTROL:
Trailer parks shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris which may provide breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other
pests. (1997 Code)
10-9-3: RODENT CONTROL:
Storage areas in trailer parks shall be so maintained as to prevent a rodent harborage. Lumber, pipe and other building materials shall
be stored at least one foot (1') above the ground. (1997 Code)
10-9-4: CONTROL OF POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS LOCATIONS:
Where the potential for vermin infestation exists in trailer parks, all exterior openings in or beneath any structures shall be appropriately
screened with wire mesh or other suitable materials. No storage shall be permitted under a trailer coach. (1997 Code)
10-9-5: WEED CONTROL1:
The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled in trailer parks to prevent the harborage of ticks, chiggers and other noxious
insects. Trailer parks shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of ragweed, poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac and other
noxious weeds considered detrimental to health. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description. (1997
Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 213/251
Chapter 10
SERVICE BUILDINGS AND SERVICE FACILITIES
10-10-1: GENERALLY:
The requirements of this Chapter shall apply to accessory structures and community service facilities in all trailer parks which are
required for park management and for the servicing and well-being of trailer park residents. The accessory structures may include, but
are not limited to, service buildings or other community structures containing one or more of the following uses and must be constructed
in accordance with applicable City regulations:
A. Park management office.
B. Community laundry facilities.
C. Community sanitary facilities.
D. Indoor community recreation areas.
E. Repair shops and storage buildings. (1997 Code)
10-10-2: NONRESIDENTIAL USES:
No part of any trailer park shall be used for nonresidential purposes except such uses that are required for the direct servicing and wellbeing
of the park residents and for the management and maintenance of the park. (1997 Code)
10-10-3: REQUIRED SERVICE FACILITIES:
Each trailer park operated, or intended to be operated subject to this Title, shall be provided with a community service building
containing a park management office. (1997 Code)
10-10-4: STORAGE AREAS:
Locations for storage of maintenance materials such as lumber, pipe and other building materials in trailer parks shall be screened from
the view of the residents and the public. (1997 Code)
Chapter 11
FIRE PROTECTION
10-11-1: GENERALLY:
All trailer park shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the Colona Community Fire Protection District. (1997 Code)
10-11-2: FLAMMABLE MATERIALS:
Trailer park areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other flammable materials; no storage shall be permitted under a trailer coach.
(1997 Code)
10-11-3: FIRE EXTINGUISHERS:
Two (2) all purpose fire extinguishers of a least two and one-half (21/2) pound capacity shall be located inside each mobile home at
opposite ends. Each fire extinguisher shall be checked annually and kept in condition for use at all times. (1997 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 214/251
10-11-4: FIRES:
Fires in trailer parks shall be made only in cooking stoves and equipment approved for such purposes. (1997 Code)
10-11-5: SMOKE ALARMS:
Smoke alarms are to be in place. (1997 Code)
Chapter 12
MISCELLANEOUS FACILITIES
10-12-1: ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM:
Each trailer park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of approved wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances, which
shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the Electrical Code of the City and other regulations governing such systems. All
parts of the trailer park electrical distribution system shall conform with approved standards for safety to life and property and with
accepted engineering practices. No electric wires shall be suspended less than seven feet (7') above the sidewalks or pathways or be
allowed to lie on the ground. (1997 Code)
10-12-2: NATURAL GAS INSTALLATIONS:
Natural gas piping systems in all trailer parks shall be installed and maintained in conformity with accepted engineering practices and
the rules and regulations of the authority having jurisdiction. (1997 Code)
10-12-3: FUEL OIL SUPPLY SYSTEMS:
All fuel oil supply systems provided for trailer coaches, service buildings and other structures shall be installed and maintained in
conformity with the rules and regulations of the authority having jurisdiction. Fuel oil systems underground shall be located at a minimum
of ten feet (10') horizontally from water lines and, at necessary crossings, shall be placed substantial pipe sleeves extending ten feet
(10') on each side of the water pipe. (1997 Code)
10-12-4: STORAGE STRUCTURES:
No more than one storage structure shall be permitted on each mobile home lot. Such storage structures shall be located at least three
feet (3') from any mobile home and lot line, and shall be:
A. Not larger than ten feet by ten feet (10' x 10') in floor plan, by eight feet (8') in height.
B. Capable of being completely and easily disassembled and are readily portable.
C. Used only for storage purposes.
D. Not attached to a trailer or used as an auxiliary room or otherwise used for dwelling or living purposes.
E. Set on a poured concrete slab and properly anchored. (1997 Code)
Chapter 13
OPERATION
10-13-1: GENERALLY:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 215/251
The construction, operation and maintenance of trailer parks in the City shall, in addition to complying with this Title, be in conformity
with the trailer or mobile home park law of the State and provisions promulgated by the State Department of Public Health. (1997 Code)
10-13-2: ATTENDANT OR CARETAKER:
Each trailer park shall be in the charge of a responsible attendant or caretaker at all times, whose duty it shall be to maintain the park,
its equipment and facilities in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition, and be answerable, with the licensee for any violation of the
provisions of this Title. (1997 Code)
10-13-3: REGISTRATION OF TRAILER COACH AND OCCUPANTS:
A. Custodian's Office: Each trailer park shall be provided with a custodian's office where each trailer coach entering the trailer park shall
be assigned to a lot location, given a copy of the trailer park rules and registered according to the prescribed form.
B. Registration: The registration shall include the name and address of each occupant of the trailer coach; the license number of all
units; the state issuing such license; and a statement indicating the exact location at which the trailer coach was last parked,
including the state, city, town or village where the parking occurred. The register shall be signed by an occupant of the trailer coach.
Any person furnishing misinformation for the purposes of registration shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable under
the general statutes for such an offense.
C. Maintenance Of Records: The registration records required by subsection B above shall be neatly and securely maintained, and no
registration records shall be destroyed until six (6) years have elapsed following the date of registration. The register shall be
available at all times for inspection by law enforcement officers.
D. Home Manufactured After April 1, 1981: No licensee under this Title shall permit any mobile home manufactured after April 1, 1981,
to be parked on the licensed premises unless it complies with the safety code provisions then in force. (1997 Code)
10-13-4: CONFINEMENT OF PETS:
No owner or person in charge of a dog or other pet animal shall permit it to run at large or to commit any nuisance within the limits of
any trailer park. All animals are subject to City ordinances. (1997 Code)
10-13-5: MAINTENANCE; EJECTMENT OF TENANT:
The licensee of each mobile home park shall assume full responsibility for maintaining in good repair and condition all park facilities
required by this Title, including streets and sanitary and safety appliances, and shall promptly bring such action as is necessary to
prosecute or eject from the park any person who wilfully or maliciously damages any appliance, or any person who fails to comply with
the provisions of this Title. (1997 Code)
Title 11
SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
11-1-1: PURPOSE:
In accordance with State law1 this Title regulates the subdivision and development of land in order to implement the City
Comprehensive Plan and Official Map. Thus this Title assists in achieving the following specific objectives:
A. To preserve, protect, and promote the public health, safety, and welfare;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 216/251
B. To provide a pleasant living environment by furthering the orderly layout and use of land; and to create an environment conducive to
the productive development of the City;
C. To avoid legal and other problems by requiring that subdivided land be properly monumented and recorded;
D. To conserve and increase the value of land, improvements, and buildings;
E. To preserve the natural beauty and topography to the maximum feasible extent;
F. To provide adequate light, air, and privacy for all residents of new developments by preventing undue concentration of population;
G. To protect against injury or damage caused by fire, pollution, flooding, storm water runoff, or erosion and sedimentation;
H. To provide safe and convenient access to new developments and to avoid traffic congestion by requiring the proper location, design,
and construction of streets and sidewalks;
I. To reduce the cost of installing and maintaining adequate water mains, sanitary sewers, storm water sewers, and other utilities and
services; and
J. To ensure that adequate parks, schools, and similar facilities can be made available to serve the residents of new developments.
K. Provide for the acceptance of lands of public rights of way. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-1-2: JURISDICTION:
This Title shall be applicable within the corporate limits of the City and within all unincorporated territory located within one and one-half
(1.5) miles of said limits, provided such territory is not located within the subdivision jurisdiction for another municipality2. (Ord. 99-01, 1-
25-1999)
11-1-3: INTERPRETATION:
Every provision of this Title shall be construed liberally to achieve the purposes outlined in Section 11-1-1 of this Chapter.
A. More Restrictive Requirements Apply: Whenever the requirements of this Title differ from those of any statute, lawfully adopted
ordinance or regulation, easement, covenant, or deed restriction, the more stringent requirement shall prevail. Thus, in accordance
with State law3, whenever this Title imposes higher standards than the County subdivision ordinance, said higher standards shall
supersede the County regulations in the unincorporated territory located within the City's subdivision jurisdiction.
This Title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, deed restriction, or any other private agreement or restriction;
provided, that, where the provisions of this Title are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement,
covenant, deed restriction, or other private agreement or restriction, the provisions of this Title shall govern. Where the provisions of
the easement, covenant, deed restriction, or private agreement or restriction impose duties and obligations more restrictive, or higher
standards than the requirements of this Title or the determinations of the City in approving a subdivision or in enforcing this Title, and
such private provisions are not inconsistent with this Title or determinations thereunder, then such private provisions shall be
operative and supplemental to this Title and determinations made thereunder. The City does not purport to enforce any such private
provisions not reflected on the plat and its supporting documents and unless there is expressed in the nature of the document and
the approval process an intent to give the City enforcement rights over same. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-1-4: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
A. Except as may be provided otherwise by statute or ordinance, no officer, board member, agent, or employee of the City shall render
himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his duties under this Title4.
B. Any suit brought against any officer, board member, agent, or employee of the City, as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his duties under this Title, shall be defended by the City Attorney until the final determination of the legal proceedings.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 217/251
(Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-1-5: VARIANCES:
When the subdivider can show that a provision of this Title, if strictly adhered to, would cause the unnecessary hardship and when, in
the opinion of the City Plan Commission, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, a departure may be made
without destroying the intent of such provision, the City Plan Commission may recommend a variance or modification to the Council.
The subdivider shall apply in writing for such variance or modification of the action. Any variance or modification thus authorized, shall
be attached to and made a part of the final plat. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
Chapter 2
DEFINITIONS
11-2-1: CONSTRUCTION OF TERMS:
In construing the intended meaning of terminology used in this Title, the following rules shall be observed:
A. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in Section
11-2-2 of this Chapter; terms not defined in Section 11-2-2 of this Chapter shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
the Zoning Ordinance of the City; if any term is not defined either in Section 11-2-2 of this Chapter or in the Zoning Ordinance, said
term shall have its standard English dictionary meaning.
B. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders.
C. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
D. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the singular.
E. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is discretionary.
F. Captions (i.e., titles of sections, subsections, etc.) are intended merely to facilitate general reference and in no way limit the
substantive application of the provisions set forth thereunder.
G. References to sections shall be deemed to include all subsections within that section; but a reference to a particular subsection
designates only that subsection.
H. A general term that follows or is followed by enumerations of specific terms shall not be limited to the enumerated class unless
expressly limited. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-2-2: SELECTED DEFINITIONS:
ADMINISTRATOR: The official appointed to administer this Land Subdivision Title, or his duly authorized representative.
ALLEY: A public right of way which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to the side or rear of premises that front on a nearby
street.
AMENDMENT: A change in the provisions of this Title, properly effected in accordance with State law and the procedures set forth
herein.
AREA, GROSS: The entire area within the lot lines of the property proposed for subdivision/development, including any areas to be
dedicated/reserved for street and alley rights of way and for public uses.
BLOCK: An area of land entirely bounded by streets, highways, barriers, or ways (except alleys, pedestrianways, or exterior boundaries
of a subdivision unless exterior boundary is a street, highway, or way) or bounded by a combination of streets, public parks, cemeteries,
railroad rights of way, waterways, or corporate boundary lines.
CENTER LINE OFFSET: The distance between the center lines of two (2) roughly parallel streets, measured along the third street with
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 218/251
which both said "parallel" streets intersect.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street used primarily to collect limited amounts of residential traffic and for access to abutting properties, and
on which the speed limit is low and traffic volume is minimal.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The plan or any portion thereof adopted by the City Council to guide and coordinate the physical and
economic development of the City of Colona. The Comprehensive Plan includes, but is not limited to, plans and programs regarding the
location, character, and extent of highways, bridges, public buildings or uses, utilities, schools, residential, commercial or industrial land
uses, parks, drainage facilities, etc.
CROSS-SLOPE: The degree of inclination measured across a right of way rather than in the direction traffic moves on said right of way.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and having the other end permanently terminated by a turnaround for
vehicles, the term may also be used to refer solely to said turnaround.
CURB AND GUTTER, INTEGRAL: The rim forming the edge of a street plus the channel for leading off surface water, constructed of
poured concrete as a single facility.
DEDICATE: To transfer the ownership of a right of way, parcel of land, or improvement to the City of Colona or other public entity without
compensation.
DEVELOP: To erect any structure or to install any improvements on a tract of land, or to undertake any activity (such as grading) in
preparation therefor.
DISTRICT, ZONING: A portion of the territory of the City of Colona wherein certain uniform requirements or various combinations
thereof apply to structures, lots, and uses under the terms of the Zoning Ordinance.
EASEMENT: A right to use a portion of another person's real property for certain limited purposes.
EROSION: The wearing away of the land surface by the action of wind, water or gravity.
ESCROW DEPOSIT: A deposit in cash or other approved securities to assure the completion of improvements within a subdivision.
FRONTAGE: The boundary of a lot along a public street.
FRONTAGE ROAD: A minor street fronting on an arterial street or highway (usually a limited access highway), used for access to
abutting lots.
GRADE: The degree of inclination of the site or right of way, expressed as a percentage. Synonym for "slope".
IMPROVEMENT PLANS: The engineering plans showing types of materials and construction details for the structures and facilities to
be installed in, or in conjunction with, a subdivision.
IMPROVEMENTS: Any street, curb and gutter, sidewalk, drainage ditch, sewer, catch basin, newly-planted tree, off-street parking area,
or other facility necessary for the general use of property owners in a subdivision.
INTERSECTION: The point at which two (2) or more public right of ways (generally streets) meet.
LOCAL STREET: A street serving limited amounts of residential traffic, and used for access to abutting property.
LOT: A tract of land intended as a unit for the purpose (whether immediate or future) of development or transfer of ownership. A "lot"
may or may not coincide with a "lot of record".
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plan bounded by the front, side, and rear lines of a lot.
LOT, CORNER: A lot having at least two (2) adjacent sides that abut for their full length upon streets.
LOT OF RECORD: An area of land designated as a lot on a plat of subdivision recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of Henry County,
Illinois, in accordance with State law.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having a pair of approximately parallel lot lines that abut two (2) approximately parallel streets. Both such lot lines
shall be deemed front lot lines.
MAINTENANCE BOND: A surety bond, posted by the developer and approved by the City of Colona, guaranteeing the satisfactory
condition of installed improvements for the one year period following their dedication.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET: A local dead-end street providing access to ten (10) or fewer dwelling units.
MINOR ARTERIAL STREET: A street which carries or is proposed to carry intermediate volumes of traffic from local streets to arterial
streets and which may or may not be continuous.
OFFICIAL MAP: The Official Map may show indication of sites for planned public facilities. Public facility sites which may be indicated on
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 219/251
the Official Map may include, but are not limited to: sites for new trafficways or widening of existing trafficways; school sites; public
building sites; and sites for future storm drainage, electrical or other public service or utility easements.
PERFORMANCE BOND: A surety bond posted by the developer and approved by the City of Colona, guaranteeing the installation of
required improvements within, or in conjunction with, a subdivision.
PLAT, DEDICATION: A plat required for the dedication to the City of all right-of-way easements, and public improvements outside of a
subdivision plat or within a special use classification.
PLAT, FINAL: The subdivider's plan and supporting documentation of the subdivision which, if approved, may be filed with the Henry
County Recorder of Deeds.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: Preliminary engineering maps, drawings, and supportive material indicating the proposed layout of a subdivision.
PREFILING CONFERENCE: A conference held between the developer and appropriate City staff prior to submission of a preliminary or
final plat.
PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL STREET: A street designed or utilized primarily for high vehicular speeds or for heavy volumes of traffic on a
continuous route with intersections at grade, and on which traffic-control devices are used to expedite the safe movement of through
traffic.
RESERVE: To set aside a parcel of land in anticipation of its acquisition by the City of Colona (or other government entity) for public
purposes.
RIGHT OF WAY, PUBLIC: A strip of land which the owner/subdivider has dedicated to the City of Colona or other unit of government for
streets, alleys, and other public improvements.
SEDIMENT: Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of
origin by air, water, or gravity as a product of erosion.
SETBACK, FRONT: The horizontal distance between the street right-of-way line and the building line. Minimum setback requirements
are set forth in the Zoning Ordinance.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM, PRIVATE: A sewer system including collection and treatment facilities established by the developer to serve a
new subdivision in an outlying area.
SIDEWALK: A pedestrianway constructed in compliance with the standards of this Title.
SOIL: All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of whatever origin that overlies bedrock which can be readily excavated.
STOP ORDER: An order used by the Administrator to halt work-in-progress that is in violation of this Title.
STREET: A public or private way for motor vehicle travel. The term "street" includes a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway,
road, pike, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, drive, court and similar designations, but excludes an alley or way for pedestrian use only.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. All
buildings are structures but not all structures are buildings.
STUB STREET: A street that is temporarily terminated, but that is planned for future continuation.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate or other group or combination acting as a unit, dividing or
proposing to divide land in a manner that constitutes a "subdivision" as defined in this Section.
SUBDIVISION: Any division of land into two (2) or more lots, any of which is less than five (5) acres, or any transfer involving an
easement of ingress or egress, except as set forth in the Plat Act, 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/1.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR: A division of land into two (2) but not more than five (5) lots, all of which front upon an existing street, and not
involving any new streets, other rights of way, easements, improvements, or other provisions for public areas and facilities.
TOPOGRAPHY: The relief features or surface configuration of an area of land.
UTILITY: A business or service which is engaged in regularly supplying the public with some commodity or service which is of
consequence and need and which has a duty to serve without discrimination all within its service area. A utility can be publicly or
privately owned and includes, without limitation, the following services or commodities:
A. Electricity;
B. Gas, oil, or steam;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 220/251
C. Water;
D. Sanitary sewerage;
E. Storm sewerage;
F. Telephone or telegraph;
G. Cable television and other communication lines;
H. Transportation lines, such as fixed rail, but only if expressly stated.
VACATE: To terminate the legal existence of right of way or subdivision or portion thereof, and to so note on the final plat recorded with
the Henry County Recorder of Deeds1.
VARIANCE, SUBDIVISION: A relaxation in the strict application of the design and improvement standards set forth in this Title. (Ord. 99-
01, 1-25-1999)
Chapter 3
DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
11-3-1: APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER:
No land within the subdivision jurisdiction of the City other than land that is specifically exempted from the requirements of the Illinois
Plat Act1 shall be subdivided or developed except in compliance with the regulations of this Chapter and the applicable provisions of
State law2. No lot in any subdivision shall be conveyed until:
A. The final plat of said subdivision has been approved by the City Council and recorded in the office of the Henry County Recorder of
Deeds; and
B. The portion of said subdivision in which the lot is located has been improved in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter or
until a performance bond or other security has been posted to assure the completion of such improvements.
A building permit shall not be issued for any lot conveyed in violation of this Section. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-3-2: SUITABILITY FOR SUBDIVISION GENERALLY:
Land that is unsuitable for development due to flooding, poor drainage, rough topography, adverse soil conditions, or other features
which will be harmful to the health, safety, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding areas shall not
be subdivided or developed unless the subdivider/developer formulates adequate plans/methods to solve the problems caused by the
adverse land conditions. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-3-3: LOT REQUIREMENTS; ACCESS AND RELATIONSHIP TO STREET:
A. Lot Requirements: All lots in a subdivision shall conform to the minimum lot area and dimension requirements of the zoning district in
which said subdivision is located; land that is under water or proposed for street improvements shall not be counted to satisfy these
minimum requirements. Every corner and through lot shall be large enough to permit compliance with the district's front setback
requirements on every side of the lot that faces a street. All lot remnants shall be added to adjacent lots to avoid the creation of
unbuildable parcels.
B. Access And Relationship To Street: Land shall be subdivided in such a way that each lot abuts a street meeting the requirements of
Section 11-3-5 of this Chapter. All side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street right-of-way lines or radial to curved street
right-of-way lines except where a deviation from this rule will provide a better street and lot design. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-3-4: PERMANENT REFERENCE MONUMENTS:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 221/251
A. Materials, Size, And Location:
1. Concrete cylinders or rectangular prisms, not less than four inches (4") in diameter or square and forty two inches (42") long, shall
be set at the extreme corners of subdivisions.
2. Steel pins, not less than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter and thirty inches (30") long, with a survey marker cap showing the land
surveyor's registration number, shall be set at locations in accordance with the Plat Act.
3. The intersection of two (2) right-of-way lines at corner lots shall terminate at a tangent to a curve having a minimum radius of
fifteen feet (15').
B. Resetting Monuments: Any monuments disturbed by construction or grading shall be reset. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-3-5: STREET DESIGN STANDARDS:
All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed street system indicated in the Municipal Comprehensive Plan and
Official Map, and shall meet the specifications set forth in tabular form below. For divided boulevards, the developer shall submit an
acceptable plan for maintenance to the City Planning Commission.
TABLE OF STREET DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
Type Of
Street
Permitted
On-Street
Parking
Required
Right Of Way
Required
Pavement
Width (B-B)
Maximum/
Minimum
Grades
Alley None 20 ft . 18 ft . Maximum: 10%
Minimum: 0.5%
Marginal Access None 50 ft . 20 ft . Maximum: 10%
Minimum: 0.5%
Local Street One side
Two side
50 ft .
50 ft .
27 ft .
31 ft .
Maximum: 10%
Minimum: 0.5%
Collectors Both sides 60 ft . 40 ft . Maximum: 10%
Minimum: 0.5%
Minor Arterials None 80 ft . 11 ft. lanes Maximum: 5%
Minimum: 0.5%
Principal Arterials None 100 ft . 12 ft. lanes Maximum: 5%
Minimum: 0.5%
Divided Boulevard None 70 ft . 14 ft . Maximum: 10%
Minimum: 0.5%
A. Horizontal Curvatures: All changes in horizontal alignment shall be conducted with a horizontal curve with the following minimum
center line radius, designated "R":
1. For principal, minor and collector streets (design speed = 35 mph), R shall equal five hundred feet (500');
2. For local streets (design speed = 30 mph), R shall equal one hundred twenty five feet (125'); and
3. For alleys, R shall equal one hundred feet (100').
B. Through Traffic Discouraged: Marginal access and local streets shall be laid out so as to discourage use by through traffic. The rigid
rectangular gridiron street pattern should be avoided, and the use of curvilinear streets, cul-de-sacs, or U-shaped streets shall be
encouraged to effect a more desirable street layout.
C. Limited Access To Arterials: Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the Planning Commission
may recommend to the City Council that access to said arterial may be limited by one of the following means:
1. The subdivision of lots so that they back onto the arterial street and front onto a parallel local street (double frontage lots), coupled
with the installation of screening in a reserve (access-restricting) strip along the rear lot lines of such lots;
2. A series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets, or short loops entered from and generally at right angles to the arterial street; or
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 222/251
3. A frontage road separated from the arterial street by a planting strip, but having access thereto at suitable points.
D. Dead-End Streets:
1. Temporary Stub Streets: Streets shall be so arranged to provide for the continuation of streets between adjacent properties when
such continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire and police protection, and efficient provision of
utilities, and where such continuation comports with the Municipal Comprehensive Plan. If the adjacent property is owned by the
developer (under the same ownership) and undeveloped and the street must dead-end temporarily, the right of way shall be
extended to the property line, and no strip that would prevent connections with future streets shall be reserved. A temporary
turnaround shall be provided at the terminus of any temporary dead-end street. If the adjacent property is under another
ownership there should be a permanent dead-end.
2. Permanent Dead-End Streets: Cul-de-sacs shall have a maximum length of seven hundred fifty feet (750'). A cul-de-sac
turnaround, having a minimum right of way diameter of ninety eight feet (98'), a minimum pavement return radius of twenty five
feet (25'), and a pavement diameter of seventy five feet (75'), shall be provided at the end of every permanent dead-end street.
E. Alleys: Alleys shall be prohibited in single-family residence districts. Alleys may be required in multiple-family districts and in
commercial/industrial districts unless other adequate provisions for service access are made. Adequate vehicular turnaround space
shall be provided at the terminus of any dead-end alley.
F. Intersections:
1. Only Two Streets: Not more than two (2) streets shall intersect at any one point.
2. Right Angles: Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles; in no case shall two (2) streets
intersect at an angle of less that eighty degrees (80o) or more than one hundred degrees (100o). An oblique street shall be curved
approaching an intersection and shall be approximately at right angles with said intersection for at least one hundred feet (100')
therefrom.
3. Alignment: Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing
intersections on the opposite side of such street. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than one hundred twenty five feet (125')
shall not be permitted, except where the intersected street has divided lanes without median breaks at either intersection.
Intersections involving collector or arterial streets shall be at least eight hundred feet (800') apart.
4. Curb Radii: To permit safe vehicular movement at corners, the minimum curb radius at the intersection of two (2) streets shall be
fifteen feet (15') where both streets are marginal access or local and at other intersections, not less than twenty five feet (25').
5. Grade: Intersections shall be designed with a minimum grade of 0.5%. In hilly terrain, an area having not greater than a two
percent (2%) slope for a distance of sixty feet (60') from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street shall be provided at
the approach to an intersection.
6. Cross-Slope: The cross-slopes of all streets, including intersections, shall not exceed three percent (3%).
7. Adequate Sight Lines: Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation, the developer shall cut such
ground and/or vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of the public right of way to the extent necessary to
provide adequate sight distance in accordance with the following chart:
30 mph 130 feet each way from intersection
35 mph 155 feet each way from intersection
For design speeds exceeding thirty five miles per hour (35 mph), sight distance will be determined based upon AASHTO criteria.
G. Reverse Curves: A tangent at least fifty feet (50') long shall be introduced between reverse curves on local streets and one hundred
feet (100') long on collector streets.
H. Road Dedications And Reservations And Improvements To Existing Streets:
1. New Perimeter Streets: Street systems in new subdivisions shall be laid out so as to eliminate or avoid new perimeter half-streets.
Where an existing half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the other half of the street shall be improved and dedicated by the
subdivider. The Planning Commission may authorize a new perimeter street where the subdivider improves and dedicates the
entire required street right-of-way width within his own subdivision boundaries.
2. Existing Roads: Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow road or when the Comprehensive Plan, Official Map, or zoning
setback regulations indicate plans for realignment or widening a road that would require use of some of the land in the subdivision,
the applicant shall be required to improve and dedicate at his expense such areas for widening or realignment of such roads as
are specifically and uniquely attributable to his subdivision and to reserve for public use any portion of the right of way determined
not to be specifically and uniquely attributable to his subdivision.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 223/251
3. Excess Right Of Way: Right of way in excess of the standards set forth in the Table of Street Design Specifications shall be
required to be dedicated when:
a. Due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate earth slopes; or
b. Due to the location of railroad tracks, additional width is needed to construct overpasses, underpasses, and approaches thereto.
4. "Specifically And Uniquely Attributable" Defined: For purposes of this Section, the phrase "specifically and uniquely attributable"
shall mean as a minimum that areas currently zoned or to be zoned single-family for residential uses in the Comprehensive Plan
shall require marginal access, local, or collector streets, depending on density; that areas currently zoned or to be zoned for multifamily
residential uses in the Comprehensive Plan shall require local, boulevard, collector, minor arterial, or principal arterial
streets, depending on density; that areas currently zoned or to be zoned for commercial uses in the Comprehensive Plan shall
require local, collector, minor arterial, or principal arterial streets, depending on whether same is a neighborhood, community, or
regional area; and that areas currently zoned or to be zoned for industrial uses in the Comprehensive Plan shall require collector,
minor arterial, or principal arterial streets, depending on the size of the industrial area. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-3-6: STREET IMPROVEMENTS STANDARDS:
All new streets shall be graded, curbed, and surfaced in accordance with the standards of Illinois Department of Transportation and the
provisions of the subsections below.
A. Curb And Gutter: All streets shall be bounded by concrete curbs and gutters. Definition of a rollover curb is more fully explained in
diagram form by Appendix 1 of this Section.
B. Pavement: All streets and alleys shall be paved in accordance with the minimum standards as indicated below:
1. Alleys: Six inch (6") thick nonreinforced concrete.
2. Marginal Access, Local:
a. Six inch (6") thick reinforced Portland cement concrete pavement; or
b. Seven inch (7") thick nonreinforced Portland cement concrete; or
c. Asphaltic concrete construction meeting Department of Transportation specifications and satisfactorily meeting ACO
specifications.
3. Collector, Minor Arterial:
a. Seven inch (7") thick reinforced Portland cement concrete; or
b. Eight inch (8") thick nonreinforced Portland cement concrete; or
c. Asphaltic concrete construction meeting Department of Transportation specifications and satisfactorily meeting ACO
specifications.
4. Principal Arterial:
a. Eight inch (8") thick reinforced Portland cement concrete; or
b. Nine inch (9") thick nonreinforced Portland cement concrete; or
c. Asphaltic concrete construction meeting Department of Transportation specifications and satisfactorily meeting ACO
specifications.
The above thickness requirements shall be increased if traffic volume, subgrade or other conditions show justifications for
increased thickness. A subbase or base shall be constructed in accordance with the appropriate articles of the standard
specifications when required by the ACO . A subbase or base with an underdrain system may be required in areas where a
combination or proposed street grade and soil type may lead to subgrade erosion and pavement undermining. The City may
require additional engineering documentation to establish that the above standards are appropriate for the reasons stated in this
paragraph.
Pavements shall be constructed in accordance with these standard specifications and in conformity with the lines, dimensions
and grades shown on the plans and to the form and dimensions shown on the detail drawings included with and being part of
these specifications.
APPENDIX 1
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 224/251
(Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-3-7: BLOCKS:
A. Block Width: Blocks shall be sufficiently wide to accommodate two (2) tiers of lots having the minimum depth required by the zoning
district regulations; provided, that this requirement may be waived in blocks adjacent to local collector or collector streets, railroads,
or watercourses.
B. Block Length: No block shall be longer than one thousand feet (1,000') nor shorter than three hundred feet (300'). (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-
1999)
11-3-8: SIDEWALKS:
Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all streets. Sidewalks shall be installed at the time the lot is developed or prior to issuance
of the occupancy permit.
A. Sidewalk Construction Standards:
1. Relationship To Curb: Sidewalks shall be located one foot (1') inside the right-of-way line or on a line to be given by the City
Engineer when it is impossible or not feasible to build or construct the same as aforesaid.
2. Width: Sidewalks shall be at least four feet (4') wide.
3. Thickness Of Concrete: All sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete at least four inches (4") thick, except that across driveways
the thickness shall be increased to six inches (6").
4. Grade: No sidewalk shall be constructed at a grade steeper than ten percent (10%).
5. Ramps At Intersections: Curbs shall be cut and sidewalks shall be ramped at all intersections so as to enhance the mobility of
handicapped individuals. Ramps shall equal or exceed the standards of the Illinois Capital Development Board. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-
1999)
11-3-9: UTILITIES:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 225/251
All utilities provided as new installations within a subdivision shall be placed in the right of way or in easements, and shall be provided
underground, unless an exception or exemption has been granted.
A. Responsibility: For all major subdivisions, the subdivider shall make the necessary arrangements with the appropriate utility
companies for the proper installation of utilities to assure that all lots have adequate gas, electrical, and communications service.
B. Requirements: All underground electric distribution circuits installed by the utility company within the City shall be installed in
accordance with the Safety Rules for the Installation and Maintenance of Electric Supply and Communication Lines, U.S.
Department of Commerce, National Bureau of Standards, and General Order No. 160, Rules for Construction of Electric Power and
Communication Lines, Illinois Commerce Commission.
C. Enforcement: The Building Inspector shall not issue any occupancy permits until all utilities have been installed in the subdivision.
D. Exceptions: The requirements for underground utilities shall not apply in the following instances:
1. Principal electric distribution feeder circuits and electric transmission circuits shall not be required to be installed underground.
2. Any service which is considered by the utility company to be unfeasible for undergrounding, due to high voltage or inordinately
high and unjustified cost, may be provided overhead when authorized by the City Council.
3. When topographic or soil conditions cause the cost of undergrounding to be extremely and unjustifiably high, services may be
provided overhead when authorized by the City Council.
4. When a subdivision is developed adjacent to or abutting an existing development in which the primary feeder lines have been
installed overhead, the new subdivision may use the overhead lines with the following provisions:
a. The service lines to the buildings in the new subdivision shall be installed underground.
b. All additional necessary feeder lines shall be installed underground.
5. When a building is constructed on a single unoccupied lot in an area which is fully developed with overhead electric and
communication service, the building may use the overhead service line if it completes the development of the area.
6. Utilities provided as new installations to lots for industrial purposes may be provided overhead.
E. Exemptions: The following specific facilities shall be exempt from the requirements of this Title:
1. Poles used exclusively for street lighting.
2. Poles, overhead lines, and associated overhead structures, authorized by the City Council, crossing or entering any portion of a
district from which overhead wires have been prohibited, and originating in an area in which overhead wires are allowed.
3. Overhead lines attached to the exterior of a building by means of a bracket or similar device, and extending from one location on
the building to another on the same building, or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street or right of way.
4. Radio antenna and associated structures and equipment used for furnishing communication service.
5. Service terminals and necessary pad-mounted electric equipment installed aboveground, used to distribute communication and
electric service in underground systems. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-3-10: WATER FACILITIES:
A. Water Distribution System: Every subdivision shall be provided with a complete water distribution system adequate to serve all lots
within the subdivision. The water distribution system shall be designed according to standard specifications and shall be approved by
the ACO and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. Whenever a water main is extended it shall be extended across the entire
frontage of the property being subdivided and it shall be connected to any other mains which front on or are adjacent to the
subdivision to provide for looping of the water system.
B. Fire Flow Requirements: The engineer for the subdivider shall calculate the expected fire flow requirements within the subdivision
based upon the intended zoning and expected land use in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code, latest adopted edition. Also taken
into consideration when determining the size of pipe to be installed shall be the anticipated demand for water by downstream
properties based on anticipated development of such properties based on the Comprehensive Plan for such expansion areas.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 226/251
C. Service Connections: Individual service connections within single-family residential subdivisions shall be extended from the main to
within one foot (1') of the lot line of each lot with an approved corporation and curb box and clearly marked with a fence post or
similar material to facilitate their locations.
D. Fire Flow Tests: Upon written request to the ACO , the City will perform fire flow tests on the existing water mains to be extended and
provide the data to the subdivider's engineer.
E. Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants of the type approved by the ACO shall be installed according to standard engineering practices and shall
be placed at intervals of not more than four hundred feet (400') for residential, and not more than the maximum specified for
commercial and industrial use, in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-3-11: SANITARY SEWERS:
All proposed sanitary sewer facilities shall comply with the regulations of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and must be
approved by the ACO.
A. When Public System Available:
1. Whenever the subdivision any point of which is within three hundred feet (300') of an existing publicly owned sewer main or other
collection system and who have the right to extend public sewer mains or private sewer laterals from said property to said existing
publicly owned sewer main or other collection system either by way of street, alley, public way, public easement, or private
easement the subdivider shall construct sewer mains, where technically feasible, which shall be connected to such public sewer
and shall provide sewer to all lots within the subdivision.
2. All sewer main construction shall be done according to standard engineering practices.
3. Whenever a sanitary sewer system is extended it shall be extended across the entire frontage or frontages of the property to be
improved by the extension unless the City has determined, because of land contours or the presence of other mains, that no other
property can be technically or needs to be served by such an extension.
B. Interim Disposal Systems: Where a sanitary sewer cannot be extended as required by subsection A3 of this Section, the developer
shall construct a sanitary sewer system to serve all lots within the subdivision and shall provide sewage treatment by means of an
approved sewage treatment plant which shall be operated and maintained by the developer until such time as the system can be
connected to the publicly owned system. Said system shall be temporarily capped. Where the land covered by the preliminary plat
contains not more than ten (10) lots, individual sewage disposal systems may be used and must be installed according to applicable
laws and regulations of the appropriate approving agency. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-3-12: EASEMENTS:
A. Utility Easements: Easements at least ten feet (10') wide shall be provided for public and private utilities along the front right-of-way
lines of the public streets. Easements located elsewhere shall be at least twenty feet (20') wide and if along lot lines, they shall be
centered on the lot lines.
B. Drainage Easements: Adequate easements for storm water drainage shall be established along any natural drainage channel and in
any other locations where necessary to provide satisfactory disposal of storm water from streets, alleys, and all other portions of the
subdivision. The precise location and minimum widths of said easements shall be determined by the Municipal Engineer. (Ord. 99-
01, 1-25-1999)
11-3-13: DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS:
A. Design Criteria: The Planning Commission shall not recommend the approval of plat unless, the appropriate City official (ACO)
determines that the proposed provisions for storm water drainage are adequate within boundaries of the subdivision. Drainage
improvements in the subdivision shall be coordinated with existing and planned drainage improvements elsewhere so as to form an
integrated City system. The storm water drainage system shall be separate and independent of the sanitary sewer system and shall
meet the following design criteria:
1. Principal And Minor Arterial Streets:
a. Flow from a 10-year storm shall not inundate the center twenty feet (20') of the pavement.
b. Flow from a 50-year storm shall be carried without damage to any building.
2. Collector Streets:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 227/251
a. Flow from a 10-year storm shall not inundate the center ten feet (10') of the pavement.
b. Flow from a 50-year storm shall be carried without damage to any building.
3. Local Streets:
a. Flow from a 10-year storm shall not top the curb.
b. Flow from a 50-year storm shall be carried without damage to any building.
B. Catch Basins Or Inlets: Catch basins or inlets, if required, shall be constructed so that the majority of surface water shall be
intercepted before reaching the intersection, and not carried for a distance of more than four hundred feet (400') of the pavement.
C. Accommodation Of Upstream Drainage Areas: A culvert or other drainage facility large enough to accommodate potential runoff from
the entire drainage area upstream from the proposed subdivision shall be provided in accordance with the City's standard
specifications. Potential runoff shall be determined on the basis of the maximum development of the upstream area that is permitted
or to be permitted under the Comprehensive Plan.
D. Areas Subject To Flooding: Whenever a plat is submitted for an area that is subject to flooding, the City Council may require
appropriate protective measures, including the filling of the flood-prone area to a level equal to the regulatory flood elevation, if any.
(Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-3-14: SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL:
In the development of any subdivision, the following erosion and sedimentation control regulation shall be observed:
A. The developer shall protect the development site from soil erosion and shall protect downstream property from sedimentation
deposits during the construction of the subdivision. Practices contained in "Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control in Illinois" shall be employed in the preparation of an erosion and sedimentation control plan which shall be
approved by the City Engineer prior to any earth disturbing activity taking place. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-3-15: DEDICATIONS FOR PUBLIC USE:
The City Council may require the developer to dedicate (i.e., to transfer without compensation) to the City or other appropriate
governmental entity suitable parcel(s) of land within the subdivision for public purposes provided such facilities are otherwise required
by this Title. Any such dedicated area shall be shown on the final plat.
A. Reservations For Public Use: Besides requiring the developer to dedicate parcels for public purposes, the City Council may require
that he reserve land for parks, playgrounds, schools, or other public purposes in locations designated in the City's Comprehensive
Plan. Since public acquisition of reserved land requires compensation, it is not essential that the need for such land be uniquely and
specifically attributable to the subdivision3.
1. Adopted: There is hereby adopted an Official Map dated , which shall be applicable to all land situated within the City, and shall
also be applicable to contiguous territory within one and one-half (11/2) miles from the corporate limits of the City and not included
within the corporate limits of any other municipality. The Official Map shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk and is made part of
this Title by reference.
2. Planned Public Improvements To Be Shown On Map: The Official Map may show indication of sites for planned public facilities.
Public facility sites which may be indicated on the Official Map may include, but are not limited to: sites for new trafficways or
widening of existing trafficways; school sites; recreational sites; public building sites; and sites for future storm drainage, electrical
or other public service or utility easements.
3. Availability Of Sites For Planned Public Improvements:
a. Whenever the Official Map indicates the necessity for providing a site for a planned public facility, the Council may require that
the site for the public use be designated on the subdivision plat before granting approval to such plat; and, furthermore, that the
site be held for that specific public use for a period of one year from the date of approval of the final plat. When such designation
has been required, the Council shall notify the responsible public agency in writing of the designation within ten (10) days.
b. Whenever a site for public use, shown on the Official Map, has been required to be indicated on a subdivision plat, the
responsible agency having jurisdiction of such use shall acquire the land so designated by purchase or commence proceedings
to acquire the land by condemnation within one year from date of final approval of the plat; and, if it does not do so within such
period of one year, the land so designated may then be used by the owners in any other manner consistent with this Chapter,
the Zoning Ordinance, or any other provision of this Code or other ordinance of the City.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 228/251
4. Amendments Or Additions To The Official Map: Amendments to the Official Map, including the indication of additional public sites
to be shown on the map, shall be considered amendments to this Title and therefore shall be as specified in this Title for
amendments to this Title. Any public agency requesting the establishment of the Official Map of a future public site or easement
which is not included in the Comprehensive Plan, shall indicate to the Plan Commission the need for the site in the particular
location specified. The Plan Commission, before making a favorable recommendation for the inclusion on the Official Map of such
site by the Council, shall find that this public site location is determined to be necessary to provide public service consistent with
the Comprehensive Plan of the community and shall so indicate in its minutes. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
Chapter 4
PLATS AND PLANS
11-4-1: PREFILING CONFERENCE:
Prior to the submission of the initial plat, a prefiling conference may be held between the developer and appropriate City staff. The
developer shall present a concept sketch of the proposed development. City staff shall use a standardized checklist to review the
proposed development for conformance to the Subdivision Ordinance. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-4-2: PRELIMINARY PLATS:
Except as specifically provided below, every person who proposes to subdivide any land located within the subdivision jurisdiction of the
City shall file six (6) copies of the preliminary plat of said subdivision with the ACO at least three (3) weeks prior to a regularly scheduled
meeting of the Planning Commission.
He shall also file one copy of the preliminary plat and supporting data with the appropriate Soil and Water Conservation District. Said
District shall have not more than thirty (30) days to submit any comments it might wish to make to the Planning Commission1.
Whenever a large tract is to be developed in stages and only a portion of that tract is to be submitted for final plat approval, a
preliminary plat of the entire tract shall be submitted.
All preliminary plats shall be reviewed and acted upon in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-8 and the provisions of
the subsections below.
Exception: A preliminary plat shall not be required for minor subdivisions; or land that is specifically exempted from the Illinois Plat Act
as now or hereafter amended2.
A. Information Required: Every preliminary plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor registered in Illinois at a scale of one hundred feet
(100') or less to the inch provided the resultant drawing does not exceed thirty six inches by twenty four inches (36" x 24"). Said
preliminary plat, together with the supporting data, shall provide all of the following information:
1. Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider (if not owner), and registered land surveyor;
2. Proposed name of the subdivision and all adjoining subdivisions;
3. Zoning district classification of the tract to be subdivided and proposed setbacks;
4. North arrow, graphic scale, and date of map;
5. Dimensions of the tract, and its gross area;
6. Topography of the tract to be subdivided as indicated by two foot (2') contour data for land having slopes of zero to four percent (0
to 4%), five foot (5') contour data for land having slopes between four and twelve percent (4 and 12%), and ten foot (10') contour
data for land having slopes of twelve percent (12%) or more;
7. Locations of such features as bodies of water, ponding areas, natural drainageways, railroads, cemeteries, bridges, parks,
schools, buildings, areas subject to flooding, etc.;
8. Locations and right-of-way widths of all existing and proposed streets and alleys;
9. Locations, widths, and purposes of all existing and proposed easements;
10. All proposed deed restrictions and covenants;
11. Location and size of existing and proposed sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, and any appurtenances thereto;
12. Locations, types, and approximate sizes of all other existing and proposed utilities;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 229/251
13. Locations, dimensions, and areas of all parcels to be reserved or dedicated for schools, parks/playgrounds, and other public
purposes;
14. Locations, dimensions, and areas of all proposed or existing lots within the subdivision numbered sequentially;
15. For all contiguous holdings of the owner; including land owned by the same person, corporation, firm, entity, partnership, or
unincorporated association or owned by different corporations, firms, partnerships, entities, or unincorporated associations in
which a stockholder, partner, or associate, or a member of his family owns an interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity,
or unincorporated association; with an indication of the portion proposed for subdivision: an affidavit of ownership, which shall
include the dates the respective holdings of land were acquired, together with the book and page of each conveyance to the
present owner as recorded in the County Recorder of Deeds' office or other official records; the name and address and telephone
number of the legal owner of the property, the subdivider, if different from the legal owner, the land surveyor and engineer, and the
agents of any of these persons; the name, address and telephone number of the contract owner, if any, of the property and the
date the contract of sale was executed; and, if any corporations are involved, a complete list of all directors, officers, and
stockholders owning more than five percent (5%) of any class of stock of each corporation; and, if a trust is involved, a complete
list of the names of the trustees, and the names and addresses and telephone numbers of all beneficiaries of the trust;
16. The location by township, range, section, or by other legal description;
17. A list of requested variances and justifications.
B. Utility Company Notification: It is the subdivider's responsibility to notify the appropriate public utilities. Proof of notification shall be
submitted with the preliminary plat to the City for City approval.
C. Planning Commission Action: The Planning Commission shall either recommend approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of the
application for the preliminary plat within ninety (90) days from the date of said application or the filing of the last item of required
supporting data, whichever date is later, unless the Planning Commission and the subdivider mutually agree to extend this time
limit3. If the Planning Commission recommends disapproval of the preliminary plat, they shall furnish to the applicant within the
ninety (90) day period a written statement specifying the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to this Title and/or the
Official Map. If the Planning Commission recommends approval of the preliminary plat, it shall promptly so inform the City Council.
D. Appeals Process: If the preliminary plat is not approved, the ACO shall write "Not Approved" and the date of the Planning
Commission's action on the prints, and shall transmit to the subdivider one print with a letter stating the reasons for the disapproval.
The subdivider may transmit an amended plat to the Planning Commission for consideration.
If the subdivider is not satisfied with the decision of the Planning Commission on the preliminary plat, then the subdivider may appeal
the decision to the City Council. An appeal must be made by letter addressed to the Mayor and City Council, stating the reasons for
the appeal. Said letter must be received by the ACO no less than ten (10) days following the date of the Planning Commission's
decision. The letter of appeal shall be placed on the next regular City Council meeting agenda after it is received by the ACO . The
ACO shall also provide to the City Council the preliminary plat, the Planning Commission's meeting minutes pertaining to the plat,
and the reports and recommendations made to the Planning Commission by the ACO . The City Council shall have thirty (30) days
from the time the appeal is first placed on its agenda either to: reaffirm the Planning Commission's decision on the preliminary plat;
to approve the preliminary plat as submitted by the subdivider; or to approve the preliminary plat with modifications.
E. Action By The City Council: If the Planning Commission has recommended approval of a preliminary plat, the City Council, by
resolution, shall either accept or reject said plat within thirty (30) days after their next regularly scheduled meeting following the
Planning Commission's action. If the City Council rejects the preliminary plat, their resolution shall specify the aspects in which the
plat fails to comply with this Title. The City Clerk shall attach a certified copy of the Council's resolution of approval or disapproval to
the preliminary plat. One copy of the resolution and plat shall be retained by the Clerk, one copy shall be filed with the ACO , and
one copy shall be given to the subdivider. City Council approval shall not qualify a preliminary plat for recording. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-
1999)
11-4-3: IMPROVEMENT PLANS:
After the City Council has approved the preliminary plat, but prior to submission of the final plat, the subdivider shall furnish four (4)
copies of the plans and specifications for all improvements to be installed within or in conjunction with the proposed subdivision to the
ACO for review. These plans and specifications shall be signed and sealed by the registered professional engineer responsible for their
preparation. Until the ACO certifies in writing that the proposed improvements conform to generally accepted engineering practices and
to the standards imposed in this Title: the ACO shall not issue any permit to allow construction of said improvements; and the City
Council shall not act upon the application for final plat approval.
A. Information Required: Improvement plans shall consist of black or blue line prints not larger than thirty six inches by twenty four
inches (36" x 24"). These plans and the related specifications shall provide all of the following information:
1. Topography of the tract, both before and after development at the same scale as required in the preliminary plat;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 230/251
2. Existing and proposed elevations along the center lines of all streets;
3. Radii of all curves and lengths of tangents on all streets;
4. Locations and typical cross section of street pavements including curbs/gutters and catch basins;
5. Locations and typical cross section of sidewalks and driveway aprons;
6. Locations, sizes, and invert elevations of all existing and proposed sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and fire hydrants, showing
connections to any existing or proposed utility systems;
7. Locations and sizes of all water, gas, electric, and other utilities;
8. Locate area(s) for removal of trees six inches (6") or larger;
9. All proposed measures to control erosion and sedimentation;
10. High water elevations of all lakes/streams adjoining or within the tract; and
11. Such other information as the ACO may reasonably require to perform his duties under this Section.
B. Inspections Required: The subdivider/developer shall notify the ACO of both the start and completion of construction of approved
improvements.
1. The ACO shall inspect said improvements while they are under construction. If he determines that they are being built in violation
of this Title, he shall promptly notify the Administrator who, in turn, shall issue a stop order. All public improvements proposed to be
made under the provisions of this Chapter shall be inspected during the course of construction by the ACO or a duly designated
deputy selected and retained by the subdivider and approved by the City. All fees and costs connected with such inspection and in
reviewing the plan and specifications for such improvements shall be paid by the subdivider. The fees and cost shall be set at the
prevailing rate.
2. In addition to the detailed requirements listed below, the inspector shall maintain a daily diary in a standard format acceptable to
the ACO . Copies of the daily diary entries shall be provided to the ACO on a weekly basis during construction.
a. Content: The daily entries shall include at least the following information:
(1) Weather conditions.
(2) Site conditions.
(3) Contractor's working hours.
(4) Inspector's hours on the site.
(5) An explanation of the actual work performed by the contractor that day.
(6) Specific information about material tests taken.
(7) Description of any problems.
b. Purpose: The purpose of the diary is to provide backup information for the developer's engineer and the ACO to recommend
acceptance of the improvements by the City Council and provide actual construction records of any problems that may develop.
c. Format: The general format of the diary must be approved by the ACO before construction begins.
3. The inspector shall make and document the following inspections:
a. Storm And Sanitary Sewer And Water Main Improvements:
(1) Inspect all materials and documents pertinent items such as pipe manufacturer, class, and size.
(2) Reject any defective material and ensure that it is not used on the job.
(3) Observe the actual pipe laying operation to ensure that all joints are properly made, the pipes are true to line and grade, and
the bedding and backfill are done according to the specifications.
(4) Document the depth and type of bedding, trench conditions, location of all service laterals, backfilling, and location of all
utilities installed and encountered. Location measurements shall be of the accuracy and type required by the ACO .
(5) Observe and document all final acceptance testing required by the specifications.
b. Street Improvements:
(1) Perform and document subgrade, subbase, base, and embankment compaction tests.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 231/251
(2) Inspect the alignment and condition of the paving forms.
(A) Check and document subgrade depth checks.
(B) Check and document the paving machine adjustments.
(3) Furnish the asphalt or PC concrete mix design to the ACO for approval prior to connecting paving operations.
(4) Inspect all concrete pours.
(A) Perform and document an appropriate number of air content and slump measurements.
(B) Cast compression cylinders or beams and document the results of the tests.
(5) Inspect the placement of all asphalts.
(A) Perform and record asphalt compaction tests.
(B) Perform at least one asphalt extraction test and one sieve analysis from an asphalt sample taken on the job site.
4. The ACO shall also inspect required improvements upon their completion. The City shall not accept any improvement until the
Municipal Engineer has certified that it complies with this Title.
C. Filing "As Built" Records: The improvements will not be recommended for acceptance until the following is provided for the ACO :
1. Copies of all daily diary entries.
2. Copies of all material test results.
3. Detailed reproducible cloth or polyester reproducible "as-built" improvements construction plans of all public improvements.
4. Certification by the developer's engineer that all construction was accomplished within reasonably close conformance to the plans
and specifications, and that the "as-built" plans accurately reflect actual field conditions.
5. A labor and material payment and maintenance bond posted prior to construction by the contractor of a subdivider for the
installation of all public improvements, using forms provided by the ACO .
6. Permanent easements or agreements granted to the City for all public improvements that are not constructed in dedicated right of
way, using forms provided by the ACO .
7. Accurate triangular measurements for sewer and water laterals to permanent items, e.g., fire hydrants or manholes. The sewer
and water services shall be marked with a four inch by four inch (4" x 4") marking, that stands five or six feet (5 or 6') tall including
a curb notch.
D. Privately Developed And Operated Facilities: Where the subdivision is to contain sewers, sewage treatment plants, water supply
systems, park areas, or other physical facilities which will not be maintained by existing public agencies, provision should be made
by trust agreement, which is a part of the deed restrictions and which is acceptable to the proper public agencies, for jurisdiction over
the continuous maintenance, supervision, operation and reconstruction of such facilities by the lot owners in the subdivision. (Ord.
99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-4-4: ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Final Plat Approval: The City Council shall not approve any final plat (and, hence, said final plat shall not be entitled to recording)
until:
1. All improvements required in the approved improvements plan have been completed by the subdivider/developer at his expense,
inspected by the ACO , and dedicated to the City, or other appropriate entity; or
2. In accordance with the subsections below, the subdivider/developer has provided the City with legal assurance to guarantee the
satisfactory completion and dedication of all required improvements; or
3. Necessary title assurances have been given.
B. Forms Of Assurance: The required legal assurance may be a performance bond, an escrow deposit or a letter of credit. Every
performance bond shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney, and posted with the City Clerk. Any funds held in escrow shall
be deposited with an approved escrow agent.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 232/251
C. Amount Of Bond Or Deposit: The amount of the legal assurance shall be equal to the ACO's estimate of the costs of constructing the
uncompleted portion of the required improvements plus all required inspection fees. Any escrow deposit may be in the form of:
1. An irrevocable letter of credit or commitment from a lending institution guaranteeing to the City the availability of the escrow funds
from time to time upon demand; or
2. Interest bearing accounts with a financial institution authorized to serve as an escrow agent.
D. Eligible Sureties: No person shall be eligible to act as surety unless he has been approved by the State to act as a surety on public
works improvements.
E. Term Of Assurance, Extension: The initial term of any performance bond or escrow agreement shall not exceed two (2) years. If all
the required improvements have not been completed by the end of the two (2) year period, the ACO , with the advice and consent of
the City Council may extend said bond/escrow agreement for one year only.
F. Release Of Bond/Escrow Deposit:
1. The ACO may release up to ninety percent (90%) of the amount of the performance bond/escrow deposit upon receipt of written
authorization from the Municipal Engineer. The amount which the Municipal Engineer authorizes to be released shall be equal to
the value of improvements actually completed in accordance with approved plans.
2. The balance of the amount of the performance bond/escrow deposit shall not be released until:
a. The Municipal Engineer has certified to the ACO in writing that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed;
and
b. Said improvements and corresponding right of way have been accepted by and dedicated to the City or other appropriate entity.
G. Failure To Complete Improvements: If all the required improvements have not been completed by the end of the two (2) year period
(or 3 year period, in the case of an extension), the ACO , with the assistance of the City Attorney, may:
1. Require the surety to perform on the bond, and to pay to the City an equal amount to the cost of completing the required
improvements (as estimated by the Municipal Engineer) or the amount of the bond not theretofore released, whichever is less; or
2. Order the escrow agent to retain all escrowed funds needed to complete the required improvements, and to return the balance (if
any) of such funds to the subdivider/developer. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-4-5: FINAL PLATS:
The Henry County Recorder of Deeds shall not record any final plat of a subdivision located within the subdivision jurisdiction of the City
until said final plat has been approved by the City Council. The City Council shall not approve any final plat unless they determine that it
is in compliance with all pertinent requirements of this Title including those set forth in the subsections below.
A. Filing, Time Limits: The subdivider of every subdivision, who desires final plat approval shall file six (6) black or blue line prints of the
final plat and supporting data with ACO not later than one year after preliminary plat approval has been granted.
B. Information Required: Every final plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor authorized to practice land surveying in the State on new
linen tracing cloth- or polyester-based film with waterproof black ink at a scale not greater than one hundred feet equals one inch
(100' = 1"), provided that the resultant drawing shall not be less than 81/2 x 14 and shall not exceed twenty four by thirty six inches
(24 x 36") square. The final plat and supporting data shall portray/provide all of the following information:
1. North arrow, graphic scale, and data;
2. Name of subdivider and subdivision;
3. Accurate metes and bounds or other adequate legal description of the tract tied to section or one-fourth (1/4) section corner;
4. Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and bearings or angles which provide a survey of the tract, closing with an error of
closure of not more than one foot in fifteen thousand feet (1' in 15,000') and provide a copy of the closure calculations;
5. Reference to recorded plats of adjoining platted land by record name, plat book and page number;
6. Accurate locations of all existing streets intersecting the boundaries of the subdivision;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 233/251
7. Right-of-way lines of all streets, other rights of way, easements, areas to be reserved, and lot lines with accurate dimensions,
angles, or bearings and curve data, including radii, arcs or chords, points of tangency, central angles, and accompanying legal
descriptions;
8. Name and right-of-way width of every proposed street;
9. Location, width and purpose of any existing or proposed easement;
10. Number of each lot, lot dimensions, and (in a separate list) lot areas;
11. Purpose(s) for which sites, other than private lots, are reserved;
12. Building or setback lines with accurate dimensions;
13. Restrictions of all types which will run with the land and become covenants in the deeds of lots;
14. The names of all legal owners and other parties with an interest, whether recorded or not, in the property being subdivided,
together with formal irrevocable offers of dedication to the public of all streets, local government uses, utilities, parks, and
easements, signed by all parties of interest or their authorized agents, in a form approved by the City Attorney, if the plat is
proposed for final approval without improvements in place and accepted with a deed of dedication to the public in fee simple
absolute unless otherwise called for on the plat of such lands; and with a commitment for title insurance policy or title opinion from
a licensed attorney showing that those signing the plat are necessary and sufficient to create the subdivision and, prior to signing
the plat, a title policy for the local government in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for any lands or interests to be
dedicated to the public; and
15. Monument identification.
16. Notification approval of easements by appropriate utilities. This approval will not be noted in the final plat.
C. Modifications And Exceptions: If the final plat is under one ownership and is no more than five (5) lots, no formal Commission
approval is needed and the plans can go directly to the City Council unless there are new streets, other public improvements, or
easements of egress or ingress.
D. Certificates Required: Certificates4 are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
E. Action By City Council: The City Council shall either approve or disapprove the application for final plat approval by resolution within
sixty (60) days from the date of said application or the filing of the last item of required supporting data, whichever date is later,
unless the City Council and the subdivider mutually agree to extend this time limit5. The City Council shall not approve any final plat
unless:
1. The final plat substantially conforms to the approved preliminary plat if required; and
2. The final plat manifests substantial compliance with the design and improvement standards of this Title and the Official Map; and
3. To the City Council's knowledge and belief, the final plat complies with all pertinent statutory requirements; and
4. Either of the following has been met:
a. All required improvements have been completed, inspected, accepted, and dedicated; or
b. The subdivider/developer has posted an acceptable form of assurance as stated in subsection 11-4-4B of this Chapter.
If the City Council disapproves the final plat, their resolution shall specify the aspects in which the plat fails to meet the above
conditions for approval. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-4-6: MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The subdivider/developer shall provide all the improvements in the subdivision for a period of one year and provide a one year
maintenance bond prior to acceptance and dedication to the City or other appropriate entity. Said bond shall be in the amount
determined by the ACO to be sufficient to guarantee the satisfactory condition of the required improvements for a period of one year
from the date of their acceptance and dedication. If at any time during the one year period the improvements are found to be defective,
they shall be repaired/replaced at the subdivider/developer's expense. If the subdivider/developer refuses to pay such costs within
ninety (90) days after demand is made upon him by the ACO , the City shall use the maintenance bond to make the necessary
repairs/replacement. If the cost of repairs/replacement exceeds the bond amount, the subdivider/developer shall be liable for the
excess. At the end of the one year period, the maintenance bond shall be released. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 234/251
Chapter 5
OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS
11-5-1: ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, DUTIES:
The , referred to herein as the Administrator, is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this Title.
(Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-5-2: AMENDMENTS:
Amendments to this Title may be proposed by any member of the City Board, any Planning Commission member, or any party in
interest. Every amendment proposal shall be filed on a prescribed form in the Administrator's office. The ACO shall promptly transmit
each proposal, together with any comments or recommendations he may wish to make, to the City Planning Commission for a public
hearing.
A. Public Hearing, Notice: The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on every amendment proposal within a reasonable time
after said proposal is submitted to them. At the hearing any interested party may appear and testify, either in person or by duly
authorized agent or attorney. Notice indicating the time, date, and place of the hearing, and the nature of the proposed amendment
shall be given not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation within the City.
B. Advisory Report, Action By City Board: Within a reasonable time after the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall submit an
advisory report to the City Board. The City Board shall act on the proposed amendment at a regularly scheduled meeting following
submission of this report. Without another public hearing, the City Board may either pass, modify or reject the proposed amendment
or may refer it back to the Planning Commission for further consideration. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-5-3: PENALTIES:
A. Any person who is convicted of a violation of this Title shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
B. Nothing contained in this Section shall prevent this Municipality from taking any other lawful action that may be necessary to secure
compliance with this Title. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-5-4: REPEAL:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are to the extent of such conflict hereby repealed. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-5-5: SEPARABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this Title is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Title. The City Board hereby declares that it would have adopted the Title and each
section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word thereof without incorporation in this Title of any such invalid section, subsection,
clause, phrase or word. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
Title 12
ZONING
Chapter 1
ADOPTION
12-1-1: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 235/251
Those ordinances pertaining to city zoning regulations, adopted by ordinance 03-5-02 dated April 22, 2002, and all amendments
thereto, are hereby adopted by reference, and are on file in the city. (Per correspondence dated 10-25-2005)
Chapter 2
SIGNS
12-2-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Interference With Traffic Control: No sign shall be erected or maintained at any location where by reason of its position, wording,
illumination, size, shape or color it may impair, obstruct, obscure, or be confused with any authorized traffic control sign, signal or
device.
B. Flashing, Intermittent Or Animated Illumination: No off site sign or billboard having flashing, intermittent, or animated illumination shall
be permitted within three hundred feet (300') of property in any residence district unless such sign is not visible from such property.
C. Proximity To Residential District: No off site sign or billboard shall be erected or placed within one hundred feet (100') of any
residence district.
D. Temporary Signs: Advertising signs of no more than four (4) square feet in area shall be permitted in any district provided they
comply with subsections A and B of this section. These signs shall be removed within five (5) days following the event to which they
pertain. (1997 Code)
12-2-2: RESIDENCE DISTRICTS:
In any residence district the following regulations shall apply:
A. Identification Sign: A nonilluminated identification sign not exceeding one square foot in area shall be permitted for each dwelling unit.
Such sign shall indicate nothing other than name and/or address of the occupants.
B. Real Estate Signs: One temporary, nonilluminated, on site sign not to exceed six (6) square feet in area for the sale of real estate,
which sign shall be removed within ten (10) days after sale of the real estate.
C. Announcements: Announcement of church, school, or other public buildings or uses, where permitted bulletin boards or identification
signs shall be permitted, not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area.
D. Normal Use: Signs corresponding to that normal use permitted in the zoning district for uses given conditional uses.
E. All Other Signs: All other signs are prohibited in residence districts. (1997 Code)
12-2-3: NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
The following signs are allowed in nonresidential districts:
A. Real Estate: Temporary signs not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area advertising the sale or lease of real property when
located on the property to which the sign refers and when not located closer than ten feet (10') to a lot line, which sign shall be
removed within ten (10) days of the sale or lease of the property.
B. Future Use Or Development: Temporary ground signs advertising future use or development of property on which such signs are
located may be maintained subject to provisions of this section, provided such signs do not exceed two hundred fifty (250) square
feet in area or remain longer than six (6) months. "For Rent" and "For Lease" signs in commercial and industrial districts for new
buildings shall not exceed forty eight (48) square feet in area or remain more than ninety (90) days after the building is completed
and when located not closer than ten feet (10') to a lot line.
C. Church Or Public Building: Church or public building bulletin boards not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area. (1997 Code)
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 236/251
12-2-4: AGRICULTURE DISTRICT:
In the A agriculture district, the following signs are also permitted:
A. On Premises Activities: Ground signs pertaining to activities conducted on the premises.
B. Off Premises Activities: Ground or post signs, not exceeding one hundred (100) square feet in area, advertising activities conducted
within twelve (12) miles of the sign or providing information of direct interest to the traveling public, including points of interest,
recreation and scenic areas, places for camping, lodging, eating, sale of farm supplies, and vehicular service and repair. (1997
Code)
12-2-5: BUSINESS DISTRICTS:
A. Permitted Signs: In the business and commercial districts, there may be any signs allowed in subsection 12-2-4B of this chapter and
roof signs, wall signs, projecting signs, awning signs, and portable signs when displaying no advertising matter except pertaining to
the business conducted in the building or on the premises on which such sign is placed.
B. Size: The total square foot area of roof signs, wall signs, projecting signs, marquee signs and awning signs shall not exceed one-fifth
(1/5) of the total square foot area of the face of the building on which they are placed.
C. Number Of Signs: There shall not be more than one ground sign for each one hundred feet (100') of street frontage.
D. Placement: No ground sign shall extend closer than ten feet (10') to a lot line. (1997 Code)
12-2-6: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
A. Permitted Signs: In the I-1 and I-2 industrial districts there may be any sign allowed in section 12-2-5 of this chapter and ground
signs, provided that no ground sign shall exceed three hundred (300) square feet in area.
B. Number Of Signs: Not more than one ground sign shall be erected on any one lot or tract of land, or one sign for each three hundred
feet (300') of street frontage when located at least three hundred feet (300') apart on such lot or tract of land.
C. Intersecting Streets: No ground sign when erected on a lot fronting on intersecting streets shall be erected within fifty feet (50') of the
intersection of the streets, and no ground sign may be erected within fifty feet (50') of the intersection of the state or federal
highways.
D. Frontage On Interstate Highway: Notwithstanding any other provision herein, in a B-2 district along the frontage of any interstate
highway, being any highway designated by the Illinois department of transportation and approved by the United States department of
transportation as a part of the national system of interstate and defense highways on July 1, 1972, or thereafter, ground signs may
be one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet in total area, with no height restriction. (1997 Code)
12-2-7: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
The following additional sign regulations shall be observed:
A. Ground Signs: No ground sign shall be, at any point, over twenty five feet (25') above ground level and shall have an open space of
at least three feet (3') between the lower edge of such sign and the ground level, fifty percent (50%) of which may be filled in with a
platform and decorative latticework of light construction. Every ground sign shall be stoutly constructed in a secure and substantial
manner. The end of all such ground signs shall be at least six feet (6') distant from any wall or fence or any obstruction that would
prevent a clear passage around the ends and shall be at least ten feet (10') distant from any lot line.
B. Wall Signs: No wall sign shall extend beyond the building more than twelve inches (12"). No wall sign shall be so erected as to cover
the doors or windows of any building or otherwise prevent free ingress or egress to or from any window, door or any fire escape of
any building.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 237/251
C. Projecting Signs: Projecting signs may extend not more than four feet six inches (4'6") from the building into the front yard.
D. Marquee Signs: Marquees may extend eight feet (8') into a front yard. Marquees shall be not less than eleven feet (11') above the
ground at its lowest level. A sign may be placed upon a marquee, provided such sign does not extend more than three feet (3')
above or one foot (1') below such marquee, but shall be at least eight feet (8') above grade.
E. Portable Signs: Portable signs are prohibited except that there may be such portable signs on parking lots as permitted by the
administrative officer as being necessary to satisfactory operation of the lot and except that each filling station may have one
portable sign not exceeding twelve (12) square feet of total sign area restricted solely to stating the price of gasoline.
F. Paper Posters And Certain Signs Or Devices Prohibited: Paper posters applied directly to the wall or building or pole or other support
and letters or pictures in the form of advertising printed or applied directly on the wall of a building are prohibited. Temporary signs
may be displayed in or attached to the inside of show or display windows, provided the total sign area does not exceed twenty
percent (20%) of the show or display window area. Signs or devices which by color, location or design resemble or conflict with traffic
control signs or devices are prohibited. No sign shall contain flashers, animators, or mechanical movements or contrivances of any
kind, excepting clocks.
G. Required Signs: Traffic or county signs, railroad crossing signs, danger, safety, temporary, emergency, nonadvertising, community
service, or decorative signs as may be required by statute or authorized by the administrative officer. (1997 Code)
Title 13
FLOOD CONTROL
Chapter 1
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
13-1-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this city of Colona by the Illinois municipal code1 in order to accomplish
the following purposes:
A. To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage hazards to others;
B. To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood damage;
C. To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
D. To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
E. To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the potential for creating blight areas;
F. To make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
G. To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water
impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide
aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic development. (Ord. 0-25-10, 5-9-2011)
13-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also
known as the 100-year flood. The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section 13-1-3 of this chapter.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 238/251
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the crest of the base flood.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally aboveground, including manufactured
homes, prefabricated buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed
on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of the population and, if flooded, would create an added
dimension to the disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital services, can cause greater damage to other
sectors of the community, or can put special populations at risk.
Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and
police stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites
(telephone switching stations or electrical transformers), and hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals,
hazardous or toxic substances).
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate including, but not necessarily limited to:
A. Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a building, or any structural alteration to a building;
B. Substantial improvement of an existing building;
C. Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year;
D. Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or similar projects;
E. Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or fences;
F. Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other alterations of the ground surface;
G. Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that
might change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
"Development" does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing,
and similar practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual
and rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: A map prepared by the federal emergency management agency that depicts the floodplain or special
flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict floodways and show
base flood elevations.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood plus one foot (1') of freeboard at any given location in the
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 239/251
floodplain.
FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): These two (2) terms are synonymous. Those lands within the
jurisdiction of the city of Colona, the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city of Colona, or that may be annexed into the city of Colona that
are subject to inundation by the base flood. The floodplains of the city of Colona are generally identified as such on panel number(s)
135E, 151E, 152E, and 155E of the countywide flood insurance rate map of Henry County prepared by the federal emergency
management agency and dated June 2, 2011. Floodplain also includes those areas of known flooding as identified by the community.
The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Henry County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city of Colona or that
may be annexed into the city of Colona are generally identified as such on the flood insurance rate map prepared for Henry County by
the federal emergency management agency and dated June 2, 2011.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate, property and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency management agency that is used to certify that a
building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base flood. The floodway for the floodplains of the Rock
River and Green River shall be as delineated on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Henry County prepared by FEMA and
dated June 2, 2011. The floodways for each of the remaining floodplains of the city of Colona shall be according to the best data
available from the federal, state, or other sources.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations,
future watershed development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or
debris jams.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the national register of historic places or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting
the requirements for individual listing on the national register.
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
C. Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been certified by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources/office of water resources.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest
floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of section 13-1-7 of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more lots for rent or
sale.
NFIP: National flood insurance program.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 240/251
B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for
which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty five percent (25%) of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SFHA: See definition of Floodplain And Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement, was within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation
or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE: See definition of Building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cumulative percentage of damage "subsequent
to the adoption of this chapter", equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred
regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. The term includes
"repetitive loss buildings" (see definition of Repetitive Loss).
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a structure taking place "subsequent to
the adoption of this chapter", in which the cumulative percentage of improvements:
A. Equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started, or
B. Increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
"Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. This term includes structures
which have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
The term does not include:
A. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
B. Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of historic places or the Illinois register of historic places.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations. A structure or other development without the required federal, state, and/or local permits and elevation certification is
presumed to be in violation until such time as the documentation is provided. (Ord. 0-25-10, 5-9-2011)
13-1-3: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is the base flood. The best available base flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees
with the best available data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace the existing data with better data
and submit it to the FEMA and IDNR/OWR for approval prior to any development of the site.
A. The base flood elevation for the floodplains of Rock River and Green River shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the
countywide flood insurance study of Henry County prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated June 2, 2011.
B. The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an "AH zone" or "AO zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on
the countywide flood insurance rate map of Henry County.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 241/251
C. The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains delineated as an "A zone" on the countywide flood insurance rate map
of Henry County shall be according to the best data available from federal, state or other sources. Should no other data exist, an
engineering study must be financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
D. The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Henry County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city of Colona, or that may be annexed into the city of Colona shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles
in the flood insurance study of Henry County prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated June 2, 2011. (Ord.
0-25-10, 5-9-2011)
13-1-4: DUTIES OF THE BUILDING INSPECTOR AND ZONING OFFICER:
The building inspector and zoning officer shall be responsible for the general administration of this chapter and ensure that all
development activities within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the city of Colona meet the requirements of this chapter.
Specifically, the building inspector and zoning officer shall:
A. Process development permits in accordance with section 13-1-5 of this chapter;
B. Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements
of section 13-1-6 of this chapter;
C. Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings subject to section 13-1-7 of this chapter are met and maintain a
record of the "as built" elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
D. Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of section 13-1-8 of this chapter;
E. Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public health standards of section 13-1-9 of this chapter;
F. If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of section 13-1-11 of this chapter are met and maintain documentation of any
variances granted;
G. Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions outlined in section 13-1-13 of this chapter as necessary to
ensure compliance with this chapter;
H. Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other required local, state, and federal permits;
I. Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse;
J. Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
K. Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of
this chapter;
L. Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps, copies of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance
for development activities subject to this chapter;
M. Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and make substantial damage determinations for structures within
the floodplain; and
N. Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR and/or submitting information to FEMA within six (6) months
whenever a modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to the floodplain map. (Ord. 0-
25-10, 5-9-2011)
13-1-5: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall commence any development in the floodplain without first
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 242/251
obtaining a development permit from the building inspector and zoning officer. The building inspector and zoning officer shall not issue a
development permit if the proposed development does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
A. The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
1. Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions;
2. Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling;
3. The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings;
4. The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section 13-1-7 of
this chapter; and
5. Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also
meet this requirement.
B. Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the building inspector and zoning officer shall compare the elevation of the
site to the base flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown by survey data to be higher than the current
base flood elevation and which has not been filled after the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map is not in the floodplain and
therefore not subject to the requirements of this chapter. Conversely, any development located on land shown to be below the base
flood elevation and hydraulically connected, but not shown on the current flood insurance rate map, is subject to the provisions of
this chapter.
The building inspector and zoning officer shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and
certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map identification.
The building inspector and zoning officer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and
local permits, approvals or permit not required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The building inspector and zoning
officer shall not issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and local permits have been obtained. (Ord. 0-25-10, 5-9-2011)
13-1-6: PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES:
Within any floodway identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map, and within all other floodplains where a floodway has not
been delineated, the following standards shall apply:
A. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no development shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and
anticipated development will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to public health and safety. The following
specific development activities shall be considered as meeting this requirement:
1. Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the following conditions of the Illinois department of natural
resources, office of water resources statewide permit number 2:
a. The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface profile elevation in excess of 1.0 foot, and
b. The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface profile elevation in excess of one-half foot (0.5') at a point one
thousand feet (1,000') upstream of the proposed structure.
c. There are no buildings in the area impacted by the increases in water surface profile.
d. The proposed bridge or culvert crossing will not involve straightening, enlarging, or relocating the existing channel.
e. The design must be certified by a licensed professional engineer in the state of Illinois and the designs must meet the conditions
of an IDNR/OWR permit.
f. The design must be certified by a second licensed professional engineer.
2. Barge fleeting facilities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 3:
a. The permit is only applicable when deadmen, pier cells, or other similar anchorage devices have been permitted by the U.S.
army corps of engineers.
3. Aerial utility crossings meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 4:
a. The utility line must be constructed above the existing 100-year flood elevation or attached to an existing bridge.
b. A utility line attached to an existing bridge shall be constructed above the low cord elevation of the bridge.
c. No supporting towers or poles shall be located in a river, lake or stream.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 243/251
d. Supporting towers including foundation and poles shall be designed and located so as to not cause an obstruction of flood flows
by trapping debris.
e. All disturbed areas shall be returned to preconstruction grades and revegetated.
f. All Illinois commerce commission, national electrical safety code, and federal requirements must be met.
4. Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 5:
a. The boat dock must not extend more than fifty feet (50') into a waterway and no more than one-fourth (1/4) of the width of the
waterway and shall not extend beyond the navigational limits established by the IDNR and corps of engineers.
b. The width of the boat dock shall not be more than ten feet (10').
c. For L-shaped or T-shaped docks, the length of that portion parallel to the shoreline must not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
landowner's shoreline frontage nor fifty feet (50').
d. Docks must be aligned so as not to cross the projection of property lines into the waterway or come within ten feet (10') of the
projected property line.
e. Dock posts must be marked by reflective devices.
f. The boat dock must be securely anchored to prevent detachment during times of high wind or water.
g. Metal drums or containers may not be used as buoyancy units unless they are filled with flotation foam. Containers which
previously stored pesticides, herbicides, or any other toxic chemicals are not permissible.
h. This permit does not authorize any other related construction activity such as shore protection or fill.
i. Nonfloating boat docks must be constructed in a manner which will minimize obstruction to flow.
j. At any future date, the permittee must agree to make necessary modifications to the dock as determined by the IDNR or corps of
engineers.
5. Minor, nonobstructive activities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 6:
a. The following activities (not involving fill or positive change in grade) are covered by this permit:
(1) The construction of underground utility lines, wells, or septic tanks not crossing a lake or stream.
(2) The construction of light poles, signposts, and similar structures.
(3) The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields (excluding fences), patios, and similar structures.
(4) The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports.
(5) The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square feet in size, nor ten (10) square feet in any
dimension. Only one such building on a property is authorized by this statewide permit.
(6) The raising of existing buildings, provided no changes are made to the outside dimensions of the building and the placement
of fill is not involved.
6. Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 7:
a. Any outfall structure, including any headwall or end section, shall not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent
natural bank slope or adjacent bank protection.
b. The velocity of the discharge shall not exceed the scour velocity of the channel soil, unless channel erosion would be prevented
by the use of riprap or other design measures.
c. Outlets from drainage ditches shall not be opened to a stream until the ditch is vegetated or otherwise stabilized to minimize
stream sedimentation.
d. Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All
disturbed floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be restored to their original contours and seeded or otherwise
stabilized upon completion of construction.
7. Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 8:
a. In all cases, the crossing shall be placed beneath the bed of the river, lake or stream and, unless the crossing is encased in
concrete or entrenched in bedrock, a minimum of three feet (3') of cover shall be provided. The river, lake or stream bed shall be
returned to its original condition.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 244/251
b. Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All
disturbed floodway areas, including stream banks, shall be restored to their original contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized
upon completion of construction.
c. Any utility crossing carrying material which may cause water pollution, as defined by the environmental protection act2, shall be
provided with shutoff valves on each side of the body of water to be crossed.
d. If blasting is to be utilized in the construction of the crossing, the permittee shall notify the IDNR/OWR at least ten (10) days
prior to the blasting date to allow monitoring of any related fish kills.
8. Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 9:
a. Only the following materials may be utilized in urban areas: stone and concrete riprap, steel sheet piling, cellular blocks, fabric
formed concrete, gabion baskets, rock and wire mattresses, sand/cement filled bags, geotechnical fabric materials, natural
vegetation and treated timber. Urban areas are defined as: areas of the state where residential, commercial, or industrial
development currently exists or, based on land use plans or controls, is expected to occur within ten (10) years. (The
department should be consulted if there is a question of whether or not an area is considered urban.)
b. In addition to the materials listed in subsection A8a of this section, other materials (e.g., tire revetments) may be utilized in rural
areas provided all other conditions of this permit are met.
c. The following materials shall not be used in any case: auto bodies, garbage or debris, scrap lumber, metal refuse, roofing
materials, asphalt or other bituminous materials, or any material which would cause water pollution as defined by the
environmental protection act3.
d. The affected length of shoreline, stream bank, or channel to be protected shall not exceed, either singularly or cumulatively, one
thousand feet (1,000').
e. All material utilized shall be properly sized or anchored to resist anticipated forces of current and wave action.
f. Materials shall be placed in a way which would not cause erosion or the accumulation of debris on properties adjacent to or
opposite the project.
g. Materials shall not be placed higher than the existing top of the bank.
h. Materials shall be placed so that the modified bank full width and cross sectional area of the channel will conform to or be no
more restrictive than that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
For projects involving continuous placement of riprap along the bank, toe of the bank or other similar applications, in no case
shall the cross sectional area of the natural channel be reduced by more than ten percent (10%) nor the volume of material
placed exceed two (2) cubic yards per linear foot of the stream bank or shoreline. The bank may be graded to obtain a flatter
slope and to lessen the quantity of material required.
i. If broken concrete is used, all protruding materials such as reinforcing rods shall be cut flush with the surface of the concrete and
removed from the construction area.
j. Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
areas shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
k. In the case of sea walls and gabion structures on lakes, the structure shall be constructed at or landward of the water line as
determined by the normal pool elevation, unless:
(1) It is constructed in alignment with an existing sea wall(s) or gabion structure(s), and
(2) The volume of material placed, including the structure, would not exceed two (2) cubic yards per linear foot.
l. Excess material excavated during the construction of the bank or shoreline protection shall be placed in accordance with local,
state, and federal laws and rules, shall not be placed in a floodway.
9. Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number
10:
a. The accessory structure or building addition must comply with the requirements of the local floodplain ordinance.
b. The principal structure to which the project is being added must have been in existence on the effective date of this permit (July
25, 1988).
c. The accessory structure or addition must not exceed five hundred (500) square feet in size and must not deflect floodwaters
onto another property, and
d. Must not involve the placement of any fill material.
e. No construction shall be undertaken in, or within fifty feet (50') of the bank of the stream channel.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 245/251
f. The accessory structure or addition must be properly anchored to prevent its movement during flood conditions.
g. Only one accessory structure or addition to an existing structure shall be authorized by this permit; plans for any subsequent
addition must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for review.
h. Disturbances of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
10. Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 11:
a. The affected length of the stream shall not either singularly or cumulatively exceed one thousand feet (1,000').
b. The project shall not include the construction of any new channel; all work must be confined to the existing channel or to
reestablishing flows in the natural stream channel, and
c. The cross sectional area of the dredged channel shall conform to that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the
site.
d. Dredged or spoil material shall not be disposed of in a wetland and shall be either:
(1) Removed from the floodway;
(2) Used to stabilize an existing bank provided no materials would be placed higher than the existing top of bank and provided
the cross sectional area of the natural channel would not be reduced by more than ten percent (10%), nor the volume of
material placed exceed two (2) cubic yards per linear foot of stream bank;
(3) Used to fill an existing washed out or scoured floodplain area such that the average natural floodplain elevation is not
increased;
(4) Used to stabilize an existing levee provided the height of the levee would not be increased nor its alignment changed;
(5) Placed in a disposal site previously approved by the department in accordance with the conditions of the approval; or
(6) Used for beach nourishment, provided the material meets all applicable water quality standards.
e. Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All
disturbed floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
11. Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit
number 12:
a. A licensed professional engineer shall determine and document that the existing structure has not been the cause of
demonstrable flood damage. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum, confirmation that:
(1) No buildings or structures have been impacted by the backwater induced by the existing structure, and
(2) There is no record of complaints of flood damages associated with the existing structure.
b. A licensed professional engineer shall determine that the new structure will provide the same or greater effective waterway
opening as the existing structure. For bridge widening projects the existing piers and the proposed pier extensions must be in
line with the direction of the approaching flow upstream of the bridge.
c. The project shall not include any appreciable raising of the approach roads. (This condition does not apply if all points on the
approaches exist at an elevation equal to or higher than the 100-year frequency flood headwater elevation as determined by a
FEMA flood insurance study completed or approved by IDNR/OWR.)
d. The project shall not involve the straightening, enlargement or relocation of the existing channel of the river or stream except as
permitted by the department's statewide permit number 9 (minor shoreline, channel and streambank protection activities) or
statewide permit number 11 (minor maintenance dredging activities).
e. The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by this permit necessary to document compliance with the above
conditions.
12. Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 13:
a. No temporary construction activity shall be commenced until the individual permittee determines that the permanent structure (if
any) for which the work is being performed has received all required federal, state and local authorizations.
b. The term "temporary" shall mean not more than one construction season. All temporary construction materials must be removed
from the stream and floodway within one year of their placement and the area returned to the conditions existing prior to the
beginning of construction. Any desired subsequent or repetitive material placement shall not occur without the review and
approval of the IDNR/OWR.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 246/251
c. The temporary project shall be constructed such that it will not cause erosion or damage due to increases in water surface
profiles to adjacent properties. For locations where there are structures in the upstream floodplain, the temporary project shall
be constructed such that all water surface profile increases, due to the temporary project, are contained within the channel
banks.
d. This permit does not authorize the placement or construction of any solid embankment or wall such as a dam, roadway, levee,
or dike across any channel or floodway.
e. No temporary structure shall be placed within any river or stream channel until a licensed professional engineer determines and
documents that the temporary structure will meet the requirements of special condition number 3 of this statewide permit. Such
documentation shall include, at a minimum, confirmation that no buildings or structures will be impacted by the backwater
induced by the temporary structure.
f. The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by this permit necessary to document compliance with the above
condition.
g. Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
areas shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of the removal of the temporary construction.
h. Materials used for the project shall not cause water pollution as defined by the environmental protection act4.
13. Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway
permit requirements.
B. Other development activities not listed in subsection A of this section may be permitted only if:
1. A permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not
required), or
2. Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory
map and base flood elevation. (Ord. 0-25-10, 5-9-2011)
13-1-7: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
A. In addition to the damage prevention requirements of section 13-1-6 of this chapter, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building protection requirement applies to the following
situations:
1. Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.
2. Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty
percent (20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration shall be figured cumulatively "subsequent to
the adoption of this chapter". If substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the flood protection
standards of this section.
3. Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs shall be figured cumulatively "subsequent to the adoption of this
chapter". If substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection standards of this section.
4. Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on an existing site. (The building protection
requirements do not apply to returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid
flood damage.)
5. Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
6. "Repetitive loss" to an existing building as defined in section 13-1-2 of this chapter.
B. Residential or nonresidential buildings can meet the building protection requirements by one of the following methods:
1. The building may be constructed on permanent landfill in accordance with the following:
a. The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation.
b. The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches (6") before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10')
beyond the foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation.
c. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure.
d. The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated debris or refuse material, and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 247/251
e. Shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or onto neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater
management techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
2. The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the following:
a. The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles, walls, crawl space, or other foundation that is permanently open
to floodwaters.
b. The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be
located at or above the flood protection elevation.
c. If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or by having a
minimum of one permanent opening on each wall no more than one foot (1') above grade with a minimum of two (2) openings.
The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject
to flooding below the base flood elevation, and
d. The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored, designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to
hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
(1) All structural components below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.
(2) Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below
the flood protection elevation provided they are waterproofed.
(3) The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used solely for parking or building access and not later modified or
occupied as habitable space, or
(4) In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply with these requirements may be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or architect.
3. The building may be constructed with a crawl space located below the flood protection elevation provided that the following
conditions are met:
a. The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
b. Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for
the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a total net area of not less than one
square inch per one square foot of enclosed area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade.
c. The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood protection elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest
adjacent exterior grade.
d. The interior height of the crawl space measured from the interior grade of the crawl space to the top of the foundations wall
must not exceed four feet (4') at any point.
e. An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a
reasonable period of time after a flood event.
f. Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, and
g. Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
C. Nonresidential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or
architect certifies that:
1. Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of
the base flood.
2. The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of
buoyancy, and the impact from debris and ice.
3. Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design and operable without human intervention and without an
outside source of electricity.
4. Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
D. Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on site shall be:
1. Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance with subsection B of this section, and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 248/251
2. Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the
Illinois mobile home tie-down act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code section 870.
E. Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year shall meet the elevation
requirements of subsection D of this section unless the following conditions are met:
1. The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty truck.
2. The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
3. The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as decks and porches.
4. The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel, or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
5. The vehicle's largest horizontal projections must be no larger than four hundred (400) square feet.
6. The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
7. Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be safe for movement of the floodplain.
8. Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be quick disconnect and above the 100-year flood elevation.
9. The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or park model, and
10. Must either:
a. Entirely be supported by jacks, or
b. Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching the ground and be supported by blocks in a manner that will
allow the blocks to be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
F. Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
1. The garage or shed must be nonhabitable.
2. The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
3. The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have the appropriate state and/or federal permits.
4. The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory to an existing principal structure on the same lot.
5. Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of materials not susceptible to flood damage.
6. All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
7. The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each wall not more than one foot (1') above grade with one
square inch of opening for every one square foot of floor area.
8. The garage or shed must be less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in market value or replacement cost whichever is greater
or less than five hundred (500) square feet.
9. The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and overturning.
10. All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides, fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
11. The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner advised of the flood insurance implications. (Ord. 0-25-10, 5-9-
2011)
13-1-8: SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
The city of Colona planning commission and zoning board of appeals shall take into account hazards, to the extent that they are known,
in all official actions related to land management use and development.
A. New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured
home parks and subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protections standards of sections 13-1-6 and 13-1-7 of
this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the following data:
1. The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study,
the applicant shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 249/251
2. The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and
3. A signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of
surface waters in accordance with the plat act5.
Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize
natural streams and channels. Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or other public grounds. (Ord. 0-
25-10, 5-9-2011)
13-1-9: PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS:
A. Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In addition to the requirements of sections 13-1-6 and 13-1-7 of
this chapter the following standards apply:
1. No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids,
pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless such materials are stored in a
floodproofed and anchored storage tank and certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed according to
the requirements of section 13-1-7 of this chapter.
2. Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
3. Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
4. New and replacement on site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment
to them or contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other aboveground openings located below the flood protection
elevation shall be watertight.
5. Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of
new critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed
within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry floodproofed to the 500-year flood
frequency elevation or three feet (3') above the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater. Floodproofing
and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access
routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities.
B. All other activities defined as "development" shall be designed so as not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
(Ord. 0-25-10, 5-9-2011)
13-1-10: CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION:
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the
watercourse shall be maintained.
In addition, the city of Colona shall notify adjacent communities in writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the
alteration or relocation of the watercourse. (Ord. 0-25-10, 5-9-2011)
13-1-11: VARIANCES:
Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the
planning commission or zoning board of appeals for a variance. The planning commission or zoning board of appeals shall review the
applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the city council. The city council may attach such conditions to
granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the intent of this chapter.
A. No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that all of the following conditions are met:
1. The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain.
2. An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted.
3. The relief requested is the minimum necessary.
4. There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or creation of a nuisance.
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 250/251
5. There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or
other public facilities.
6. The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP, and
7. All other state and federal permits have been obtained.
B. The planning commission or zoning board of appeals shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the requirements of the
building protection standards of section 13-1-7 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
1. Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of
insurance coverage;
2. Increase the risk to life and property; and
3. Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of
the risk and liability.
C. Variances to the building protection requirements of section 13-1-7 of this chapter which are requested in connection with
reconstruction, repair, or alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in "historic structures", may be granted using
criteria more permissive than the requirements of sections 13-1-6 and 13-1-7 of this chapter subject to the conditions that:
1. The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
2. The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being removed as a certified historic structure. (Ord. 0-25-10, 5-9-2011)
13-1-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available
information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by
manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free from
flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of the city of Colona or any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damage that results from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 0-25-10, 5-9-
2011)
13-1-13: PENALTY:
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be
deemed to be a violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the zoning officer or building inspector may determine that a violation of
the minimum standards of this chapter exists. The zoning officer or building inspector shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
A. If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the violation:
1. The city of Colona shall make application to the circuit court for an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make
such other order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
2. Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
3. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues, and
4. The city of Colona shall record a notice of violation on the title of the property.
B. The zoning officer or building inspector shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a wilful act to increase flood
damages and therefore may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
The zoning officer or building inspector is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of the subject development. The stop
work order shall be in writing, indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve the
circumstances requiring the stop work order. The stop work order constitutes a suspension of the permit.
No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a hearing is held by the zoning board of appeals.
Written notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
1. The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation, and
6/5/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=989 251/251
2. The time and place of the hearing.
At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing,
the zoning board of appeals shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
C. Nothing herein shall prevent the city of Colona from taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs
connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 0-25-10, 5-9-2011)
13-1-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the city of Colona to fulfill the requirements of the national flood
insurance program. However, this chapter does not repeal the original resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the
program. Nor does this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this chapter
and other ordinances, easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail. (Ord. 0-25-10, 5-9-2011)

COLONA ZONING
ORDINANCE
Adopted
April 22, 2002
Amended
July 15, 2003
Prepared by:
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - i - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
TITLE 12
ZONING
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter Subject Page
1 TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION ......................................................... 1
2 DEFINITIONS ....................................................................................................................... 2
3 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT ......................................................................... 13
4 BOARD OF APPEALS ......................................................................................................... 16
5 VARIANCES, APPEALS, ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS AND CONDITIONAL .................. 18
USE PERMITS
6 DISTRICTS AND MAP ......................................................................................................... 25
7 GENERAL PROVISIONS ..................................................................................................... 26
8 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS, EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS .......................... 37
9 AG-1 AGRICULTURAL PRESERVATION DISTRICT ....................................................... 40
10 AG-2 GENERAL AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT .................................................................. 42
11 SE-1 SUBURBAN ESTATES LOW DENSITY DISTRICT ................................................. 44
12 SE-2 SUBURBAN ESTATES MEDIUM DENSITY DISTRICT ........................................... 46
13 R-1 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT ....................................................................... 47
14 R-2 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT ....................................................................... 49
15 R-3 ONE AND TWO FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT .................................................... 50
16 R-4 ONE TO SIX FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT .......................................................... 51
17 R-5 MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT ............................................................. 52
18 R-6 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT .................................................................... 53
19 R-7 MOBILE HOME/MANUFACTURED HOUSING DISTRICT ........................................ 54
20 U-1 UNIVERSITY/COLLEGE DISTRICT ........................................................................... 55
21 C-1 CONSERVATION DISTRICT ...................................................................................... 57
22 C-2 CONSERVATION DISTRICT ...................................................................................... 58
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - ii - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
TABLE OF CONTENTS (Continued)
Chapter Subject Page
23 "O-1" OFFICE DISTRICT ........................................................................................................ 59
24 "B-1" NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT .................................................................... 60
25 "B-2" GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT ................................................................................. 62
26 "B-3" COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT ............................................................................ 64
27 "B-4" HIGHWAY/INTENSIVE BUSINESS DISTRICT ............................................................. 65
28 "ORT" OFFICE/RESEARCH PARK AND TECHNOLOGY DISTRICT.................................... 67
29 "I-1" LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT...................................................................................... 69
30 "I-2" GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT ............................................................................... 70
31 "PUD" PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT............................................................. 73
32 "RCO" RIVERFRONT CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT ..................................................... 83
33 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS .............................................................................................. 87
34 ILLUMINATIONS PROVISIONS .............................................................................................. 90
35 LANDSCAPE AND BUFFERYARD REQUIREMENTS............................................................ 94
36 VALIDITY AND REPEAL...........................................................................................................99
37 WHEN EFFECTIVE ................................................................................................................ 100 
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 1 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER I
TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTERPRETATION.
12-1-1 TITLE AND PURPOSE
TITLE: This Title shall be known as the ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF COLONA,
ILLINOIS.
PURPOSE: The zoning regulations and districts as herein have been made with these objectives: the
assuring that adequate light, air and safety from fire and other dangers may be conserved; that traffic
congestion be lessened or avoided; and that public health, safety, comfort, morals, and welfare might
otherwise be promoted.
The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Colona, Illinois, heretofore adopted April 22, 2002, be and is
hereby amended by striking all of said Ordinance except the Title and Purpose thereof and inserting in
lieu thereof the following:
12-1-2 INTERPRETATION
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare. Where this Ordinance
imposes greater restrictions upon the use of buildings or other structures, or law or ordinance, the
provisions of this Ordinance shall prevail.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 2 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
The following words, terms and phrases are hereby defined as follows and shall be interpreted as such
throughout these regulations. Terms not herein defined shall have the meanings customarily assigned to them.
Accessory Building or Use
A. Accessory Structure: A subordinate structure detached but located on the same lot as the principal
structure, the use of which is incidental and accessory to that of the principal structure.
B. Accessory Use: A structure or use that: (a) is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection
with a principal building or use; (b) is subordinate to and serves a principal building or a principal use; (c) is
subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or principal use serviced; (d) contributed to
the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants, business, or industry in the principal building or
principal use served; and (e) is located on the same lot as the principal building or use served.
Adult Bookstore. An establishment for the sale, rental, or exchange of books, magazines, or video cassettes,
distinguished or characterized by primary emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "Specific
Sexual Activities" or "Specific Anatomical Areas" as defined below including instruments, devices or
paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. Adult bookstores do not
include businesses which sell, rent, or exchange books, magazines, or video cassettes as a sideline or adjunct
to sales or rental of books, magazines, or video cassettes not relating to "Specific Sexual Activities" or "Specific
Anatomical Area".
A. Specific Sexual Activities are defined as:
1. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
2. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and
3. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts.
B. Specific Anatomical Areas are defined as:
1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, and female breast
below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
2. Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Adult Mini-motion Picture Theaters. An enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty (50) persons, used
for presenting materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating
to "Specific Anatomical Areas" or "Specific Sexual Activities" for observation by patrons therein.
Adult Motion Picture Theaters. An enclosed building with capacity of fifty (50) or more persons, used for
presenting material distinguished or characterized by emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
"Specific Sexual Activities" or "Specific Anatomical Areas" for observation by patrons therein.
Adult Modeling and Entertainment Facility. An establishment having its primary activity the presentation of
live models displaying lingerie, or otherwise presenting live, artistic modeling, with said modeling displaying the
human body in a nude or semi-nude state, distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "Specific
Anatomical Areas" for observation by patrons therein.
Alley. A public right of way which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to the side or rear of premises
that front on a nearby street.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 3 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
Amusement Center. Any premises which contains four (4) or more coin or token operated devices played for a
fee, such as pinball machines, foosball tables, pool tables and other similar entertainment or amusement
devices.
Apartment. A room or suite of rooms in a multi-family structure, which is arranged, designed, used or intended
to be used as a single housekeeping unit. Complete kitchen, bath and toilet facilities, permanently installed,
must always be included for each apartment.
Apartment/Dormitory. A multi-unit dwelling for which each dwelling unit contains fewer than ten (10) occupants
whether related or unrelated. Each unit shall have two (2) exits and a common area of not less than three
hundred (300) square feet which may include cooking and dining facilities and shall be subject to relevant codes
or regulations for behavior by students and others in effect at such educational facility which are enforced by
resident personnel of such educational facility.
Assisted Living. Rental housing which provides a living arrangement of self-contained units that integrates
shelter, food services and other services for independent adults who do not require twenty four (24) hour,
professional oversight. Services may include meals, laundry, transportation, housekeeping and organized
activities which create opportunities for socialization.
Automobile Repair - Major. General repair, rebuilding of or reconditioning of engines of any type, motor
vehicles, trucks, buses or trailers. Collision service, including body work, frame or fender straightening or repair,
overall painting of motor vehicles, trucks, trailers or painting booth.
Automobile Repair - Minor. Minor repairs, incidental body and fender work, touch-up painting and
upholstering, replacement of minor parts and general tune-up service to passenger automobiles and trucks not
exceeding one and one-half (1-1/2) tons capacity.
Automobile Service Station. Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires, and
automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail, and where in addition the following services
may be rendered and sales made, and no other:
A. Sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries, distributors and distributor parts;
B. Tire servicing and repair, but no recapping or regrooving;
C. Replacement of mufflers and tail pipes, water hose, fan belts, brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat
covers, windshield wipers and wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors, and the like;
D. Radiator cleaning and flushing;
E. Washing and polishing where no mechanical conveyor, blower, or steam cleaning device is employed
provided that no more than one single car bay of the service station shall be equipped with washing
equipment; and provided that the lot on which the washing equipment is to be located shall be sufficient to
provide on-site waiting storage for a total number of vehicles equal to the number capable of being
processed during one-half (2) hour; and provided that a drip area shall be provided where vehicles can be
dried, located such that water will be confined to the site and will not run onto any street or alley so as to
cause a hazard.
F. Greasing and lubrication;
G. Providing and repairing fuel pumps and lines;
H. Minor servicing and repair of engines;
I. Emergency wiring repairs;
J. Adjusting and repairing brakes;
K. Minor motor adjustments not involving removal of the head or crank case or racing the motor;
L. Sale of cold drinks, packaged foods, tobacco, and similar convenience goods for filling station customers,
as accessory and incidental to principal operation;
M. Provision of road maps and other informational material to customers and provision of restroom facilities.
It shall be unlawful to provide major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting,
welding, storage of automobiles, trucks or trailers not in operating condition, or other work involving noise,
glare, fumes, smoke or other such characteristics. An automobile service station is not a repair garage, a
body shop, a car wash, an automobile wrecking yard or junk yard, nor a storage place for rental trailers.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 4 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
Automobile Wrecking Yard. Any place where two or more vehicles not in running condition, or parts thereof,
are stored in the open, and are not being restored to operation, or any land, building or structure used for
wrecking or storing of such motor vehicles or parts thereof, and including any used farm vehicles or farm
machinery, or parts thereof, stored in the open and not being restored to operating condition; and including the
commercial salvaging of any other goods, Chapters or merchandise.
Balcony. Is an outside deck located at least on the second floor or any higher floor of a dwelling building, and
can be cantilevered or supported on piers.
Bed and Breakfast. Shall mean an operator-occupied residence providing accommodations for a charge to the
public with no more than five guest rooms for rent, in operation for more than ten nights in a twelve month
period. Breakfast may be provided to the guests only. Bed and Breakfast establishments shall not include
motels, hotels, boarding houses, or food service establishments. "Operator" shall mean the owner of the bed
and breakfast establishment, or the owner's agent, who is required to reside in the bed and breakfast
establishment or on contiguous property.
Boarding House. An establishment with lodging for compensation offering accommodations for short-term
transients or extended periods of time. Meals may or may not be provided (also referred to as Boarding House,
Rooming House, Lodging House, Lodging Room, does not include Bed and Breakfast).
Book/stationery Store. An establishment dealing in books, printed materials and stationery supplies, which is
not an adult bookstore.
Building. Any permanently anchored structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or
occupancy. When a building is divided into separate parts by unpierced walls, each part shall be deemed a
separate building (see structure).
Building, Completely Enclosed. A building separated on all sides from the adjacent open space, or from other
buildings or other structures, by a permanent roof and by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows
and normal entrance or exit doors.
Building, Height of. The vertical distance above a reference datum measured to the highest point of the coping
of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or
hipped roof. The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following, whichever yields a greater height
of building:
A. The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five-foot horizontal distance of
the exterior wall of the building when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than ten feet above
lowest grade.
B. An elevation ten feet higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or ground surface described in Item 1
above is more than ten feet above lowest grade.
The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum of any segment of the building.
Building, Structure. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground or attached to
something having a fixed location on the ground. Structures include, but not limited to: buildings, walls,
swimming pools, signs and fences.
Building Set-back Line. See "Setback".
Bulk Storage. Means the storage of flammable or combustible liquid in an above ground tank that is not for
dispensing purposes. If an above ground tank is used for any bulk storage purposes, it is classified as a bulk
storage tank for the remainder of the calendar year in which it was so used.
Care Home, Large Residential. A Residential Care Home for more than eight (8) persons, plus supervisory or
oversight personnel, living together as a single housekeeping unit who are disabled, as defined by "Disability" in
this Ordinance, for the primary purpose of providing shelter.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 5 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
Care Home, Small Residential. A Residential Care Home containing a single one family dwelling unit for eight
(8) persons or fewer, plus supervisory or oversight personnel, living together as a single housekeeping unit for
the primary purpose of providing shelter in a family-like atmosphere.
Church. A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly assemble for
religious worship, and which building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and
controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship.
Clinic or Medical Health Center. A building containing an individual practitioner or an association or group of
physicians, dentists, clinical psychologists, or similar professional health care practitioners, including assistants.
The clinic may include apothecary, dental and mental laboratories, and/or x-ray facilities, but shall not include
inpatient or overnight care.
Club or Lodge, Private. Non-profit association of persons, who are bona fide members paying annual dues,
which owns, hires, or leases a building, or portion thereof, the use of such premises being restricted to members
and their guests. It shall be permissible to serve food and meals on such premises provided adequate dining
room space and kitchen facilities are available. The sale of alcoholic beverages to members and their guests
shall be allowed provided such sale of alcoholic beverages is in compliance with the applicable Federal, State
and Municipal laws.
Comprehensive Plan. The plan or any portion thereof adopted by the City to guide and coordinate the physical
and economic development of the City. The comprehensive plan includes, but is not limited to, plans and
programs regarding the location, character, and extent of highways, bridges, public buildings or uses, utilities,
schools, residential, commercial or industrial land uses, parks, drainage facilities, etc.
Convenience Store. Any retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged food products, household items,
commercial products associated with minor auto servicing (but not automobile parts), and other goods
commonly associated with the same including the retail dispensing of vehicular fuels.
Day Care Home. A family dwelling unit occupied by attending family which receives more than three (3) and up
to a maximum of eight (8) children for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day. The maximum of eight (8) children
includes the family's natural or adopted children and all other persons under the age of twelve (12). A Day Care
Home may also be a family home which receives adults who are sixty (60) years of age or older.
Day Care Center. A child care facility which regularly provides day care for less than twenty-four (24) hours per
day for (a) more than eight (8) children in a family dwelling unit, or (b) more than three (3) children in a facility
other than a family dwelling unit.
Deck. Is an outside porch without a roof not necessarily attached to a dwelling wall, whose floor is built on a
foundation, piers, or blocks, as a distinct structure requiring a building permit, above ground grade, limited to a
maximum height of the adjacent first floor level in the dwelling. It is not allowed any higher level than above
grade, to avoid the deck floor from creating a de-facto roofed porch underneath; but a deck can be located on
the existing roof of dwellings and garages.
Disability. As defined by the Americans with Disability Act (ADA), a person who has:
A. A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities;
B. A record of such an impairment; or
C. Is regarded as having such an impairment.
District, Zoning. A portion of the territory of the City wherein uniform requirements or various combinations
thereof apply to structures, lots, and uses under the terms of the zoning ordinance.
Dormitory. A building used as group living quarters for a student body operated by a college or university or
other such institution of higher education, subject to relevant codes and regulations for behavior of students and
others in effect at such educational facility which are enforced by resident personnel at such institution.
Dwelling Group. Two or more one-family, two-family or multiple-family dwellings, or boarding or lodging
houses, located on one zoning lot, but not including tourist courts or motels.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 6 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
Dwelling, One-family. A building designed exclusively for use and occupancy by one family, and entirely
separated from any other dwelling by space totaling at least 900 square feet and the structures length does not
exceed four times its width and is affixed to a permanent masonry or concrete footing and/or foundation.
Dwelling, Two-family. A building designed or altered to provide dwelling units for occupancy by two families.
Dwelling, Multiple-family. A building or portion thereof designed or altered for occupancy by three or more
families living independently of each other.
Dwelling, Row (Townhouse). A row of two to twelve attached, one-family, party-wall dwellings.
Dwelling Unit. One or more rooms which are arranged, designed or used as living quarters for a family or for a
community residence as a single housekeeping unit. A dwelling unit includes bathroom and kitchen facilities in
addition to sleeping and living areas.
Easement. A right to use a portion of another person's real property for certain limited purposes.
Educational Institution. Public, private, or parochial school, charitable or non-profit junior college, college or
university, other than trade or business schools, including instructional and recreational uses, with or without
living quarters, dining rooms, restaurants, heating plants and other incidental facilities for students, teachers and
employees.
Essential Services. The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other
governmental agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution
systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, elevated and underground water storage tanks,
including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic
signals, hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary
for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for
the public health or safety or general welfare but not including buildings.
Family. One or more persons each related to them by blood, marriage, or adoption (including foster children),
together with such relatives of the respective spouses who are living with the family in a single dwelling and
maintaining a common household. A family may also be composed of not to exceed three (3) persons not so
related, provided that such unrelated persons live in a single dwelling and maintain a common household and
single housekeeping unit. A family includes any domestic servants and not more than one gratuitous guest
residing with said family; such servants or guest shall be included in the unrelated persons attained by this
definition, and shall not be in addition thereto.
Farm. An area which is used for the growing of the usual farm products such as vegetables, fruit, trees, flora,
fauna, and grain, and their storage on the area, as well as for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry
feeding of such farm poultry and farm animals shall be subject to the regulations of the State of Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency. The term "farming" includes the operating of such an area for one or more of
the above uses, including dairy farms with the necessary accessory uses for treating and storing the produce,
provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal
farming activities, and provided further that farming does not include the extraction of minerals. The term "farm"
includes farm dwellings.
Fast Food Restaurant. An establishment whose principal business is the sale of rapidly prepared food directly
to the customer in a ready-to-consume state for consumption either within the restaurant building or off
premises. The establishment may include a drive-up or drive-through service facility or offers curb service.
Fence. A structure, other than a building, which is an artificially constructed barrier of any material or
combination of materials or plantings/shrubbery planted or erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
Decorative corner treatments which do not exceed six feet (6') in length and three feet (3') in height are not
considered fences if it allows for 50 percent or more open visibility.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 7 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
Flood Plain or Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). Those lands within the jurisdiction of the City that are
subject to inundation by the flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year (also known as the 100-year flood).
Floodway. The portion of the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) required to store and convey the base flood.
The floodway and the SFHAs for the Rock and Green Rivers shall be as delineated on the Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Foster Family Home. A family home which provides full-time family care to foster children unrelated to them.
Foster family homes are limited to a maximum of eight (8) children, including the foster family's children, unless
all of the children unrelated to the foster family are of common parentage, or the applicable department of the
State of Illinois has waived the limit of eight (8) unrelated children to facilitate an adoptive placement.
Foster Group Homes. A child care facility which regularly provides care for no more than ten (10) children
placed by and under the supervision of a child welfare agency licensed by the applicable department of the State
of Illinois. Adult supervision shall be provided on a twenty-four (24) hour basis.
Frontage Lots. See Lots, Multiple Frontage
Garage, Bus or Truck. A building which is used or intended to be used for the storage of motor trucks, truck
trailers, tractors, commercial vehicles, and buses exceeding one and one-half (1-1/2) ton capacity.
Garage, Private. A detached accessory building or portion of a principal building used for storage of selfpropelled passenger vehicles or trailers of the occupants of the premises and/or not more than (1) truck of a
rated capacity exceeding one and one-half (1-1/2) tons.
Halfway House/Group Home. A temporary residential living arrangement for up to five (5) persons, excluding
staff, who are receiving therapy, counseling and/or care from support staff who are present at all times residents
are present, for the following purposes:
A. To help them re-enter society while housed under supervision while under constraints of alternatives to
imprisonment including, but not limited to, pre-release, work release, and probationary programs.
B. To help persons with family or school adjustment problems that require specialized attention and care in
order to achieve personal independence;
C. To provide temporary shelter for persons who are victims of domestic abuse and/or neglect; or
D. To provide adult congregate living arrangements without nursing care.
Hazardous Waste. Any substance or material that, by reason of its toxic, caustic, corrosive, abrasive or
otherwise injurious properties, may be detrimental or deleterious to the health of any person handling or
otherwise coming into contact with such material or substance. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) has developed a list of hazardous wastes based upon corrosivity, reactivity, and toxicity. Hazardous
substances include, but are not limited to, inorganic mineral acids of sulfur, fluorine, chlorine, nitrogen,
chromium, phosphorous, selenium and arsenic and their common salts, lead, nickel, and mercury and their
inorganic salts, or metallo-organic derivatives; coal, tar acids, such as phenol and cresols and their salts, and all
radioactive materials.
Health/Recreational and Physical Training Club. An indoor facility including uses such as game courts,
exercise equipment, locker rooms, training studios, jacuzzi and/or sauna, and pro shop.
Height. See Building, height of.
Home Occupation. An occupation or profession customarily carried on by an occupant of a dwelling unit as a
secondary use, and which is clearly incidental to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes. There are
major and minor home occupations which are clearly addressed under the General Provisions of this Ordinance.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 8 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
Hospital or Sanitarium. An institution which patients or injured persons are given medical or surgical care; or
for the care of contagious diseases or terminal patients, and may include inpatient overnight care.
Hotel. A facility offering transient lodging accommodations on a daily rate to the general public and providing
additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreational facilities and is not a bed and
breakfast (also see "Motel").
Hotel, Transient. See Boarding House.
Household Hazardous Waste. A hazardous waste that can catch fire, react, or explode under certain
circumstances, or that is corrosive or toxic. Common household hazardous waste items, and others not
included on this list, might contain materials that are ignitable, corrosive, reactive, or toxic such as: drain
openers, oven cleaners, wood and metal cleaners and polishers, automotive oil and fuel additives, grease and
rust solvents, carburetor and fuel injection cleaners, air conditioning refrigerants, starter fluids, paint thinners,
paint strippers and removers, adhesives, herbicides, insecticides, and fungicides/wood preservatives.
Independent Trailer Coach or Independent Mobile Home. A transportable non-permanent single-family
dwelling unit on wheels suitable for year-round occupancy and containing the same water supply, waste
disposal, heating and air condition, electrical conveniences and with self-contained toilet and bath or shower
facilities as conventional housing. This definition is not intended to include recreational vehicle types.
Junk Yard. Open area where waste, scrap metal, paper, rags, or similar materials are bought, sold, exchanged,
stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including auto and building wrecking yards.
Kennel. Any structure or premises where dogs and cats over four (4) months of age are kept, raised, bred or
boarded for commercial purposes excluding animal hospitals, clinics and pet shops.
Land Use Plan. The comprehensive long range plan for the desirable use of land in the jurisdiction, as officially
adopted and as amended from time to time by the City Council, the purpose of such plan being among other
things, to serve as a guide to the zoning and prospective changes in the zoning of land to meet changing
community needs in the subdividing and use of undeveloped land.
Legal Objector. The owner of a lot, parcel, or tract of land, which is next to a lot, parcel, or tract of land, for
which a Special Use is proposed or which is the subject of an amendment of this Ordinance. For the purposes
of this Ordinance, a lot shall be deemed to be next to another if the lots, parcels, or tracts share a common lot
boundary line in whole or in part or if a common lot boundary in whole or in part would occur if all street, highway,
or alley right-of-way between such lots were excluded.
Loading and Unloading Space, Off-street. An open hard-surfaced area of land other than a street or public
way, the principal use of which is for the standing, loading and unloading of motor trucks, tractors, and trailers, to
avoid undue interference with the public use of streets and alleys.
Lodging or Rooming House. See Boarding House.
Lodging Room. See Boarding House.
Lot. A tract of land intended as a unit for the purpose (whether immediate or future) of development or transfer
of ownership. A lot may or may not coincide with a "lot of record".
Lot Area/Coverage. The area of the lot covered by buildings above grade, excluding permitted projections.
Lot of Record. An area of land designated as a lot on a plat recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of Henry
County, Illinois in accordance with State law.
Lot, Corner. A lot having at least two (2) adjacent sides that abut for their full length upon streets.
Lot, Front or Frontage. The length of any one property line of a premises, which property line abuts a legally
accessible street right of way, except alleys.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 9 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
Lot, Multiple Frontage. A lot that fronts on two or more street right of ways, such as corner lots, through lots,
etc.
Lot, Interior. A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
Lot Line, Rear. The lot line or lot lines most nearly parallel and most remote from the front lot line.
Lot Line, Side. A lot line which is not a front or rear lot line.
Lot, Reversed Corner. A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the side of another lot, whether across an
alley or not.
Lot, Through. A lot having a pair of approximately parallel lot lines that abut two (2) approximately parallel
streets. Both such lot lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
Lot, Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the side lot lines at
the front building line.
Lot, Zoning. A single tract of land located within a single block, which (at the time of filing for a building permit)
is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single
ownership or control. Therefore, a "zoning lot" may or may not coincide with a lot of record.
Mobile Home/Manufactured Housing. A detached residential dwelling unit designed for transportation after
fabrication on streets of highways on its own wheels or on a flatbed or other trailers, and arriving at the site
where it is to be occupied as a dwelling, complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or other temporary or permanent foundations,
connections to utilities, and the like. A travel trailer, self-contained motor home or other recreational vehicle is
not to be considered a mobile home.
Modular Home. Factory-built housing certified to meet the current building codes and amendments as adopted
by Henry County, Illinois and the requirements of the Illinois Department of Public Health, applicable to modular
housing. Once certified by the State, modular homes shall be subject to the same standards as site built homes.
Motel. A building or a group of buildings, whether attached or in connected units, used as individual sleeping
units designed primarily for transient travelers and providing for accessory off-street parking facilities. The term
"motel" includes but is not limited to buildings designated as auto courts, tourist courts, motor hotels, motor
lodges, and similar terms.
Motor Freight Terminal. A building or area in which trucks, including tractor or trailer units, are parked, stored,
or serviced, including the transfer, loading or unloading of goods. A terminal may include facilities for the
temporary storage of loads prior to transhipment.
Nightclub. A tavern or other commercial establishment where alcoholic beverages and/or food are served for
consumption on premises and a dance floor and/or entertainment are provided. See also "Tavern".
Non-conforming Use. A lawful use of land that does not comply with the use regulations for its zoning district
but which complied with applicable regulations at the time the use was established.
Nursery School. An institution providing instructional/educational services for six preschool aged children.
Ordinance. Reference to "Ordinance" herein shall be construed as the Zoning Ordinance.
Owner. The word "owner" applies to the entity in which title is vested in the building or land.
Parking Area, Accessory. An area of one or more parking spaces located at the same property as the building,
structure or premises it is intended to serve, or on adjoining or nearby property and of such shape and nature as
to be appropriate and usable for the parking or storage, loading and unloading of self-propelled vehicles.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 10 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
Parking Space, Automobile. Space within a public or private parking area of not less than 180 square feet
exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps, columns, or office and work areas, for the storage of one passenger
automobile or commercial vehicle under one and one-half ton capacity.
Person. An individual, group of individuals, corporation, association, partnership, joint venture or other entity,
and includes any trustee, estate, receiver, assignee or personal representative.
Plan Commission. The Plan Commission of the City of Colona.
Planned Unit Development. A planned unit development is a parcel of land or contiguous parcels of land of a
size sufficient to create its own environment, controlled by a single land-owner or by a group of landowners in
common agreement as to which is compatible with adjacent parcels, and the intent of the zoning district or
districts in which it is located. The developer or developers of a planned unit development may be granted relief
from specific land-use regulations and design standards and may be awarded certain premiums in return for
assurances of an overall quality of development, including any specific features which will be of exceptional
benefit to the community as a whole.
Porch. Is a roofed structure (either enclosed or unenclosed), attached to one or two permanent exterior walls of
a dwelling building, whose floor is at or just below the level of the dwelling first floor adjacent to the porch.
Principal Building. A building in which the primary use of the lot on which the building is located is conducted.
Property Owner. Any individual, group of individuals, association, corporation, joint stock association, joint
venture, or any other entity in whose name the legal title to the real estate is recorded.
Recreational Vehicle. A general term for a vehicular unit bearing current license and/or registration, not
exceeding thirty-six (36) feet in overall length, eight (8) feet in width or twelve (12) feet in overall height, which
includes but is not limited to the following specific vehicle types:
A. Camper trailer: A folding or collapsible vehicular structure without its own (motive) power designed as
temporary living quarters for travel, camping, recreation and vacation uses; and (to) be licensed and
registered for highway use.
B. Travel trailer: A rigid structure without its own motive power designed as a temporary dwelling for travel,
camping, recreation and vacation use; to be licensed and registered for highway use; and which, when
equipped for the road, has a body width of not more than eight (8) feet, six (6)inches.
C. Truck camper: A portable structure without its own motive power designed to be transported on a power
vehicle as a temporary dwelling for travel, camping, recreation and vacation use; and which, in combination
with the carrying vehicle (shall) be licensed and registered for highway use.
D. Motor home: A vehicular unit built on or as a part of a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis, primarily
designed to provide temporary dwelling for travel, camping, recreation and vacation use; and to be licensed
and registered for highway use. This category shall include converted bus campers.
E. Boat trailer: A vehicular structure without its own motive power designed to transport a boat for recreation
and vacation use and which is licensed and registered for highway use.
F. Horse trailer: A vehicular structure without its own motive power designed primarily for the transportation
of horses and which, in combination with the towing vehicle, is licensed and registered for highway use.
G. Utility trailer: A vehicular structure without its own motive power designed and/or used for the
transportation of all manner of motor vehicles, goods or materials and licensed and registered for highway
use.
H. Recreational boat: A vessel, whether impelled by wind, oars or mechanical devices, and which is
designed primarily for recreation or vacation use. A recreation vessel when mounted upon a boat trailer
shall be considered one unit. If the recreational vehicle is equipped with liquefied gas containers, they shall 
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 11 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
meet the standards of the Interstate Commerce Commission or the Federal Department of Transportation
standards in existence at the passage of this Ordinance.
Refuse Equipment Operation. The storage, repair, maintenance, sale or lease of equipment used in the
collection, storage or transportation of refuse, including but not limited to vehicles, containers and any repair,
parts, accessories and appurtenances thereof.
Residential Solid Waste. Waste that normally originates in a residential environment.
Restaurant. A food establishment serving full course meals prepared on the premises and which may serve
alcoholic beverages.
Right of Way. A strip of land dedicated to the City or other unit of government for streets, alleys, and other
public improvements.
Set-back. The minimum horizontal distance between the lot or property line and the nearest front, side or rear
line of the building, including terraces or any covered projection thereof, including steps.
Stable, Riding. A stable shall mean a building/buildings including other structures and grounds used for the
boarding or housing of horses used for riding sessions or pleasure riding on the premises.
Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the
floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper
surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a usable or
unused under floor space is more than six (6) feet above grade as defined herein for more than fifty percent
(50%) of the total perimeter or is more than 12 feet above grade as defined herein at any point, such usable or
unused under-floor space shall be considered as a story.
Story, Half. A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite
exterior walls are not more than four (4) feet above the floor of such story.
Street. A public or private way for motor vehicle travel. The term "street" includes a highway, thoroughfare,
parkway, throughway, road, pike, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, drive, court and similar designations, but
excludes an alley or way for pedestrian use only.
Structural Alteration. Any changes in the supporting members of a building including but not limited to bearing
walls, load-bearing walls, load-bearing partitions, columns, beams or girders or any substantial change in the
roof or the exterior walls.
Structure. Is that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially
built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.
Tavern. Any premises wherein alcoholic beverages are sold at retail for consumption on the premises as the
principal uses; and where sandwiches, snacks and other food products are available for purchase. "Tavern"
does not include "restaurants", where the principal business is serving food (includes "Bar" and "Cocktail
Lounge"). (See Nightclub".)
Terrace/Patio. Is an unroofed paved area located outside at ground grade, which is paved as concrete, stone,
brick or wood paver blocks (also known as patio blocks).
Theater. An establishment used to observe films and other visual material which is neither an Adult Motion
Picture Theater nor Adult Mini-Motion Picture Theater.
Tourist Courts, Motor Lodges, Motels. A group of attached or detached buildings containing individual
sleeping or living units, designed for or used temporarily by automobile, tourists or transients, with garage
attached or parking space conveniently located to each unit, including auto courts, motels, motor lodges or other
similar type uses.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 12 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
Tourist Home. A dwelling in which accommodations are provided or offered for transient guests.
Toxic Waste. Any combination of pollutants, including disease-carrying agents, that, after discharge and upon
exposure, ingestion, inhalation or assimilation into any organism, can cause death or disease, mutations,
deformities or malfunctions in such organisms or their offspring and that adversely affect the environment which
are being discarded by being disposed, incinerated or recycled.
Trailer Park or Mobile Home Park. An area of land upon which two or more occupied trailer coaches or mobile
homes are harbored either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and shall include any building, structure, tent,
vehicles, or enclosure used or intended for as, a part of the equipment of such trailer coach park.
Truck Parking Area or Yard. Any land used or intended to be used for the storage or parking of trucks,
tractors, truck trailers, and including commercial vehicles, while not loading or unloading. Does not include Class
B trucks.
Unrelated Group Family. A group of no more than five (5) unrelated adults living together as a common
household by doing their own cooking and living together, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding
house, lodging house, club, fraternity, sorority, or hotel. Unrelated group families are permitted with
administrative approval, provided that they comply with the standards and conditions specified in Chapter 3 of
this Zoning Ordinance.
Yard. The space adjacent to lot lines which is required to be open and unobstructed from its lowest level upward
except as otherwise permitted. The minimum depth of width of a yard shall consist of the horizontal distance
between the lot line and nearest point of the foundation or exterior wall of a building.
Yard, Front. An open space extending the full width of the lot between a principal building and the street rightof-way except for an alley, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as hereinafter
specified.
Yard, Rear. An open space extending the full width of a lot between a building and the rear lot line, unoccupied
and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as hereinafter specified.
Yard, Side. An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between a building and the side lot
line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as hereinafter specified.
Zoning Maps. The map or maps incorporated into this Ordinance as a part hereof.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 13 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
12-3-1 Organization
The administration of this Ordinance is vested in the following four (4) offices of the government of the
City of Colona: Zoning Officer, Plan Commission, Secretary of the Plan Commission and Board of
Appeals, and City Council and Mayor.
A. Zoning Officer
1. Appointment of Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor in
consultation and approval of the City Council.
2. Powers and Duties of the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall enforce this Ordinance,
and in addition thereto and in furtherance of said authority, shall:
a. Maintain permanent and current records of this Ordinance including, but not limited to,
all maps, amendments, conditional uses, variances, appeals, and applications
therefore.
b. Provide and maintain a public information service relative to all matters arising out of
this Ordinance.
c. Forward to the Plan Commission all applications for amendments to this Ordinance.
d. Transmit to the Board of Appeals applications for appeals, variances, conditional uses,
or other matters on which the Board of Appeals is required to pass under this
Ordinance.
e. Initiate, direct, and review from time to time a study of the provisions of the Ordinance
and make reports of recommendations to the Plan Commission.
B. Plan Commission
1. Creation. The Plan Commission of the City of Colona, as established under the applicable
provisions of the Illinois revised statutes and the Municipal Code, is the Plan Commission
referred to in this Ordinance.
2. Refer to Title 2 Chapter 1 of the Municipal Code for membership, term of office,
compensation, organization and other activities of the Plan Commission.
Immediately following appointment of Plan Commission members, the members of the Plan
Commission shall meet, organize, elect such officers as it may deem necessary, and adopt
and later change or alter, rules and regulations of organization and procedure consistent
with City Ordinances and state laws. The Commission shall keep written records of its
proceedings which shall be open at all times to public inspection. The Commission shall
also file an annual report with the Mayor and City Council setting forth its transactions and
recommendations.
C. Secretary of the Plan Commission and Board of Appeals. The Secretary of the Plan Commission
and the Secretary of the Board of Appeals may be the same person. The Mayor and City Council
shall authorize the Clerk to assign the Secretary of the Plan Commission and Board of Appeals
from the City Clerk Staff.
1. The Secretary of the Plan Commission shall attend all meetings of the Plan Commission,
take full and accurate minutes of the proceedings, prepare all necessary reports and 
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 14 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
documents for and on behalf of the Plan Commission, and perform such other duties and
functions as may be necessary for the orderly recording of the business of the Plan
Commission.
2. The Secretary of the Board of Appeals shall attend all meetings of the Board of Appeals,
take full and accurate minutes of the proceedings, prepare all necessary reports and
documents for and on behalf of the Board of Appeals, and perform such other duties and
functions as may be necessary for the orderly recording of the business of the Board of
Appeals.
3. The compensation for the Secretary of the Plan Commission and the Secretary of the Board
of Appeals shall be as established from time to time by the Mayor with the approval of the
City Council of the City of Colona.
D. Mayor and City Council. The Mayor and City Council shall discharge the following duties under
this Ordinance:
1. Appoint the Zoning Officer whose responsibility will be to enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance;
2. Appoint members to the Board of Appeals as provided for in this Ordinance;
3. Appoint members to the Plan Commission as provided for in this Ordinance;
4. Receive and decide upon all recommendations concerning amendments, supplements,
changes, or repeal of the Zoning Ordinance submitted to them by the Plan Commission;
5. Receive from the Plan Commission all recommendations on the effectiveness of this
Ordinance; and
6. To decide all matters upon which it is required to pass under this Ordinance.
12-3-2 Permits
A. Building Permits. Except as hereinafter provided, no permit pertaining to the use of land or
buildings shall be issued by any officer, department, or employee of the City of Colona unless the
application for such permit has been examined by the Zoning Officer, indicating that the
proposed building or structure complies with all the provisions of this Ordinance. Any permit
issued in conflict with the provisions of the Ordinance shall be null and void.
B. Occupancy Permits. No building, or addition thereto, constructed after the effective date of this
Ordinance, and no addition to a previously existing building shall be occupied, and no land,
vacant on the effective date of this Ordinance, shall be used for any purpose until an occupancy
permit has been reviewed by the Zoning Officer. No change in a use other than that of a
permitted use to another similar permitted use, shall be made until an occupancy permit has
been issued by the Building Inspector in consultation with the Zoning Officer. Every occupancy
permit shall state that the use of occupancy complies with the provisions of this Ordinance.
1. Application for Occupancy Permit. Every applicant for a building permit shall be deemed to
be an application for an occupancy permit. Every application for an occupancy permit for a
new use of land where no building permit is required shall be made directly to the Building
Inspector.
2. Issuance of Occupancy Permit. No occupancy permit for a building, or portion thereof,
constructed after the effective date of this Ordinance, shall be issued until construction has
been completed and the premises inspected and certified by the Building Inspector to be in
conformity with the plans and specifications upon which the building permit was based.
Pending the issuance of a regular certificate, a temporary certificate may be issued to be
valid for a period not to exceed six (6) months from its date during the completion of any 
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 15 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
addition or during partial occupancy of the premises. Reasons in writing for refusal to issue
an occupancy permit must be forwarded to the applicant no later than fourteen (14) days
after the request for an occupancy permit.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 16 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 4
BOARD OF APPEALS
12-4-1 Creation
The Board of Appeals, as established under the applicable provisions of the Illinois revised statutes, is
the Board of Appeals referred to in this Ordinance.
12-4-2 Membership
The Board of Appeals shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
the City Council. At least two (2) such members shall be named from among the members of the Plan
Commission. The members of said Board of Appeals shall serve respectively for the following terms,
or until their respective successors are appointed and qualified: One (1) for one (1) year, one (1) for
two (2) years, one (1) for three (3) years, one (1) for four (4) years, one (1) for five (5) years, one (1)
for six (6) years, and one (1) for seven (7) years; the successor to each member so appointed to serve
for a term of five (5) years. One of the members shall be designated by the Mayor with the approval of
the City Council as Chairperson and shall hold office until the next Chairperson is appointed.
12-4-3 Jurisdiction
The Board of Appeals is hereby vested with the following jurisdiction and authority:
A. To hear and pass upon the applications for variances from the terms provided in Ordinance in
the manner prescribed and subject to the standards established herein;
B. To hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Zoning Officer under this Ordinance;
C. To interpret the provisions of this Ordinance and the district map in the manner provided for
herein; and
D. To hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under this
Ordinance, as prescribed by the applicable provisions of the Illinois revised statutes.
12-4-4 Meetings and Rules
All meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at other such
times as the Board of Appeals may determine. All hearings and other meetings conducted by said
Board shall be open to the public. Any person may appear and testify at the hearing either in person
or by duly authorized agent or attorney.
The Chairperson, or in the Chairperson=s absence, the Acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses. The Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such
fact, and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official actions. A copy of every rule or
regulation, order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Board of Appeals shall be filed
immediately in the office of the Zoning Officer and shall be a public record. The Board shall adopt its
own rules and procedures, not in conflict with this Ordinance or with the applicable Illinois revised
statutes, and select or appoint such officers as it deems necessary.
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board is necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision, or determination of any administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant any
matter upon which it is required to pass under this Ordinance or to effect any variation in the
Ordinance, or to recommend any variation or modification in the Ordinance to the corporate
authorities.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 17 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
12-4-5 Finality of Decisions of the Board of Appeals
All decisions and findings of the Board of Appeals on appeals, applications for a variance, or
application for a use on review, after a hearing, shall, in all instances, be final administrative decisions
and shall be subject to judicial review as may be provided by law.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 18 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 5
VARIANCES, APPEALS, ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS AND
CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
12-5-1 Variances
A. Purpose and Findings of Fact. The Board of Appeals, after a public hearing, may determine and
vary the regulations of this Ordinance in harmony with their general purpose and intent, only in
the specific instances hereinafter set forth, where the Board of Appeals makes written findings of
fact in accordance with the standards hereinafter prescribed and further, finds that there are
practical difficulties or particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the
regulations of this Ordinance.
B. Application for Variance and Notice of Hearing.
1. An application for a variance shall be filed in writing with the Zoning Officer. Said application
shall contain such information as the Board of Appeals may by rule require.
2. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be published at least once, not less
than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days before the hearing, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City of Colona. The published notice may be supplemented by
such additional form of notice as the Board of Appeals by rule may require.
C. Standards for Variance. The Board of Appeals shall not vary the regulations of this Ordinance,
as authorized in this Section, unless there is evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
1. Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical conditions of the
specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as distinguished
from a mere inconvenience if the strict letter of the regulations were to be carried out;
2. The conditions upon which a petition for a variation is based are unique to the property for
which the variance is sought, and are not applicable, generally, to other property within the
same zoning classification;
3. The purpose of the variance is not based exclusively upon a desire to make more money
out of the property;
4. The alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by this Ordinance and has not been created by
any persons presently having an interest in the property;
5. The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other
property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located;
6. The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent
property, substantially increase the congestion of the public streets, increase the danger of
fire, endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the
neighborhood;
7. The purpose of the variance shall not be to establish a use otherwise excluded from the
particular district in which it is requested; and
8. The Zoning Board of Appeals may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the
premises benefited by a variance as may be necessary to comply with the standards
established in this Section.
D. Authorized Variances. Variances from the regulations of this Ordinance shall be granted by the
Board of Appeals only in accordance with the standards established in this Section and may be
granted only in the following instances and in no others:
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 19 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
1. To permit any yard or setback of less dimension than required by the applicable regulations;
2. To permit any building or structure to exceed the height limitations imposed by the
applicable regulations;
3. To permit the use of a lot or lots for a use otherwise prohibited solely because of the
insufficient area or width of the lot or lots, but in no event shall the respective area and width
of the lot or lots to be less than eighty (80) percent of the required area and width;
4. To permit the same off-street parking facility to qualify as required facilities for two (2) or
more uses, provided that substantial use of such facility by each under does not take place
at approximately the same hours of the same days of the week;
5. To reduce the parking and loading requirements in any of the districts whenever the
character or use of a building is such as to make unnecessary the full provision of parking
or loading facilities or where such regulations would impose an unreasonable hardship upon
the use of the lot, as contrasted with merely being granted for a convenience;
6. To permit the alteration or enlargement of an existing building or use located on premises in
a district which prohibits that use of land or building, or the height and area of buildings
existing at the time of the adoption of this Resolution where such alteration or enlargement
is a necessary incident to the use of the structure existing at the time of the adoption,
amendment, or change of this Resolution;
7. To permit the reconstruction of a non-conforming building which as been damaged by
explosion, fire, act of God, or the public enemy to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent
of its actual cash value, as determined by the official County tax assessment and
equalization rate, where the Board finds some compelling public necessity requiring a
continuance of the non-conforming use, and the primary purpose of continuing the nonconforming use is not to continue a monopoly; and
8. To permit other variances as authorized in the Floodplain Ordinance of this Code.
E. Granting a Variance. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board of Appeals shall be
necessary to grant a variance. No decision of the Board of Appeals granting a variance shall be
valid for a period longer than twelve (12) months from the date of such order unless the building
permit is obtained within such period and the erection or alteration of a building is started or the
use is commenced within such period.
F. Effect of Denial of Variance. No application for a variance that has been denied wholly or in part
by the Board of Appeals shall be resubmitted for a period of one (1) year from the date of said
order of denial, except of the grounds of new evidence found to be valid by the Board of Appeals.
12-5-2 Appeals
A. Authority. The Board of Appeals, after a hearing, may determine and vary any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Officer.
B. Initiation of Appeal. Any person, firm, corporation, or any officer, department, board, or bureau of
the City may request an appeal.
C. Application for Appeal. An application for an appeal shall be filed in writing with the Zoning
Officer. Said application shall contain such information as the Board of Appeals may, by rule,
require.
D. Imminent Peril to Life and Property. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from unless the Zoning Officer certifies to the Board of Appeals, after the
application for the appeal has been field with him/her, that by reason of acts stated in the
certificate a stay would, in his/her opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 20 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
E. Hearing on Application. The Board of Appeals shall hold a hearing on each application for an
appeal at such time and place as shall be established by the Board of Appeals.
F. Notice of Hearing. Due notice of the time and place of said hearing on an appeal shall be sent to
all affected parties.
G. Findings on Appeals.
1. The Board of Appeals may affirm or may, upon the concurring vote of four (4) members,
reverse wholly or in part or modify, the interpretation. To that end, the Board of Appeals
shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
2. The Zoning Officer shall maintain records of all actions of the Board of Appeals relative to
appeals.
H. Finality of Decision. All final administrative decisions of the Board of Appeals hereunder, shall be
subject to judicial review related to the provisions of the Administrative Review Act, approved
May 8, 1945, and all amendments and modifications thereof, and the rules adopted pursuant
thereto.
12-5-3 Amendments
A. Authority. For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals, comfort, and general
welfare, conserving the value of property throughout the City, and lessening or avoiding
congestion in the public streets and highways, the City Council may from time to time in the
manner hereinafter set forth amend the regulations imposed in the districts created by this
Ordinance. The Ordinance may be amended, provided that in all amendments adopted under
the authority of this Section, due allowance shall be made for existing conditions, the
conservation of property values, the direction of building development to the best advantages of
the entire community, and the uses to which the property is devoted at the time of the adoption of
such amendment.
B. Initiations of Amendment. Amendments may be proposed by the City Council, Plan Commission,
Board of Appeals, or by an interested person or organization.
C. Application for Amendment. An application for an amendment shall be filed with the Zoning
Officer in such form and accompanied by such information as required by the Zoning Officer.
Such application shall be forwarded to the Plan Commission with the request to hold a public
hearing on said application for amendment.
D. Hearing on Application. The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing on each application for
an amendment at such time and place as shall be established by the Plan Commission. The
hearing shall be conducted and a record of such proceedings shall be preserved in such manner
as the Plan Commission shall, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
E. Notice of Hearing. Notice of time and place of such hearing shall be published at least once in
one or more newspapers of general circulation in the City of Colona less than fifteen (15) nor
more than thirty (30) days before such hearing. Supplemental or additional notices may be
published or distributed as the Plan Commission may, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
F. Findings of Fact and Recommendation of the Plan Commission.
1. Within forty-five (45) days after the close of the hearing on a proposed amendment, the Plan
Commission shall make written findings of fact and shall submit same together with its
recommendations to the City Council. Where the purpose and effect of the proposed
amendment is to change the zoning classification of particular property, the findings of fact
and recommendations shall include the following information:
a. Existing use of property within the general area of the property in question;
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 21 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
b. The zoning classification of property within the general area of the property in question;
c. The suitability of the property in question to the uses permitted under the existing zoning
classifications;
d. The trend in development, if any, in the general area of the property in question,
including changes, if any, which have taken place since the day the property in question
was placed in its present zoning classification; and
e. Minimum size of parcel: A lot, lots, or parcel of land shall not qualify for a zoning
amendment unless it possesses two hundred (200) feet of frontage or contains twentyfive thousand (25,000) square feet of area, or adjoins a lot, lots or parcel of land which
bears the same zoning district classification as the proposed zoning amendment.
2. The Plan Commission shall not recommend the adoption of a proposed amendment unless
it finds that the adoption of such amendment is in the public interest of the applicant. The
Plan Commission may recommend the adoption of an amendment changing the zoning
classification of the property in question to any higher classification that requested by the
applicant. For the purpose of this paragraph, the AG-1 Rural Agricultural District shall be
considered the highest classification and the I-2 Heavy Industrial District shall be considered
the lowest classification.
G. Action by City Council.
1. The City Council shall not act upon a proposed amendment to this Ordinance until it shall
have received a written report and recommendation from the Plan Commission on the
proposed amendment.
2. The City Council may grant or deny any application for an amendment, provided, however,
that in case of a written protest against any proposed amendment of the regulations or
districts, signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the frontage
proposed to be altered, or by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the frontage immediately
adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the
frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, is filed with the City Clerk the
amendment shall not be passed except by a favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the City
Council then holding office. In such cases, a copy of the written protest shall be served by
the protestor or protestors on the applicant for the proposed amendment and a copy upon
the applicant=s attorney, if any, by certified mail at the address of such applicant and
attorney shown in the application for the proposed amendment.
H. Effect of Denial of Amendment. No application for an amendment that has been denied wholly or
in part by the City Council shall be resubmitted for a period of one (1) year from the date of said
denial except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of change of conditions found to be valid
by the Plan Commission.
12-5-4 Conditional Uses
A. Purpose. The development and administration of this Ordinance is based upon the division of
the City into zoning districts, within which districts the use of land and buildings and the bulk and
location of buildings and structures in relation to the land are substantially uniform. It is
recognized, however, that there are certain uses which, because of their unique characteristics,
cannot be property classified in any particular district or districts, without consideration in each
case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular
use at the particular locations. Such conditional uses fall into two categories:
1. Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public interest; and
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 22 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
2. Uses entirely private in character, but of such an unusual nature that their operation may
give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon neighboring property or public
facilities.
B. Initiation of Conditional Use. Any person having a freehold interest in land, a possessory interest
entitled to exclusive possession, or a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest
of is specifically enforceable, may file an application to use such land for one or more of the
special uses provided for in this Ordinance in the zoning district in which the land is located.
C. Application for Conditional Use. An application for a conditional use shall be filed with the Zoning
Officer on a form as the Zoning Officer shall prescribe. The application shall be accompanied by
such plans and/or date prescribed by the Plan Commission and shall include a statement in
writing by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed conditional use will
conform to the standards set forth in Chapter 12-5-4, Section F. Such application shall be
forwarded from the Zoning Officer to the Plan Commission with a request for a public hearing
and report relative thereto.
D. Hearing on Application. Upon receipt in proper form of the application and statement referred to
in Chapter 12-5-4 Section C, the Plan Commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing on
the proposed conditional use. Notice of time and place of such hearing shall be published not
less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days preceding said hearing and at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City of Colona. Supplemental or additional notices may
be published or distributed as the Plan Commission may, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
The Plan Commission shall hold at least one hearing on the application and may hold as many
hearings as necessary when the nature of the application and the nature of any proposed
evidence may require additional hearings. All hearings shall be conducted to assure fundamental
fairness and a full opportunity by the applicant, objectors, and a reasonable number of other
interested citizens to participate fully in the hearing process, including but not limited to the right
to present witnesses on the applicable standards in Chapter 12-5-4 Section F and the opportunity
to question any witness of the other party. The chairperson shall have the right to restrict
repetitive testimony.
Any party appearing before the Plan Commission may exercise the right to transcribe or record
the proceedings at the expense of the party. The Plan Commission shall accommodate any
request to transcribe or record the proceedings.
The Plan Commission reserves the right to control location of recording devices to insure the
orderly nature of the proceedings. The party exercising their right to transcribe or record the
proceedings shall have recording equipment and/or person(s) who will transcribe the
proceedings available at the commencement of the hearing. The failure of said party to provide
recording equipment and/or person to transcribe said hearing shall not be just cause to request
continuance.
E. Authorization. For each application for a conditional use the Zoning Officer shall prepare and
relay to the Plan Commission findings and recommendations, including the recommended
stipulations of additional conditions and guarantees that are deemed necessary for the protection
of the public interest.
F. Standards. No conditional use shall be granted by the Plan Commission unless such
Commission shall find:
1. That the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the conditional use will not be
detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare;
2. That the conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in
the immediate vicinity for the purpose already permitted, nor substantially diminish and
impair property values within the neighborhood, and will be located and operated to
minimize incompatibility with the character of the surrounding area and to minimize the 
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 23 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
effect on the value of the surrounding property. The applicant need not demonstrate
complete compatibility, but the applicant shall demonstrate reasonable efforts to minimize
incompatibility;
3. That the establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly
development and improvement of the surrounding property for use permitted in the district;
4. That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or necessary facilities have been or are
being provided;
5. That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so
designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets;
6. That the plan of operations for the conditional use is designed to minimize the danger to the
surrounding area from fire other operational accidents; and
7. That the conditional use shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable regulations of
the district in which it is located, except as such regulations may, in each instance, be
modified by the City Council.
After a conditional use has been granted, the Zoning Officer or any person whose property
is being, or may be adversely affected by operation of the conditional use, may file a petition
in writing with the Plan Commission requesting that the conditional use be modified or
revoked. The petitioner shall specifically allege the violation of the conditions under which
the permit was granted or facts which would justify modification or revocation of the
conditional use.
If the petition is filed by the Zoning Officer, the matter shall be set for hearing. The provision
of Chapter 12-5-4 Section D pertaining to hearings and notices shall be applicable. The
hearing shall be held within sixty (60) days of the filing of the petition. The petitioner and the
holder of the conditional use must be notified. Copies of the petition shall be sent to the
holder of the conditional use along with the notice.
In the event the petition is field by persons other than the Zoning Officer, the petition shall be
first referred to the Zoning Officer for investigation. Within forty-five (45) days after the
petition has been filed, the Zoning Officer shall report his findings and conclusions to the
Plan Commission. Within fifteen (15) days after receiving the Zoning Officer=s report, the
Plan Commission shall set the matter for hearing within sixty (60) days or shall recommend
to the City Council to dismiss the petition. If the petition is dismissed, the Plan Commission
shall state its reasons for dismissal and notify the petitioners and the holder of the
conditional use accordingly. In the event a hearing is scheduled, Chapter 12-5-4 Section D
pertaining to hearing and notice shall be applicable. The petitioner and the holder of the
conditional use shall be notified. The holder of the conditional use shall be sent a copy of
the petition with the notice.
Prior to filing a petition with the Plan Commission, or reporting findings and conclusions to
the Plan Commission, pursuant to this Section, the Zoning Officer shall give the holder of
the conditional use a reasonable period of time to correct violations. The other time
requirements of this Section shall not be stayed during the period of time the holder of the
conditional use is given to correct violations.
After a hearing, the Plan Commission may recommend to the City Council to deny the
petition, or if the evidence so warrants, recommend to the City Council to revoke the
conditional use or modify the conditions of the permit. The burden of proof shall be on the
petitioner.
The hearing shall be governed under the general standards as described in Chapter
12-5-4 Section D. Any decision of the City Council under this Section shall be final.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 24 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
G. Conditions and Guarantees. Prior to the granting of any conditional use, the Plan Commission
shall stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction,
maintenance, and operation of the special use as is deemed necessary for the protection of the
public interest and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified in
Chapter 12-5-4 Section F above. In all cases in which conditional uses are granted, the Plan
Commission shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that
the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with.
H. Planned Unit Developments (PUD). The regulations established under this Section are intended
to provide optional methods of land development which encourage more imaginative solutions to
environmental design problems. For the purpose of this text these methods of land development
shall be called Planned Unit Developments and shall be characterized by a unified building and
site development program which is integrated with the total project by unified architectural and
open space treatment.
1. Use Exceptions. The Zoning Officer may recommend and the Plan Commission may
authorize that there be in part of the area of such development and for the duration of such
development, specified uses not permitted by the use regulations of the district in which said
development is located, provided that the Plan Commission shall find:
a. That the uses permitted by such exception are necessary or desirable and are
appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the development;
b. That the uses permitted by such exception are not of such a nature or so located as to
exercise a detrimental influence on the surrounding neighborhood; and
c. That not more than twenty (20) percent of the ground area or of the gross floor area of
such development shall be devoted to the uses permitted by said exception.
2. Bulk Regulations. In the case of any Planned Unit Development, the Zoning Officer may
recommend and the Plan Commission may authorize exceptions to the applicable bulk
regulations of this Ordinance within the boundaries of such development, provided that the
Plan Commission shall find:
a. That such exception shall be solely for the purpose of promoting an integrated site plan
no less beneficial to the residents or occupants of such development as well as the
neighboring property than would be obtained under the bulk regulations of this
Ordinance for buildings developed on separate zoning lots;
b. That the minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirements of this Ordinance shall not be
decreased by more than twenty (20) percent in any such development containing
residential uses and that permanent open space or land, in an amount equivalent to that
by which each residential lot or building site has been diminished under this provision
shall be provided in a common recreational area within the development; and
c. That along the periphery of such planned developments, yards shall be provided as
required by the regulations of the district in which said development is located.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 25 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 6
DISTRICTS AND MAP
12-6-1 For the purpose of this Ordinance, the City of Colona is hereby divided into twenty four (24) classes of
districts as follows:
AG-1 Agricultural Preservation District
AG-2 General Agricultural District
SE-1 Suburban Estates Low Density District
SE-2 Suburban Estates Medium Density District
"R-1" One Family Residence District
"R-2" One Family Residence District
"R-3" One and Two Family Residence District
"R-4" One to Six Family Residence District
"R-5" Multiple Family Residence District
"R-6" Multi-Family Residence District
"R-7" Mobile/Home Manufactured Housing District
"U-1" University/College District
"C-1" Conservation District
"C-2" Conservation District
"O-1" Office District
"B-1" Neighborhood Business District
"B-2" General Business District
"B-3" Community Business District
"B-4" Highway Intensive Business District
"ORT" Office/Research Park and Technology District
"I-1" Light Industrial District
"I-2" General Industrial District
"PUD" Planned Unit Development District
"RCO" Riverfront Corridor Overlay District
12-6-2 The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown one a map entitled "Zoning Map,
City of Colona, Illinois, hereinafter referred to as the "Zoning Map, which accompanies and is hereby
made a part of this Ordinance. The district boundary lines on said map are intended to follow lot lines,
the center lines of streets or alleys, the center line of streets or alleys projected, railroad right-of-way
lines, or the corporate limit lines, all as they existed at the time of enactment of this Ordinance; but
when a district boundary line does not clearly coincide with lot lines, it shall be determined by scaling.
12-6-3 Where a district boundary lines divides a lot which was in single ownership and of record at the time of
enactment of this Ordinance, the use authorized on the other district requirements applying to the less
restricted portion of such lot is more than fifty (50) feet beyond said dividing district boundary line, such
less restricted use shall be limited to the portion of the lot lying beyond fifty (50) feet of said boundary
line.
12-6-4 Questions concerning the exact location of district boundary lines shall be determined by the Board of
Appeals according to the rules and regulations which it may adopt.
12-6-5 All territory which may hereinafter be annexed to the City of Colona shall be classed automatically to
the R-1 One Family Residence District within the general land use classification shall have been
changed by amendment of this Ordinance as provided hereunder or as provided in a pre-annexation
agreement as part of the annexation process.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 26 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 7
GENERAL PROVISIONS
12-7-1 Zoning Affects Every Structure And Use
Except as hereinafter provided, no building, structure or land shall hereafter be used and no building
or part thereof of structure shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, occupied, moved, altered or
repaired, except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the class of district in which it is
located.
12-7-2 Continued Existing Uses
Any building, structure or use lawfully existing at the time of enactment of this Ordinance may be
continued, except certain non-conforming uses as provided in Chapter 12-7-3. Nothing in this
Ordinance shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any part of any building or
structure declared unsafe by the Building Inspector.
12-7-3 Non-conforming Uses
A. Any lawfully established use of a building or land, at the effective date of this Ordinance, or of
amendments thereto, that does not conform to the use regulations for the district in which it is
located shall be deemed to be a legal non-conforming use and may be continued, except as
otherwise provided herein.
B. Any legal non-conforming building or structure may be continued in use provided there is no
physical change other than necessary maintenance and repair, except as otherwise permitted
herein.
C. Any building for which a permit has been lawfully granted prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance, or of amendments thereto, may be completed in accordance with the approved plans;
provided construction is started within six months and diligently prosecuted to completion. Such
building shall thereafter be deemed a lawfully established building.
D. Any non-conforming building or structure which has been or may be damaged by fire, flood,
explosion, earthquake, war, riot or other act of God, may be reconstructed and used as before if
it be done within twelve months (12) of such calamity unless damaged more than fifty percent
(50) of its fair market value, as determined by the Board of Appeals, at the time of such damage,
in which case, reconstruction shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
E. No building, structure or premises where a non-conforming building or structure which has been
or may be discontinued for more than one (1) year, or has been or may be changed to a use
permitted in the district in which it is located, shall again be devoted to a nonconforming use.
F. Any building or structure devoted to a nonconforming use with a fair market value of less than
five hundred dollars ($500), as determined by the Board of Appeals, may be continued for a
period not to exceed three (3) years after enactment of this Ordinance, where upon such
nonconforming use shall be removed or changed to a conforming use.
G. Any legal, nonconforming use shall be enclosed in all sides by a solid wall or tight board fence
not less than eight (8) feet high if said use includes storage, repair or maintenance of vehicles,
equipment or materials on the premises and not within the building. Said wall or fence shall be
maintained to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector. Any use so described that is in existence
at the time of this amendment is adopted shall comply with said fencing requirement within one
hundred eighty days (180) of the adoption of this amendment.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 27 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
H. A non-conforming building may be enlarged or extended only if the entire building is thereafter
devoted to a conforming use, and only if the required yards for the district in which it is located
are maintained for such enlargement, except as provided for under Variances of this Ordinance.
I. No building partially occupied by a non-conforming use shall be altered in such a way as to
permit the enlargement or expansion of the space occupied by such non-conforming use.
J. No non-conforming building in any Residential District shall be so altered as to increase the
number of dwelling units therein.
K. No non-conforming use may be enlarged or extended in such a way as to occupy any required
usable open space, or any land beyond the boundaries of the zoning lot as it existed at the
effective date of this Ordinance, or to displace any conforming use in the same building or the
same parcel.
12-7-4 Street Frontage Required - Flag Lots
Every lot shall have at least twenty (20) feet of frontage which provides reasonable access onto public
right-of-way dedicated to street purposes. No building in the rear of a principal building on the same
lot shall be used as a dwelling. Setbacks for flag lots will be determined at the start of the buildable
area of the lot.
12-7-5 Accessory Buildings in Residence Districts
A. No accessory building or buildings shall be erected in any required court, or front yard. When
erected in a side yard the accessory building shall meet the setback requirements of the principal
structure. When erected in a rear yard it or they cumulatively shall not occupy more than thirty
(30) percent of a required rear yard and/or it or they shall not exceed the total ground floor
footage of the primary structure except for swimming pools and shall be a distance at least three
(3) feet from all lot lines adjoining lots which are in any R district, and at least six (6) feet from
alley lines and from any other building or structure on the same lot. Accessory buildings shall not
exceed fifteen (15) feet in height, except that an accessory building used in part or wholly as a
dwelling for domestic employees of the owners or of the tenants of the principal building shall not
exceed two (2) stories or twenty five (25) feet in height, provided it shall conform to the open
space requirements of this Ordinance for a principal building, and for the purpose of determining
the front yard in such case, the rear line of the rear yard required for the principal building shall
be considered the front lot line for the building in the rear. Where the natural grade of a lot at the
front wall of the principal building is more than eight (8) feet above the average established curb
grade in front of the lot, a private garage may be erected within any yard or court, but not within
ten (10) feet of any street line, provided that at least one-half (2) of the height of such private
garage shall be below the level of the yard or court.
B. Any accessory building may be erected as an integral part of the principal building, or if at least
six (6) feet from the principal building, may be connected to the principal building by a breezeway
or similar structure, provided all yard and court requirements of this Ordinance for the principal
building are complied with, unless such accessory building is in a rear yard, in which case the
applicable provisions of Chapter 12-7-5 Section A shall apply.
12-7-6 Required Yard Cannot Be Reduced or Used by Another Building
A. No lot, yard, court, parking area or other open space shall be so reduced in area or dimension as
to make any such area or dimension less than the minimum requirement. No required open
space provided about any building or structure shall be included as part of any open space
required for another building or structure.
B. The space occupied by a required private garage or parking area shall be considered the same
as any required open space provided about a principal building, and such space shall not be
reduced or included as any part of any required open space for another building or structure.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 28 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
12-7-7 Permitted Obstructions in Required Yards
The following shall not be considered to be obstructions when located in the required yards specified:
A. In all yards  porch awnings and canopies, steps which are necessary for access to a permitted
building, or for access to a zoning lot from a street or alley; chimneys projecting not more than
eighteen (18) inches into the yard; clothes lines; flag poles; arbors, trellises, closed and opentype fences, and hedges six (6) feet or less in height, provided no such fence, the top rail of
which is between two (2) and six (6) feet above the roadway surface or no other ground level
sight obstructions, exceptions being trimmed tree trunks and poles, shall be placed or permitted
to remain on any corner or reversed corner lot within the triangular area formed by the right-ofway lines and a line connecting them at points twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of the
right-of-way lines, or in the case of a rounded right-of-way corner, from the intersection of the
right-of-way lines extended; open fences exceeding six (6) feet in height.
B. In front yards  one-story bay windows projecting three (3) feet or less into the yard; and
overhanging eaves and gutters projecting three (3) feet or less into the yard. In A-1 district
permitted roadside stands.
C. In rear yards  open decks not enclosed, attached or detached off-street parking spaces; open
off-street parking spaces; accessory sheds, tool rooms, similar buildings or structures for
domestic or agricultural storage; balconies; breeze-ways and open porches; one-story windows
projecting three (3) feet or less into the yard; and overhanging eaves and gutters projecting three
(3) feet or less into the yard.
D. In side yards  overhanging eaves and gutters projecting into the yard for a distance not
exceeding ten (10) percent of the required yard width but in no case, exceeding eighteen (18)
inches.
12-7-8 Conversion of Dwellings
The conversion of any building into a dwelling, or the conversion of any dwelling so as to
accommodate an increased number of dwelling units or families, shall be permitted only within a
district in which a new building for similar occupancy would be permitted under this Ordinance, and
only when the resulting occupancy will comply with the requirements governing new construction in
such a district, with respect to minimum lot size, lot area per dwelling unit, dimensions of yards and
other open spaces and off-street parking. Each conversion shall be subject to such further
requirements as may be specified hereinafter with the Chapter applying to such district.
12-7-9 Minimum Ground Floor Area for Dwellings
A one story dwelling or a story and a half, or two story dwelling shall meet the minimum floor area
standards in the Uniform Building Code (changed every third year) and be at least nine hundred (900)
square feet with the length being no more than four times (4x) the width.
12-7-10 Traffic Visibility Across Corner Lots
In any district, except B-2, on any lot, no fence structure or planting shall be erected or maintained
within twenty (20) feet, measured horizontally from the property line where they intersect on a street
corner.
12-7-11 Essential Services
Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances of the
City of Colona, it being the intention hereof to exempt such essential services from the application of
this Ordinance.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 29 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
12-7-12 Fences, Walls and Hedges
General Provisions:
A. Fences, walls and hedges located in a yard adjacent to a public street of residential and college
and university zoned property shall be no more than forty two (42) inches in height provided the
top rail is not between two (2) and six (6) feet above the roadway surface or other ground level
sight obstructions and the smooth, finished, nonstructural or dressed side of a fence, if any, shall
be directed toward the neighboring properties.
B. Fences, walls and hedges shall not exceed six (6) feet in height, except trimmed tree trunks and
poles in any side or rear yard, and the smooth, finished, nonstructural or dressed side of the
fence, if any shall be directed toward neighboring properties.
C. All fences, wall or hedges may be placed up to the property line, except in cases of a corner lot or
reversed corner lot, where they shall not be placed within the triangular area formed by the rightof-way lines and a line connecting them at a point twenty five (25) feet from the intersection of the
right-of-way lines or in the case of a rounded corner from the intersection of the right-of-way lines
extended.
D. Fences up to ten (10) feet in height shall be permitted in any I-District.
E. All refuse and/or discard areas for all commercial, industrial and multi-family residential uses
shall be screened on a minimum of three (3) sides by a six-foot solid or tight board fence. All
refuse and/or discard areas for all commercial and industrial uses which do not conform to all
applicable provisions of this section shall be made to conform within three (3) years from the
effective date of this Ordinance. The appropriate official, or designee, shall make the
determination if it is an unreasonable hardship to require existing refuse and/or discard to be
screened on a case-by-case basis.
F. Snow fencing shall only be used on a temporary basis by public jurisdictions for public safety
purposes or in Agricultural Districts or as a permitted use for temporary festival/event enclosure
purposes.
G. Fencing shall not be allowed in floodways.
H. Swimming pool fencing requirements are outlined in the City building code.
Optional:
A. Barbed wire fences shall be permitted only in Industrial, Agricultural, or Suburban Estate-1
Districts or on review by the appropriate authority in Industrial districts and the bottom strand shall
be a minimum of eight (8) feet above grade.
B. Electric fences shall be permitted only in Agricultural, or Suburban Estate -1 Districts and only for
the enclosure of livestock. Electric fences shall not carry a charge greater than twenty five (25)
milliamperes nor a pulsating current lower than one tenth (1/10) second in a one second cycle.
All electric fence charges shall carry the seal of an approved testing laboratory.
C. Barbed wire and electric fences shall be prohibited within five (5) feet of a public sidewalk or
within four (4) feet of street right-of-way line where a public sidewalk does not exist. In the latter
case, however, either fence may be installed or constructed along the right-of-way line if the 
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 30 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
property owner agrees to move the fence back the required distance within two (2) months after
the installation of a public sidewalk.
12-7-13 Home Occupations
A home occupation shall be considered a permitted accessory use in each district in which a
residential dwelling unit is permitted and shall be subject to the following limitations:
A. There shall be no on-site employment or employment of persons not residing at the residence.
B. A home occupation shall be conducted wholly within the principal building or an accessory
structure.
C. The appearance of the structure shall not be altered nor the occupation within the residence be
conducted in a manner that would cause the premises to differ from its residential character.
D. The total gross floor area which is used primarily for the operation of the home occupation shall
not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the gross floor area of the home.
E. The storage of merchandise, supplies, or products for off-premise sales is permitted. For the
purposes of this Section, any products shipped or delivered to the ultimate consumer of the
goods or merchandise shall be considered off-premise sales.
F. No display of goods or services pertaining to such home occupations shall be visible from outside
the building.
G. No home occupation or equipment connected with a home occupation, nor any storage of goods,
merchandise, supplies, products, materials, shall be allowed outdoors.
H. No advertising sign, other than a non-illuminated sign, not exceeding one (1) square foot in total
face area shall be displayed in connection with a home occupation. No other on-site advertising
visible from the exterior shall be used that informs the public of the home occupation.
I. The home occupation shall not exceed the limitations imposed by the provisions of all applicable
building, fire, health, safety, and housing codes and shall conform with all applicable
requirements for business and occupational licensing.
J. There shall be no noise, vibration, glare, heat, smoke, dust, electromagnetic, or electrical
interference, nor odor detectable beyond the confines of the subject property including transmittal
through vertical or horizontal party walls.
K. The owner of a home occupation shall not allow more than six (6) clients or customers in the
dwelling unit or on the premises during any period of sixty (60) consecutive minutes nor more
than sixteen (16) in any given twenty-four (24) hour period.
L. The owner of a home occupation shall not allow vehicular traffic associated with the business to
exceed two (2) vehicles on the property at any one time. Sufficient parking shall be provided on
the same lot as the dwelling for all business visitors.
M. The owner of a home occupation shall prohibit pedestrian and vehicular traffic generated by
clients or customers of a home occupation on the premises between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 31 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
N. The owner of a home occupation shall not allow commercial deliveries related to the home
occupation, other than the United States Postal Service and private package and letter delivery
services. Under no circumstances shall commercial deliveries by semi-trailer trucks be
permitted.
O. The owner of a home occupation shall limit the use of commercial vehicles in conjunction with a
home occupation to one (1) vehicle, not to exceed one (1) ton maximum load weight and owned
by a resident of the dwelling. Such vehicle must be parked in a garage or residential drive onsite, and in accordance with provisions elsewhere in this Ordinance.
P. If more than one home occupation is located within any single dwelling unit, the owner of each
home occupation shall not allow the combined impact of the standards contained in this Section,
with the exception that each home occupation may have one (1) first division vehicle, as defined
elsewhere in this Ordinance, for commercial use provided it is the only vehicle used in
conjunction with the home occupation.
12-7-14 Off-street Parking And Loading
A. Purpose:
The purpose of this section of this Ordinance is to alleviate or prevent congestion of the public
streets and promote the safety and welfare of the public by establishing minimum requirements
for the off-street parking and loading and unloading of motor vehicles in accordance with the use
of the property.
B. General Provisions:
1. Procedure  An application for a building permit for a new or enlarged building, structure or
use shall include a plot plan, drawn to scale and fully dimensioned showing any parking or
loading facilities to be provided in compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance.
2. In all districts, in connection with every building or part thereof hereafter erected, having a
gross floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more, which is to be occupied by
uses requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of materials and merchandise, there
shall be provided and maintained on the same premises with such building at least one (1)
off-street loading space accessible from any alley, easement of access, or when there is no
such alley or easement of access from a street, plus one (1) additional such loading space
for each two thousand (2,000) square feet or major fraction thereof of gross floor area so
used in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. such space may occupy all or any
part of any required rear yard or upon authorization from the appropriate board of review,
any part of any other yard or court space.
3. In all districts, except "B-2", an off-street parking area in the open or in a garage, shall be
provided in connection with the uses set forth herein after and to the extent indicated
therewith, in addition to the above required loading and unloading spaces. Such areas in
the case of "R districts and for dwellings in other districts, shall be on the premises
intended to be served; and in the case of other districts, and in connection with uses other
than property within one hundred feet (100') of any part of said premises and in the same or
less restricted district.
4. Off street parking facilities accessory to residential use and developed in any residential
district in accordance with the requirements of this section shall be used solely for the
parking of passenger vehicles owned and occupied.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 32 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
C. Units of Measure:
1. Floor area as employed in this parking and loading section in the case of office,
merchandising or service types of use shall mean the gross floor area of a building or
structure used or intended to be used for service to the public as customers, patrons,
clients, patients, or tenants, including areas occupied by fixtures and equipment used for
display or sale of merchandise. Floor area for the purposes of this section shall not include
any area used for storage accessory to the principal use, incidental repairs, processing or
packaging of merchandise, show windows, incidental management offices, restrooms,
utilities and dressing/fitting rooms.
2. Parking spaces shall not be less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet in area
exclusive of access drives or aisles.
3. Loading spaces shall not be less than ten feet (10') wide, fifty feet (50') in length and
fourteen feet (14') in height, exclusive of access and turning areas.
D. Schedule:
Parking requirements shall be as follows, reference to maximum number of patrons shall be
based on the figure provided by fire code for a given facility:
1. Athletic Field  five parking spaces per acre.
2. Auditorium/Theater  one parking space for every four seats or one parking space for every
150 square feet plus one for every two employees during a maximum shift.
3. Auto Repair  three per bay, plus one per employee during a maximum shift.
4. Auto Gas and Sales  two parking spaces per pump, plus two per service bay plus one per
employee during a maximum shift.
5. Banks and Business Offices  four parking spaces per 1000 square feet, plus drive through
requirements if applicable.
6. Barber/Beauty Shop Styling and Tanning Salons  two parking spaces per personal
grooming station, plus one for every two employees during a maximum shift.
7. Bowling Alleys  six parking spaces per alley plus bar and restaurant requirements, if
applicable.
8. Car Wash  six parking spaces per bay.
9. Care Homes  one parking space for every two residents, plus one for each employee
during a maximum shift.
10. Churches  one parking space for every four sanctuary seats.
11. Community Center  one parking space for every three maximum patrons.
12. Day Care Centers  one parking space for very two employees during a maximum shift,
plus one for every ten children served plus one per institutional vehicle.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 33 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
13. Drive Through Facility  six stacking spaces for each drive through station or automatic
teller machine, plus appropriate employee parking for principal use.
14. Dry Cleaning  one parking space for every two employees during a maximum shift, plus
four for patrons.
15. Durable Goods Sales (appliances, furniture, etc.)  one parking space per 500 square feet,
plus one per employee during a maximum shift.
16. Elderly Housing Facility  three parking spaces for very four units, plus one per employee
during a maximum shift.
17. Fraternities, Sororities and Boarding Houses  one parking space per lodging resident, plus
one per employee during a maximum shift.
18. Funeral Home  one parking space per 50 square feet of public access area, plus one per
business vehicle.
19. Group Home/Halfway House/Boarding House  one parking space per bedroom.
20. Health Recreation and Physical Training Facility  five parking spaces per 1,000 square
feet, plus additional parking for outdoor accessory use if applicable.
21. Hospital  one parking space per overnight bed, plus one per affiliated doctor plus one per
employee during a maximum shift, plus six per 1,000 square feet devoted to outpatient
service.
22. Laundromats  one parking space for every two washers.
23. Manufacturing Plants and Testing Labs  three parking spaces for every four employees
during a maximum shift, plus one per business vehicle plus four per 1,000 square feet
devoted to office space.
24. Medical, Dental or Veterinary Office or Clinic  two parking spaces per treatment room, plus
one per employee during a maximum shift.
25. Motel, Hotel or Apartment Hotel  one parking space per unit, plus one for every two
employees during a maximum shift plus banquet, restaurant and/or bar requirements if
applicable.
26. Mobile Home Park  one parking space and one for every four units.
27. Nursing Home  one parking space per overnight bed, plus one per affiliated doctor plus
one per employee during a maximum shift.
28. Park, Neighborhood  five parking spaces per first two acres, plus one for each additional
acre.
29. Park, Community  five parking spaces per acre, plus requirements for major facilities as
noted elsewhere in this list if applicable.
30. Residences  two parking spaces per unit and for six-plexes or greater; guest parking equal
to 10 percent of the total dwelling units.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 34 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
31. Restaurants, Taverns, or Night Clubs  one parking space for every 75 square feet of public
floor area or for each two persons allowed by fire code, whichever is greater, plus drive
through requirements if applicable.
32. Retail, Freestanding and Shopping Centers  five parking space per 1,000 square feet
gross floor area, and one for every two employees on a maximum shift
33. Schools, Elementary and Junior High  one parking space per employee, plus one per class
room plus one per institutional vehicle.
34. Schools, High School  one parking space per employee, plus one for every four students
plus one per institutional vehicle.
35. Sports Stadium, Outdoor  one parking space for every three maximum patrons, plus
parking for buses.
36. Swimming Pool  one parking space for every three maximum patrons.
37. Wholesale and Warehouse  two parking spaces per 1,000 square feet for first 10,000
square feet, plus one per 2,000 square feet for the remaining space with office area parking
calculated separately at four per 1,000 square feet.
E. Development Standards:
1. Off street accessory parking areas shall be of usable shape and shall be improved in
accordance with requirements of the City Engineer with asphalt cement concrete, Portland
cement concrete or alternate equivalent materials acceptable to the City Engineer, and so
graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulation within the area. Any
lighting used to illuminate such parking shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from
adjoining premises in any "R district and in accordance with illumination standards further
described in this Ordinance.
2. Parking lot layout shall be designed so the maneuvering requirements are accomplished
without backing into adjacent public streets. Stack parking shall not be allowed to meet
parking requirements for uses other than one and two family uses.
F. Exceptions:
1. The Board of Appeals may, on appeal, authorize a modification, reduction or waiver of the
foregoing requirements. Such modification, reduction or waiver shall be justified by the
particular nature of the use, or other exception, situation or condition.
G. Establishment of Off-street Parking:
1. The Plan Commission, in consultation with other city departments and agencies concerned,
shall make studies as found advisable of various areas in the city for the purpose of
determining the areas within which there is need for the establishment of off-street parking
facilities to be provided by the city and to be financed wholly, or in part, by a special
assessment district or by other means. Where such need is found, the Plan Commission
shall report its recommendation for the acquisition of such off-street parking facilities to the
City Council. This report shall include recommendations on the type, size, location and
other pertinent features of the proposed off-street parking facilities and the areas they are
intended to serve.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 35 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
2. Wherever pursuant to this procedure, off-street parking facilities are established by means
of a special assessment district, or other district which the City Council may have
determined, they shall be exempt from the requirements of this Chapter for privately
supplied off-street parking facilities except as provided in the following: the City Council,
upon recommendation of the Plan Commission and after public hearing, may require by
resolution, that a portion, not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the off-street parking facilities
required by this Chapter shall be provided in connection with occupancy or use of a building
in an area that was included in a special assessment district for the provision of off-street
parking facilities, or in any other district which the City Council may have determined to be
served by a public off-street parking facility in the following cases:
a. In such cases where the use of a building, erected after the levying of the special
assessment in such an area or after the establishment of the public off-street parking
facility, creates a need for an annual or exceptional amount of off-street parking
facilities.
b. In such cases where alteration, extension or change in a use of a building, after the
levying of the special assessment in such an area or establishment of the public offstreet parking facility, creates a need for off-street parking facilities more than thirty
percent (30%) in excess of the requirements of off-street parking facilities for such
building or use before alterations, extensions or changes in use, as computed on the
basis of the requirements in this section.
c. In any district, spaces for off-street parking and for loading or unloading shall be
provided in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 12-7-14.
H. Parking, Storage or Use of Recreational Vehicle:
1. No recreational vehicle shall be parked or stored on any lot in a residential district except in
a required side or rear yard providing all yard setbacks are met by the recreation vehicle and
the vehicle is parked on a concrete pad. However, such equipment may be parked
anywhere on residential premises for a period of time not to exceed 24 hours during loading
and unloading no more than twice in any consecutive period of seven (7) days. At least
thirty (30) hours must separate each occurrence. No such equipment shall be used for
living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot, or in
any location not approved for such use.
2. No recreational vehicle intended for portable temporary housing shall be used for living,
sleeping or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot, or in any
other location not approved for such use, provided however, that such equipment may be
used for the housing of guests of occupants of the principal resident if (a) occupancy shall
not exceed thirty (30) consecutive days; and (b) no charge is made for such occupancy.
3. No recreational vehicle shall be stored out of doors on residential premises unless it is in
condition for safe and effective performance of the function for which it is intended or can be
made so at a cost not exceeding the value of the equipment in its existing state. In no case
shall any such equipment be so stored for a period of more than six (6) months if not in
condition for safe and efficient performance of the function for which it is intended.
12-7-15 Pending Applications For Building Permits
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the overall layout, plans, construction, size or
designated use of any development, building, structure or part thereof, for which official approvals and
required building permits have been granted before the enactment of this Ordinance as amended, the
construction of which, conforming with such plans shall have been started prior to the effective date of 
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 36 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
this Ordinance, as amended, and completion thereof carried on in a normal manner within the
subsequent six month period, and not discontinued until completion, except for reasons beyond the
builders control.
12-7-16 Uses Authorized by the City Council with Recommendation of the Plan Commission
Any use or structure as regulated by the City Council with recommendation of the Plan Commission in
the various districts shall be accumulative in nature beginning with the most restrictive district.
12-7-17 Principal Building
Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot as herein defined and
in no case shall there be more than one principal building on one lot unless otherwise provided in this
Ordinance.
12-7-18 Adult Regulated Uses
To prevent undue adverse effects upon adjacent areas in an I-1 and I-2 district from uses, the
following will apply:
A. Not more than two (2) such Adult Use conditional uses will be established within one thousand
(1,000) feet of each other.
B. Adult Special Uses must not be located closer than one thousand (1,000) feet in any direction to
the following Zoning Districts and Land Uses, Agricultural, Suburban Estates, Residential or
Commercial Districts, Public or Private Schools, Licensed Day Care Centers, Churches or
Religious Centers, Public Parks or designated Pedestrian/Bicycle Paths.
C. No building in which Adult Use conditional uses operate shall display mat photos, live models or
drawings on the exterior of said building. Any displays of such materials, photos, live models or
drawings will be limited to the interior portion of the building which cannot readily be seen from
any entrance, exit or exterior window opening.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 37 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 8
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS, EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
The requirements and regulations specified herein before this Ordinance shall be subject to the additional
requirements, exceptions, modifications and interpretations in the following:
12-8-1 Height Limits
Height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this Ordinance shall not apply:
A. To barns, silos or other farm buildings, provided these are not less than fifty (50) feet from every
lot line, to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes, monuments, water towers, fire and hose
towers, masts and aerials; to parapet walls extending not more than four (4) feet above the
limiting height of the building. However, if in the opinion of the Building Inspector, such structures
would adversely affect adjoining or adjacent properties, such greater height shall not be
authorized except by the Board of Appeals.
B. To places of public assembly such as churches, schools and other permitted public and semipublic buildings not to exceed six (6) stories or seventy-five (75) feet, provided that for each foot
by which the height of such building exceeds the maximum height otherwise permitted in the
district, its side and rear yards shall be increased in width or depth by an additional foot over the
side and rear yards required for the highest building otherwise permitted in the district.
C. To bulkheads, conveyors, derricks, elevators, penthouses, water tanks, monitors and scenery
lofts; to monuments, fire towers, hose towers, cooling towers, grain elevators, gas holders or
other structures, where the manufacturing process requires a greater height. Where a permitted
use for the highest building otherwise permitted in the district.
D. To hospitals, provided that for each foot by which the height of such building exceeds the
maximum height otherwise permitted in the district, its side and rear yards shall be increased in
width and depth by an additional one-half (1/2) foot over the side and rear yards required for the
highest building otherwise permitted in the district.
12-8-2 Lot Area Requirements
A. Existing Lots of Record. In any district where dwellings are permitted, a one-family detached
dwelling may be constructed on any lot of official record at the time of enactment of this
Ordinance, provided that proposed yard spaces satisfy requirements stipulated for the district in
which said lot is located, or requirements as may be modified by the appropriate authority.
B. Lots Unserved by Sewer and Water. In any district where neither public water supply nor public
sanitary sewer is accessible, the otherwise specified lot area and width requirement shall be
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and one hundred (100) feet; respectively, provided,
however, that where a public water supply system is accessible and will be installed, these
requirements shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet and seventy-five (75) feet respectively,
provided further that the County Health Officer has certified that the said areas will be large
enough to satisfy all applicable requirements concerning water supply and the disposal of
sanitary wastes.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 38 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
12-8-3 Lot Area per Family
A. Modification of Minimum Lot Area on any lot where more than two dwelling units are permitted.
Where part or all of the off-street parking spaces required for dwelling are provided within the
principal building, the minimum lot area per dwelling unit specified may be reduced by a
maximum of twenty (20) percent, in accordance with the following formula:
a/b x 20%
When a = the number of spaces provided within the principal building, and b = the number of
spaces required for the dwellings.
12-8-4 Front Yard Exceptions and Modifications
A. Front Yard Requirements Do Not Apply. To bay windows or balconies occupying, in the
aggregate, not more than one-third (1/3) of the front wall, provided that these projections come
entirely within planes drawn from either main corner of the front wall, making the interior angle of
twenty-two and one-half (22-1/2) degrees in the horizontal planes with the front wall; to chimneys,
flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, uncovered porches or similar features not over three
(3) feet high above the average finished grade and distant five (15) feet from every lot line.
B. Interior Lots. In any district where the average depth of two (2) or more existing front yards on
lots within one hundred fifty (150) feet in either direction of the lot in question and within the same
block front less than the average depth of said existing front yards or the average depth on the
two (2) lots immediately adjoining, provided, however, that the depth of a front yard in any "R"
district shall be at least ten (10) feet and need not exceed thirty (30) feet.
C. Corner Lots. In any district where the average depth of two (2) or more existing front yards on
lots within one hundred and fifty (150) feet of the lot in question and within the same front is less
than the least front yard described, the depth of the front yard on such lot shall not be less than
the average depth of said existing front yards or depth of the front yard on the lot immediately
adjoining; provided, however, that the depth of a front yard on a lot in any "R" district shall be at
least ten (10) feet and need not exceed thirty (30) feet, except as provided in Section 8.10.
12-8-5 Side Yard Exceptions and Modifications
A. Along any district boundary line, an abutting side yard on a lot in the less restricted district shall
have at least width equal to that required in the more restricted district; and in a "B-2" or "I"
district, on a lot abutting a lot in any "R" district, such side yard for a building higher than the
limiting height in such "R" district shall be increased by three (3) feet for each story over such
limiting height.
B. Side Yards Shall Be Increased. In width by two (2) inches for each foot by which the length of the
side wall of the building, adjacent to the side yard, exceeds forty (40) feet in any "R-1" or "R-2"
district, or fifty (50) feet in any "R-3" district.
C. Side Yards May Be Reduced. By three (3) inches from the otherwise required least width or sum
of the least widths for each foot by which a lot of record at the time of enactment of this
Ordinance is narrower than the lot width specified for the district in which the lot is located, in the
case of buildings not higher than two and one-half (2-1/2) stories, and in case the owner of
record does not own any adjoining property; provided, however, that no side yard shall be
narrower at any point than three (3) feet.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 39 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
D. No part of any accessory building shall be nearer a side street lot line than the least depth of any
front yard required along such side street.
E. Side Yards May Be Varied. Where the side walls of a building are not parallel with the side lot
line or is broken or otherwise irregular, in which case, the average width, or narrower than three
(3) feet in any case.
F. Structures or Projections into Side Yards May Be Permitted As Follows. Fences, plantings or
walls not over six (6) feet above the average natural grade. Fire escapes three (3) feet from a
side lot line. Bays and balconies not more than three (3) feet from the building, provided these
projections are entirely within planes drawn from either main corner of the side wall, making an
interior angle of twenty-two and one-half (22-1/2) degrees in the horizontal plane with the side
wall. The sum of the lengths of such projection shall not exceed one-third (1/3) of the length of
the side yard.
G. Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sill, pilasters, lintels, ornamental features, cornices,
eaves, gutters and the like, into or over a required side yard not more than one and one-half (1-
1/2) feet.
H. Terraces, steps, uncovered porches, stoops or similar features not higher than the elevation of
the ground story of the building and distant three (3) feet from a side lot line.
12-8-6 Rear Yard Exception and Modifications
A. Rear Yards May Be Reduced. Rear yards may be reduced by three (3) inches from the required
least depth for each foot by which a lot at the time of enactment of this Ordinance is less than
one hundred (100) feet deep, in the case of a building not higher than two and one-half (2-1/2)
stories, and in the case the owner of record does not own adjoining property to the rear,
provided, however, that no required rear yard shall be less than ten (10) feet deep.
B. Structures Or Projections Into Rear Yards May Be Permitted As Follows. Fences, plantings or
walls not over six (6) feet above the average natural grade. Fire escapes six (6) feet from the
building. Bays and balconies not more than three (3) feet from the building, provided these
projections are entirely within the planes drawn from either main corner of the rear wall, making
an interior angle of twenty-two and one-half (22-1/2) degrees in the horizontal plane with the rear
wall. The sum of the lengths of such projections shall not exceed one-half (1/2) of the width of
the rear wall.
C. Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilaster lintels, ornamental features, cornices, eaves,
gutters and the like, into or over a required rear yard not more than one and one-half
(1-1/2) feet.
D. Terraces, steps, uncovered porches or similar features not more than ten (10) feet into a
required rear yard, nor closer than six (6) feet of an alley or within ten (10) feet of a rear lot line,
nor an alley lot line or within six (6) feet of an accessory building.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 40 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 9
"AG-1" AGRICULTURAL PRESERVATION DISTRICT
12-9-1 General Description
The AG-1 District is established to conserve farmland and to encourage continued agricultural
activities, thereby helping to ensure that sustainable agriculture will continue as a long term land use
and a viable economic activity within the District. The AG-1 District is also established to preserve
natural features and the rural landscape, while allowing low density residential development that
minimizes its impact on agricultural land, farming operations and sensitive environmental features.
The preferred use in the AG-1 District is Agriculture. The District is intended to permit a range of uses
related to agriculture, to encourage preservation of large blocks of farmland, and to permanently
protect from development the tracts of land which remain after permitted residential development has
occurred. More specifically, the District is established to severely restrict non-farm development in
predominantly agricultural areas in order to:
A. Preserve productive agricultural land for continued food and fiber production;
B. Protect productive farms from encroachment by incompatible non-farm uses;
C. Maintain the existing agricultural processing and related service industries;
D. Preserve the maximum freedom of operation for those legitimate agricultural purposes permitted
in this District.
12-9-2 Permitted Principal Uses
A. Agriculture
B. Farm dwelling unit
C. Roadside stand offering for sale only products grown on the premises
D. Home occupation, minor
E. Private stable
F. Transmission and distribution lines, and pipelines of public utility companies within existing public
rights-of-way
G. Public parks and forest preserves
H. Uses customarily accessory to farm operations
I. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent
12-9-3 Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Other uses incidental to a permitted use
12-9-4 When Authorized by the City Council with Recommendation from the Plan Commission
A. Airstrips/runways and heliports
B. Aircraft hangars/tiedowns
C. Agribusiness
D. Bulk storage of fuel and fertilizers
E. Cemetery
F. Churches
G. Commercial excavation of natural materials and improvements of a stream, lake river channel
and removal of dirt and or topsoil, quarry, borrow pits
H. Density increase for farm dwellings on a single 40 acre parcel when 40 acre per dwelling
requirement is met on entire farmstead
I. Government buildings
J. Grain elevator
K. Home occupation, major
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 41 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
L. Kennels
M. Mobile home dwelling for a period of one year with the right of renewal for additional periods of
one year for those instances where a unique and substantial hardship is found to be in existence
for the protection of property or for the shelter of an immediate blood relative with a sever
physical condition, with appropriate documentation
N. Private recreational use on land that is located along a body of water
O. Public stable
P. Recreational camps
Q. Schools
R. Any other similar use deemed to be consistent by the appropriate authority.
12-9-5 Height Regulations
A. No structure shall exceed 2.5 stories or thirty-five feet (35') for the principal structure.
12-9-6 Lot Area and Yard Requirements
The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both primary and accessory buildings. No
accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
Lot Area Lot Width Front Yard
Depth
Least Side
Yard Width
Side Yard
Sum
Rear Yard
40 acre 165 ft. 40 ft. 15 ft. 30 ft. 40 ft.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 42 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 10
"AG-2" GENERAL AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
12-10-1 General Description
The AG-2 General Agricultural District is established to protect and maintain the agricultural economy
and the open space and natural features of rural areas of the County in order to protect lands for
continued farming, allow non-farm residential development on a limited basis, and minimize conflicts
between agricultural and non-agricultural areas.
The AG-2 District is also established to protect those agricultural lands which, due to their location,
soils, and use for agricultural activities, warrant protection from indiscriminate development. However,
their proximity to existing development, combined with pressures for new development, makes these
lands unsuitable for preservation according to the more restrictive regulations of the AG-1 Agricultural
Preservation District. The AG-2 District is also intended to protect those agricultural lands that would
otherwise be subject to residential subdivision activity which could render these important farmlands
useless for farming.
12-10-2 Permitted Principal Uses
A. Agriculture
B. Cemeteries
C. Churches
D. Farm dwelling unit
E. Governmental uses
F. Greenhouses, commercial
G. Home occupation (non-impact, minor Impact)
H. Nurseries, commercial
I. Private stable
J. Public parks and forest preserves
K. Roadside stand offering for sale only products grown on the premises
l. Schools
M. Transmission and distribution lines, and pipelines of public utility companies within existing public
rights-of-way
N. Uses customarily accessory to farm operations
O. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent
12-10-3 Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Other uses incidental to a permitted use
12-10-4 When Authorized by the City Council with Recommendation from the Plan Commission
A. Airstrips/runways and heliports
B. Aircraft hangars/tiedowns
C. Agribusiness
D. Auction barns
E. Bulk storage of fuel and fertilizers
F. Child care facilities
G. Commercial excavation of natural materials and improvements of a stream, lake or river channel
and removal of dirt and or topsoil, quarry, borrow pits
H. Density increase for residential dwellings
I. Government buildings
J. Grain elevator
K. Home occupation (major impact)
L. Kennels, animal hospitals, veterinary clinics
M. Landscape contractors
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 43 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
N. Mobile home dwelling for a period of one year with the right of renewal for additional periods of
one year for those instances where a unique and substantial hardship is found to be in existence
for the protection of property or for the shelter of an immediate blood relative with a sever
physical condition, with appropriate documentation
O. Private recreational use on land that is located along a body of water
P. Public stable
Q. Public or private recreational facilities, (i.e., golf course, marina, bock dock)
R. Recreational camps
S. Recreational vehicle parks
T. Residential care homes
U. Temporary uses
V. Any other similar used deemed to be consistent
12-10-5 Height Regulations
A. No structure shall exceed 2.5 stories or thirty-five feet (35') for the principal structure.
12-10-6 Lot Area and Yard Requirements
The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both primary and accessory buildings. No
accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
Lot Area Lot Width Front Yard
Depth
Least Side Yard
Width
Side Yard
Sum
Rear Yard
15 acres 165 ft. 40 ft. 15 ft. 30 ft. 40 ft.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 44 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 11
"SE-1" SUBURBAN ESTATES LOW DENSITY DISTRICT
12-11-1 General Description
The SE-1 Suburban Estates District is established to provide for single family detached housing
opportunities in a rural setting at a low density and to preserve open space and natural features. This
District is intended to provide a natural buffer between the strictly urban characteristics of the SE-2
Suburban Estates Medium Density District and the R-1 Residential District. The primary difference
between the SE-1 and the SE-2 Districts is lot size and the allowance of livestock.
12-11-2 Permitted Principal Uses
A. Farm
B. Livestock not less than 100 feet from residentially zoned private property
C. Nursery or greenhouse
D. Structure for storage or treatment of seeds
E. Roadside stand selling products grown on premises
F. Accessory uses and buildings incidental to the above uses
G. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the appropriate authority
12-11-3 Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Private garages or parking areas
B. Living quarters for persons employed on the premises
C. Other uses incidental to a permitted use
12-11-4 When Authorized by the City Council with Recommendation from the Plan Commission
A. Riding stable subject to:
1. All buildings in which horses are kept shall be at least 200 feet from any lot line contiguous
with any residentially zoned lot. Animals shall not be permitted to graze or be ridden within
50 feet of any residentially zoned property, and shall not be ridden off the premises.
2. All wastes shall be disposed of in accordance with any applicable laws, regulations, or
policies of any agency having jurisdiction over such matters.
3. No odors shall be discernable at the perimeter of the site.
B. Kennel with buildings and outdoor facilities at least 100 feet from residentially zoned private
property
C. Grain elevator
D. Utility stations without service yard storage
E. Recreational facilities such as golf courses, country clubs and tennis courts with no building or
pool not less than 100 feet from any lot in an "R" District
F. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the appropriate authority
12-11-5 Height Regulations
A. No principal structure shall exceed 2-1/2 stories or thirty-five feet (35').
B. Farm buildings such as barns, silos, windmills and places of public assembly such as schools and
other permitted public and semi-public buildings not to exceed six (6) stories or seventy-five feet
(75'), provided that for each foot by which the height of such building exceeds the maximum
height otherwise permitted in the district, its side and year yards shall be increased in width or
depth by an additional foot over the side and rear yards required for the highest building otherwise
permitted in the district.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 45 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
12-11-6 Lot Area and Yard Requirements
The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both primary and accessory buildings. No
accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
Lot Area 5 acres
Lot Width 165 ft.
Front Yard Depth 40 ft.
Least Side Yard Width  15 ft.
Side Yard Sum 30 ft.
Rear Yard 40 ft.
    
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 46 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 12
"SE-2" SUBURBAN ESTATES MEDIUM DENSITY DISTRICT
12-12-1 General Description
The SE-2 Suburban Estates District is established to provide for single family detached housing
opportunities in a rural to urban transitional setting at a medium residential density level to preserve
open space and natural features. This District is intended to provide a natural buffer between the
strictly urban characteristics of the R-1 High Density District. The primary difference between the SE1 and the SE-2 Districts is lot size and the allowance of livestock.
12-12-2 Permitted Principal Uses
A. One-family detached dwelling
B. Public libraries
C. Public cultural buildings
D. Public parks, playgrounds, and community center
E. Structure or storage for treatment of seeds
F. Roadside stand selling products grown on premises
G. Essential services and municipal administrative or public service buildings not less than 20 feet
from any lot
H. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent
12-12-3 Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Nursery or greenhouse, private
B. Private garages or parking areas
C. Other uses incidental to a permitted use
12-12-4 When Authorized by the City Council with Recommendation from the Plan Commission
A. Major home occupation as defined
B. Utility stations without service yards or storage
C. Outdoor recreational facilities such as golf courses, country clubs, and tennis courts
D. Public and parochial schools, churches, and centers not less than 20 feet from any lot in an "R"
District
E. Municipal buildings and libraries
F. Gardening
G. Off street parking facilities
H. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the appropriate authority.
12-12-5 Height Regulations
A. No structure shall exceed 2.5 stories or thirty-five feet (35') for the principal structure.
12-12-6 Lot Area and Yard Requirements
The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both primary and accessory buildings. No
accessory building shall be located in a front yard.
Lot Area 1 acre
Lot Width 100 ft.
Front Yard Depth 30 ft.
Least Side Yard Width 10 ft. 
Side Yard Sum 20 ft.
Rear Yard 40 ft.
    
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 47 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 13
"R-1" ONE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
12-13-1 General Description
This district is established in order to protect public health, and promote public safety, convenience,
comfort, morals, prosperity, and welfare. These general goals include, but are not limited to, the
following specific purposes:
A. To protect residential areas against fire, explosion, noxious fumes, offensive noise, smoke,
vibrations, dust, odors, heat, glare, and other objectionable factors.
B. To protect residential areas to the greatest extent possible and appropriate in each area against
unduly heavy motor vehicle traffic, especially through-traffic, and to alleviate congestion by
promoting off-street parking.
C. To protect residential areas against undue congestion of public streets and other public facilities
by controlling the density of population through regulations of the bulk of buildings.
D. To protect and promote the public health and comfort by providing for ample light and air to
buildings and the windows thereof.
E. To promote public comfort and welfare by providing for usable open space on the same zoning
lot with residential development.
F. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations to meet the probable need for future
residential expansion and to meet the need for necessary and desirable services in the vicinity of
residences, which increase safety and amenity for residents and which do not exert objectionable
influences.
G. To promote the best use and development of residential land in accordance with a
comprehensive land use plan, to promote stability of residential development and protect the
character of desirable development, and to protect the value of land and improvements and so
strengthen the economic base of the city.
12-13-2 Permitted Principal Uses
A. One family detached dwellings
B. Day care home
C. Foster family homes
D. Unrelated group family uses
E. Municipal fire and police station
F. Care home small residential
G. Essential services and municipal administrative or public service buildings not less than eighty
feet (80') from any lot line
H. Public parks and playgrounds
I. Existing railroad right-of-way, but not switching storage or freight yards of sidings
J. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent
12-13-3 Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Private garages or parking areas
B. Living quarters for persons employed on the premises
C. Private office of lawyer, architect, or engineer within their own dwelling
D. Minor home occupations, as defined
E. Day care home licensed by the State of Illinois and with occupancy permit.
F. Other uses incidental to a permitted use
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 48 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
12-13-4 When Authorized by the City Council with Recommendation from the Plan Commission
A. Community Center
B. Major home occupation, as defined
C. Utility stations without service yards or storage
D. Outdoor recreational facilities such as golf courses, country clubs, and tennis courts
E. Public and parochial schools and churches not less than 20 feet from any lot in an "R" District
F. Municipal buildings and libraries
G. Off street parking facilities for permitted uses and/or uses permitted upon review of appropriate
authority in this zoning district
H. Day care home, as defined, but serves between nine (9) and twelve (12) children
I. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent
12-13-5 Height Regulations
A. No principal structure shall exceed 2-1/2 stories or thirty five feet (35') in height. No accessory
structure shall exceed one (1) story fifteen feet (15') in height, except as provided in Chapter
12-8-1.
12-13-6 Lot Area and Yard Requirements
The following minimum requirements shall be observed.
Number of Stories 1 to 1-1/2 2 to 2-1/2
Lot Area (sq. ft.) 7,500 7,500
Lot Width 75 ft. 75 ft.
Front Yard Depth 25 ft. 25 ft.
Least Side Yard Width 8 ft. 10 ft.
Side Yard Sum Width 20 ft. 25 ft. 
Rear Yard Depth 35 ft. 35 ft.
     
     
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 49 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 14
"R-2" ONE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
12-14-1 Permitted Principal Uses
A. Any permitted use in an "R-1" District
B. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the appropriate authority
12-14-2 Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Any permitted accessory use in an "R-1" District
B. Other uses incidental to a permitted use
12-14-3 When Authorized by the City Council with Recommendation from the Plan Commission
A. Any use authorized by appropriate authority in an "R-1" District
B. Dwelling groups
C. Any other similar uses deemed consistent by the appropriate authority
12-14-4 Height Regulations
A. No principal structure shall exceed 2-1/2 stories or thirty five feet (35') in height. No accessory
structure shall exceed one (1) story fifteen feet (15') in height, except as provided in Chapter
12-8-1.
12-14-5 Lot Area, Frontage, and Yard Requirements
The following minimum requirements shall be observed.
Number of Stories 1 to1-1/2 2 to 2-1/2
Lot Area (sq. ft.) 6,000 6,000
Lot Width 60 ft. 60 ft.
Front Yard Depth 25 ft. 25 ft.
Least Side Yard Width 6 ft. 8 ft.
Side Yard Sum Width 15 ft. 20 ft.
Rear Yard Depth 30 ft. 30 ft.
      
      
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 50 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 15
"R-3" ONE AND TWO FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
12-15-1 Permitted Principal Uses
A. All permitted uses in an "R-2" District
B. Two-family dwellings
C. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent
12-15-2 Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Any permitted accessory use in an "R-2" District
12-15-3 When Authorized by the City Council with Recommendation from the Plan Commission
A.. Bed and breakfast inns
B. Boarding and lodging houses
C. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the appropriate authority
12-15-4 Height Regulations
A. No principal structure shall exceed two and one-half (2-1/2) stories or thirty-five feet (35') in
height and no accessory structure shall exceed one (1) story, fifteen feet (15') in height, except
as provided in Chapter 12-8-1.
12-15-5 Lot Area and Yard Requirements
The following minimum requirements shall be observed.
Number of Stories  1 to 1-1/2 
Lot Area (sq. ft.) 5,000 5,000
Lot Area per Family (sq. ft.) 3,000 3,000
Front Lot Width 50 ft. 50 ft.
Front Yard Depth 25 ft.  25 ft. 
Least Side Yard Width 6 ft. 8 ft. 
Side Yard Sum 15 ft. 20 ft. 
Rear Yard Depth 30 ft. 30 ft. 
 

Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 51 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 16
"R-4" ONE TO SIX FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT
12-16-1 Permitted Principal Uses
A. All permitted uses allowed in an "R-3" District
B. Boarding and lodging houses
C. Public and parochial schools and churches not less than 20 feet from any lot in an "R" District
D. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent
12-16-2 Permitted Accessory Uses
A. All permitted accessory uses in an "R-3" District
B. Other uses incidental to a permitted use
12-16-3 When Authorized by the City Council with Recommendation from the Plan Commission
A. Care home, large residential
B. Any use authorized by appropriate authority in an "R-3" District
C. Nursing homes at least fifty feet (50') from any lot line
D. Halfway house/group home
E. Day care centers licensed by the State of Illinois
F. Private clubs, lodges, union halls
G. Parking lots accessory to use in an adjoining or less restrictive district when abutting or directly
across an alley.
H. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent
12-16-4 Height Regulations
No principal structure shall exceed two and one-half (2-1/2) stories or thirty-five feet (35') in height,
and no accessory structure shall exceed one (1) story fifteen feet (15') in height, except as provided in
Chapter 12-8-1.
12-16-5 Lot Area and Yard Requirements
The following minimum requirements shall be observed along with bufferyard requirements as
described in Chapter 12-35-6.
Number of Stories  1 to 1-1/2  2 to 2-1/2
Lot Area (sq. ft.) 5,000 5,000
Lot Area per Family (sq. ft.) 2,000 2,000
Front Lot Width 50 ft. 50 ft.
Front Yard Depth 25 ft.  25 ft. 
Least Side Yard Width 6 ft. 8 ft. 
Side Yard Sum 15 ft. 20 ft. 
Rear Yard Depth 30 ft. 30 ft. 

Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 52 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 17
"R-5" MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
12-17-1 Permitted Principal Uses
A. All permitted uses in an "R-4" District
B. Dwellings, multiple family
C. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent
12-17-2 Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Any permitted accessory use in an "R-4" District
B. Other uses incidental to a permitted use
12-17-3 When Authorized by the City Council with Recommendation from the Plan Commission
A. Any use authorized by appropriate authority in an "R-4" District
B. Any other similar use deemed to be consistent by the appropriate authority
12-17-4 Height Regulations
A. No principal structure shall exceed six (6) stories or seventy-five feet (75') in height at the
required front, side and rear yard lines, other than as provided in Section 12-8-1. No accessory
building shall exceed one (1) story or fifteen feet (15') in height, except as provided in Chapter
12-8-1.
12-17-5 Lot Area and Yard Requirements
The following minimum requirements shall be observed along with bufferyard requirements as
described in Chapter 12-35-6.

Zone standards 

Number of Stories
Minimum Lot Area
Lot Area per Family
Front Lot Width
Front Yard Depth
Least Side Yard Width
Side Yard Sum 
Rear Yard Depth
1 n/a 2,000 50 ft. 30 ft. 6 ft. 12 ft. 30 ft.
2 n/a 2,000 50 ft. 30 ft. 6 ft. 15 ft. 30 ft.
3 n/a 2,000 50 ft. 30 ft. 8 ft. 20 ft. 35 ft.
4 n/a 2,000 50 ft. 30 ft. 10 ft. 25 ft. 40 ft.
5 n/a 2,000 50 ft. 30 ft. 12 ft. 30 ft. 45 ft.
6 n/a 2,000 50 ft. 30 ft. 14 ft. 35 ft. 50 ft.

Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 53 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 18
"R-6" MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
12-18-1 Permitted Principal Uses
A Any permitted use in an "R-5" District
B. Housing designed for the elderly
C. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the appropriate authority
12-18-2 Permitted Accessory Uses
A Any permitted accessory use in an "R-5" District
B. Other uses incidental to a permitted use
12-18-3 When Authorized by the City Council with Recommendation from the Plan Commission
A. Any use authorized by appropriate authority in an "R-5" District
B. Any other similar use deemed to be consistent by the appropriate authority
12-18-4 Height Regulations
No principal structure shall exceed twelve (12) stories or one hundred fifty feet (150') in height at the
required front, side and rear yard lines, other than as provided in Chapter 12-8-1. No accessory
building shall exceed one (1) story or fifteen feet (15') in height.
12-18-5 Lot Area, Frontage, and Yard Requirements:
The following minimum requirements shall be observed along with bufferyard requirements as
described in Chapter 12-35-6.
Zone standards
Number of Stories
Minimum Lot Area
Lot Area per Family 
Front Lot Width
Front Yard Depth
Least Side Yard Width
Side Yard Sum
Rear Yard Depth
1 n/a 2,000 50 ft. 30 ft. 6 ft. 12 ft. 30 ft.
2 n/a 2,000 52 ft. 33 ft. 6 ft. 12 ft. 30 ft.
3 n/a 2,000 55 ft. 30 ft. 8 ft. 16 ft. 35 ft.
4 n/a 2,000 65 ft. 30 ft. 10 ft. 22 ft. 40 ft.
5 n/a 2,000 75 ft. 30 ft. 12 ft. 27 ft. 45 ft.
6 n/a 2,000 85 ft. 30 ft. 14 ft. 33 ft. 50 ft.
7 n/a 2,000 95 ft. 30 ft. 18 ft. 42 ft. 55 ft.
8 n/a 2,000 105 ft. 30 ft. 22 ft. 51 ft. 60 ft.
9 n/a 2,000 115 ft. 30 ft. 26 ft. 60 ft. 65 ft.
10 n/a 2,000 125 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 69 ft. 70 ft.
11 n/a 2,000 135 ft. 30 ft. 34 ft. 78 ft. 75 ft.
12 n/a 2,000 150 ft. 30 ft. 38 ft. 87 ft. 80 ft.

Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 54 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 19
"R-7" MOBILE HOME/MANUFACTURED HOUSING DISTRICT
12-19-1 Permitted Principal Uses
A. Foster family homes
B. Unrelated group family uses
C. Mobile home parks (see Mobile Home Ordinance of the City of Colona)
D. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 55 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 20
"U-1" UNIVERSITY/COLLEGE DISTRICT
12-20-1 General Description
This district is established to provide an area for colleges, universities, seminaries and other such
institutions of higher education. The intent of the district is to establish an area in which institutions of
higher education may operate compatibly with surrounding residential and business areas.
12-20-2 Permitted Principal Uses
A. Colleges, universities, seminaries and other such institutions of higher education consisting of
any number of educational, residential (apartment/dormitories, dormitories), cultural and
recreational buildings and parking areas with all associated buildings located not less than thirty
feet (30') from any residentially zoned private property or one or two family used lot
B. Community residence with appropriate permits and at least one thousand feet from any other
community residence
C. Dwellings, one and two family
D. Essential services and municipal, administrative or public services, buildings or properties
excluding warehouses, storage yards and garages with all associated buildings at least twenty
feet (20') from residentially zoned private property
E. Foster family homes
F. Parochial buildings such as schools, churches, and parish buildings, public libraries and public
safety and municipal government buildings located not less than twenty feet (20') from any
residentially zoned private property
G. Unrelated group homes
H. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent
12-20-3 Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Accessory uses permitted in an R-1 District
B. Other uses incidental to a permitted use
12-20-4 When Authorized by the City Council with Recommendation from the Plan Commission
A. Boarding and lodging house
B. Fraternities and sororities
C. Hospitals, sanitariums and nursing homes with any associated building at least fifty feet (50')
from any residentially zoned private property
D. Any other similar use deemed to be consistent by the appropriate authority
12-20-5 Restrictions
A. All buildings affiliated with institutions of higher education shall be not less than thirty feet (30')
from residentially zoned lots or existing one and two family used lots.
B. Private school buildings and public buildings shall be not less than twenty feet (20') from the side
lot line in an "R" District.
C. Small residential care homes shall be one thousand feet (1,000') from any other community
residence, shall be state or locally licensed and shall have a certificate of occupancy from the
building inspector.
12-20-6 Height Regulations
A. No structure shall exceed thirty-five feet (35') for the principal structure and fifteen feet (15') for
an accessory structure.
B. To places of public assembly such as churches, schools and other permitted public and semipublic buildings not to exceed six (6) stories or seventy five feet (75'), provided that for each foot 
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 56 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
by which the height of such building exceeds the maximum height otherwise permitted in the
district, its side and rear yards shall be increased in width or depth by an additional foot over the
side and rear yards required for the highest building otherwise permitted in the district.
12-20-7 Lot Area and Yard Requirements
The following minimum requirements shall be observed with both principal and accessory buildings
and along with bufferyard requirements as described in Chapter 12-35-6. No accessory building shall
be located in a front yard.
Number
of Stories
Lot Area
(sq. ft.)
Lot
Width
Front
Yard Depth
Least Side
Yard Width
Side Yard
Sum Width
Rear
Yard
Depth
1 to 1-/2 5,000 50 ft. 25 ft. 6 ft. 15 ft. 30 ft.
2 to 2-1/2 5,000 50 ft. 25 ft. 8 ft. 20 ft. 30 ft.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 57 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 21
"C-1" CONSERVATION DISTRICT
12-21-1 General Description
The C-1 District is intended for environmental protection and preservation. Land parcels within this
District will include wetland, marshes, swamps, scenic areas, hillsides of excessive slopes, water
courses, aquifer recharge areas, watershed protection areas, wildlife habitat, rough terrain, and areas
subject to siltation and erosion.
12-21-2 Permitted Principal Uses
A. Open space
B. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent
12-21-3 When Authorized by the City Council with Recommendation from the Plan Commission
A. Agriculture and commercial summer gardens including agricultural buildings but not permanent
dwellings not to exceed 750 square feet and no more that one (1) building per five (5) acre tract
but not the raising of livestock
B. Campgrounds, wilderness
C. Forestry activities and nurseries
D. Public parks, passive
E. Inns or other dining places on and within five hundred feet (500') of a highway or primary
thoroughfare and with any structure at least four hundred feet (400') from any residentially zoned
private property, church, school, or human care institution
F. Outdoor rifle, trap or skeet shooting range at least six hundred feet (600') from any residentially
zoned private property, church, school or human care institution subject to other state and federal
guidelines
G. Parking areas and equipment and materials storage yards accessory to principal uses in
adjoining districts within one thousand feet (1,000') of a railroad, highway or primary thoroughfare
and at least six hundred feet (600') from any residentially zoned private property, church, school,
or human care institution
H. Recreation vehicle parks on and within five hundred feet (500') of a highway or primary
thoroughfare and with any structure at least four hundred feet (400') from residentially zoned
private property, church, school, or human care institution
I. Any other use deemed to be consistent by the appropriate authority
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 58 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 22
"C-2" CONSERVATION DISTRICT
12-22-1 General Description
The C-2 District is intended to provide for the conservation and preservation of land, while allowing for
development that will make use of its natural beauty and allow for its enjoyment.
12-22-2 Permitted Principal Uses
A. All uses when reviewed by appropriate authority in a C-1 District
B. Public parks, playgrounds
C. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent
12-22-3 Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Accessory uses incidental to a permitted principal use other than a permanent residence.
12-22-4 When Authorized by the City Council with Recommendation from the Plan Commission
A. Country clubs
B. Community centers, private or public
C. Recreational uses, open air such as swimming pools, tennis courts, baseball and football fields
and golf ranges, with buildings and outdoor storage when abutting a highway or primary
thoroughfare and at least four hundred feet (400') from residentially zoned private property,
church, school or human care institution
D. Church, school, or human care institution
E. Inns or other dining places on and within five hundred feet (500') of a highway or primary
thoroughfare and with any structure at least four hundred feet (400') from any residentially zoned
private property, church, school, or human care institution
F. Outdoor rifle, trap or skeet shooting range at least six hundred feet (600') from any residentially
zoned private property, church, school or human care institution subject to other state and federal
guidelines
G. Parking areas and equipment and materials storage yards accessory to principal uses in
adjoining districts within one thousand feet (1,000') of a railroad, highway or primary thoroughfare
and at least six hundred feet (600') from any residentially zoned private property, church, school,
or human care institution
H. Recreation vehicle parks on and within five hundred feet (500') of a highway or primary
thoroughfare and with any structure at least four hundred feet (400') from residentially zoned
private property, church, school, or human care institution
I. Any other use deemed to be consistent by the appropriate authority
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 59 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 23
"O-1" OFFICE DISTRICT
12-23-1 General Description
The office of district set forth herein is established to promote public welfare, convenience, comfort,
and orderly growth of the community. These objectives include, but are not limited to the following:
A. To provide means of transitional use of land between commercial and residential uses.
B. To promote, enhance, and conserve quality of the manmade environment.
C. To protect the worth of property.
D. To promote the most desirable use of land.
E. To provide an appropriate district for functions separate from those dealing in sales, repair,
recreation, storage, processing, assembly, lodging, and eating.
F. To separate those functions which are obtrusive, quiet, do not generate large quantities of waste,
noise, odor or traffic, use heavy machinery, require docking facilities or separate service
entrances and which do not make use of large illuminated displays or signs, from those which do.
G. To provide a use district for offices for those who provide services only including instruments of
service.
H. To provide a district of less intense use and to encourage lower density use and retention of open
space.
I. To make use of areas which are not appropriate for other uses.
J. To control the growth of other districts.
K. To make less valuable land available for use other than residential.
12-23-2 Permitted Principal Uses
A. Church
B. Community service offices
C. Consultant offices
D. Dwelling above the ground floor
E. Funeral Home
F. Hospital and special care facilities
G. Nursing Home
H. Offices providing clerical administration
I. Professional offices
J. Schools and facilities for academic instruction
K. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent
12-23-3 Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Accessory uses incidental to a permitted principal use other than a permanent residence.
12-23-4 When Authorized by the City Council with Recommendation from the Plan Commission
A. Dwellings
B. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the appropriate authority
12-23-5 Height Regulations
A. No principal structure shall exceed two (2) stories or thirty feet (30') in height, and no accessory
structure shall exceed one (1) story or fifteen feet (15') in height, except as provided in Chapter
12-8-1.
12-23-6 Lot Area and Yard Requirements
The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both primary and accessory building along
with bufferyard requirements as described in Chapter 12-35-6. No accessory building shall be located
in a front yard.
Number of
Stories
Lot Area
(sq. ft.)
Lot
Width
Front
Yard Depth
Side
Yard
Width
Side Yard
Sum
Width
Rear
Yard
Depth
All Stories No more than 50% building
coverage: 5,000 - single, 6,000 -
duplex
None 15 ft. or same
as adj. R
District
None 15 ft. 15 ft.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 60 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 24
B-1" NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT
12-24-1 General Description
The Neighborhood Business District is intended to permit the development of retail sales and personal
services required to meet the day-to-day needs of a fully developed neighborhood. Stores,
businesses and offices in this zone should be useful to the majority of the neighborhood residents.
The convenience nature of the various business uses located in this District requires them to be in
close proximity to residences and is intended to include a narrow range of retail services and
convenience goods.
12-24-2 Permitted Principal Uses
A. All uses within this zone must be confined to 2,500 internal square feet of the principal structure
B. Antique or custom furniture shop with incidental upholstery
C. Bakery limited to goods for retail on the premises
D. Banks or similar financial enterprise
E. Barber or beauty shop
F. Bicycle sales and service
G. Business or professional office such as attorney, architect, engineer, dentist, physician etc.
H. Camera or photographic supply store
I. Clinics, private, for human care
J. Costume rental
K. Day care center meeting state and local permits with fenced play area
L. Delicatessen
M. Dry cleaning pick-up station
N. Dwelling, above ground floor
O. Health/recreational and physical training club
P. Hobby shop
Q. Interior decorating shop including upholstery and drape making
R. Laundromat
S. Locksmith
T. Music studio
U. Restaurant, not drive-in or drive-thru
V. Retail uses such as drugstore, florist, grocery, ice cream shop, meat market, appliance, shoe,
variety, stationary, book, clothing, packaged liquor sales and candy stores with all activities,
except for automobile off-street parking and loading facilities as permitted or required in this
district, shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building
W. Churches
X. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent
12-24-3 Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Other uses incidental to a permitted use
12-24-4 When Authorized by the City Council with Recommendation from the Plan Commission
A. Auto accessory store
B. Club or lodge
C. Bus transfer station
D. Convenience store
E. Nursing home
F. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the appropriate authority
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 61 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
12-24-5 Uses Prohibited
A. Any commercial or manufacturing use except that which is clearly necessary for the conduct of a
permitted retail business or service on the premise.
12-24-6 Lot Area and Yard Requirements
The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both primary and accessory building along
with bufferyard requirements as described in Chapter 12-35-6. No accessory building shall be located
in a front yard.

Height Front Yard
Depth
Side Yard
Width
Rear Yard
Depth
Other
35 ft. or same
as adjacent R
District
25 ft. or same as
adjacent R
District
None except
same as adjacent
R District
10 ft. or same as
adjacent R District
In accordance
with performance
standards
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 62 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 25
"B-2" GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
12-25-1 General Description
The General Business District is intended to be a high density, compact, pedestrian oriented
shopping, office, service and entertainment area. This District is one of high traffic generation and is
thus located where there can be a concentration of a variety of commercial activities.
12-25-2 Permitted Principal Uses
A. Any use permitted in a B-1 District and allowing for retail establishments with greater than 2,500
square feet
B. Art galleries and studios
C. Auction house
D. Bar, dance hall, cocktail lounge or night club, private clubs, lodges, union halls, tavern, microbrewery when enclosed and with building(s) and outside storage
E. Bicycle sales and repair
F. Blue printing, photostating, print shop and duplicating establishments
G. Bus terminal, railroad station, freight terminal or other public transportation terminal
H. Business or trade school
I. Catering within a building
J. Ceramic products manufacture for sale on premises
K. Church
L. Conservatory for retail sale on premises only
M. Commercial parking lot
N. Custom rental
O. Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring or shoe repair for retail sales on premises only
P. Drapery and mattress manufacture for sale on premises
Q. Department stores
R. Employment agency
S. Engraving of lithographing
T. Funeral home
U. Garage, public
V. Hardware or paint supply store without outdoor sales or storage
W. Hotel/motel
X. Laboratories, medical and dental
Y. Laundry or dry cleaning shop when enclosed and with building(s) and outside storage
Z. Meeting halls, clubs, fraternal organizations and lodges
1. Mirror and glazing shop, glass cutting
2. Pawn shop
3. Pet shops, but not animal hospitals
4. Picture framing
5. Plumbing, electrical, heating, and air conditioning supply stores or show rooms without
outdoor sales or storage and without repairs or fabrication
6. Public utility collection office
7. Public, customer or accessory parking lot
8. Radio, television and CATV stations, not transmitting towers
9. Second-hand stores and rummage shops
10. Taxidermist
11. Theater, indoor
12. Travel bureau and ticket office
13. Upholstering shop for furniture
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 63 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
14. Any other similar type use not specifically permitted herein which would have economic
compatibility with the established uses on adjoining properties
15. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent
12-25-3 Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Permitted accessory uses in a B-1 District
B. Assembly of small electrical appliances, instruments, small computers and other electronic
devices.
C. Other uses incidental to a permitted use.
12-25-4 When Authorized by the City Council with Recommendation from the Plan Commission
A. Any use permitted on review in a B-1 District
B. Auto accessory store
C. Auto repair, minor
D. Transmission and receiving equipment for radio, television, cable, and telephone.
E. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the appropriate authority
12-25-5 Lot Area and Yard Requirements
The following minimum requirements shall be observed with both principal and primary buildings along
with bufferyard requirements as described in Chapter 12-35-6. No accessory buildings shall be
located in a front yard.
Height Front
Yard Depth
Side
Yard Width
Rear
Yard Depth
Other
None None None except same
as adjacent R
District
None except same
as adjacent R District
In accordance with
Performance
Standards
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 64 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 26
"B-3" COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT
12-26-1 General Description
The Community Business District is intended to provide for major businesses which serve and
significant segment of the population. The District may provide for a variety of retail goods and
services, along with large traffic generators requiring access from major thoroughfares and a reliance
on motor vehicle oriented trade. The district is dominated by uses with indoor operations, although
some may have limited outdoor activities. Development in the District is encouraged in a manner
which minimizes traffic hazards and interference with other uses in the vicinity.
12-26-2 Permitted Uses
A. Any uses permitted in a B-2 District
B. Amusement centers, indoor, including bowling alleys, pool halls, billiard parlors, skating rinks
arcades and other similar uses
C. Auto/pickup sales of a two ton capacity or less and service enclosed and with building(s) and
outside storage
D. Car wash, single bay, and outside storage
E. Drive-in or fast food restaurant
F. Exterminating shop
G. Fabric or floor covering sales
H. Hospital or clinic for small animals with no long term kennel use
I. Any other similar type use not specifically listed herein, and which has economic compatibility
with the established uses on adjoining properties
J. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the appropriate authority
12-26-3 Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Permitted accessory uses in a B-2 District
B. Other uses incidental to a permitted use
12-26-4 When Authorized by the City Council with Recommendation from the Plan Commission
A. Any use permitted on review in a B-2 District
B. Car wash, multiple bays
C. Recreational uses, open air such as swimming pools, tennis courts, baseball fields and golf
ranges, with building(s) and outdoor storage at least one hundred feet (100') from residentially
zoned private property
D. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent by the appropriate authority
12-26-5 Uses Prohibited
12-26-6 Lot Area and Yard Requirements
The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both primary and accessory buildings
along with bufferyard requirements as described in Chapter 12-35-6. No accessory buildings shall be
located in a front yard.
Height Front Yard Depth Side Yard Width Rear Yard Depth Other
45 ft. 20 ft. or same as
adjacent R District
None except same as
adjacent R District
10 ft. or same as
adjacent R District
In accordance with
Performance
Standards
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 65 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 27
"B-4" HIGHWAY/INTENSIVE BUSINESS DISTRICT
12-27-1 General Description
The Highway/Intensive Business District is intended to permit development of service uses relating to
expressways or along other major arterial thoroughfares. This district permits uses that, by their
nature, tend to generate heavy traffic usage. This district also provides for functions and businesses
which may be characterized by outdoor display, storage and/or sale of merchandise, by repair of
motor vehicles, and by outdoor commercial amusement and recreational activities not completely
enclosed.
12-27-2 Permitted Principal Uses
A. Any use permitted in a B-3 District
B. Auto repair, major, with building(s) and outdoor storage
C. Agricultural implement sales and services with building(s) and outdoor storage
D. Air conditioning and heating sales and service with outdoor fabrication and repairs
E. Bath house or boat house with building(s) and outdoor storage
F. Boat sales with building(s) and outdoor storage
G. Building material sales yard, wholesale business with warehouses as specified in this Ordinance
H. Carpenter and cabinet shop with building(s) and outdoor storage
I. Car wash
J. Contractors offices and shops within building
K. Feed and seed store, wholesale
L. Greenhouse with outside storage permitted
M. Kennels with building(s) and outdoor storage at least one hundred feet (100') from residentially
zoned private property
N. Motor vehicle dealerships with building(s) and outdoor storage
O. Recreational uses, public open air, such as swimming pools, tennis courts, baseball fields, and
golf ranges with building(s) and outdoor storage
P. Sign painting shop and similar establishment with building(s) and outdoor storage
Q. Travel trailer sales and service with building(s) and outdoor storage
R. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
12-27-3 Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Permitted accessory uses in a B-3 District
B. Other uses incidental to a permitted principal use
12-27-4 When Authorized by the City Council with Recommendation from the Plan Commission
A. Any uses permitted on review in a B-3 District
B. Auditorium
C. Mini-warehousing
12-27-5 Prohibited Uses
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 66 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
12-27-6 Lot Area and Yard Requirements
The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both primary and accessory building along
with bufferyard requirements as described in Chapter 12-35-6. No accessory building shall be located
in a front yard.
Height Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Other
45 ft. 20 ft. or same as
adjacent "R
None except same
as adjacent "R
10 ft. or same as
adjacent "R
In accordance
with Performance
Standards
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 67 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 28
"ORT OFFICE/RESEARCH PARK AND TECHNOLOGY DISTRICT
12-28-1 General Description
The Office/Research Park and Technology District is intended to provide for large attractively
landscaped low-density sites primarily along an interstate or expressway corridor. The area is
appropriate for regional and/or national businesses and offices, including research activities and some
specialized unobjectionable ultra-light industrial activities which take advantage of the transportation
corridor but are low intensity and sufficiently restricted to be compatible with adjacent residential and
commercial development. This may include manufacturing, processing, packaging, assembly or
treatment of finished or semi-finished products from previously prepared materials. This district is
intended to have a green/open space atmosphere conducive to quality development with the
preservation of significant natural features. No outdoor storage is allowed in this district and all
operations must be in an enclosed building.
12-28-2 Permitted Principal Uses
A. Offices for the following occupations: executive, administrative, professional, accounting, writing,
clerical, drafting, sales and engineering excluding medical and dental offices
B. Computer manufacture, electronic assembly
C. Custom cabinet shop
D. Custom drapery manufacture
E. Data processing and computer centers including computer programming and software
development, training, and service and maintenance of electronic data processing equipment
F. Research and development, technical training and related activities for industrial, scientific and
business enterprises, and design of pilot or experimental products
G. Mattress manufacture with retail activities
H. Printing, publishing, duplicating and photographic processing
I. Processing and assembly of engineering, laboratory, scientific, and research instruments and
associated equipment
J. Prosthetic manufacture
K. Laboratories for research, development, and testing of medical, optical, dental and
pharmaceutical products
L. Hotel/motel
M. Trade or industrial schools, personnel training center
N. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent.
12-28-3 Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Bar/cocktail lounge incidental to hotel/motel and/or restaurant
B. Child care center when accessory to permitted principal use
C. Convention center, assembly hall, display hall, or similar use when accessory of hotel/motel
D. Manufacturing when accessory to permitted principal use
E. Retail business intended to serve the permitted uses within the district and not dependent upon
direct visits of retail customers
F. Residence of caretaker or security personnel
G. Other uses incidental to permitted principal use
12-28-4 When Authorized by the City Council with Recommendation from the Plan Commission
A. Bank
B. Restaurant, excluding drive-in/thru
C. Medical clinic
D. Essential public services
E. Hospital
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 68 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
F. Museum
G. Post office
H. Parking lots, public or private
I. Child care center
J. Convention center, assembly hall, display hall, or similar use
K. Manufacturing when accessory to permitted principal use
L. Radio/television station
M. Any other uses deemed to be consistent by the appropriate authority
12-28-5 Prohibited Uses
A. Adult uses
B. Auto service station
C. Mini-warehousing
D. Restaurant, drive-in
E. Retail except as noted
F. Residential except as noted
G. Freight terminal
H. Auto salvage yard
I. Disposal or storage of toxic waste
J. Outdoor advertising, off premise
12-28-6 Lot Area and Yard Requirements
The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both primary and accessory building along
with bufferyard requirements as described in Chapter 12-35-6. No accessory building shall be
located in a front yard.
Minimum Lot
Area
Height Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Other
20,000 sq. ft. 45 ft. 50 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft. In accordance with
Performance Standards
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 69 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 29
"I-1" LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
12-29-1 General Description
The Light Industrial District is intended to provide for the development of most types of industry with
regulations designed to protect adjacent properties.
12-29-2 Permitted Uses
A. Apparel and other products manufactured from textiles
B. Assembly of products from finished materials and parts
C. Bottling and canning of soft drinks
D. Cabinet making
E. Food processing
F. Fur repair and storage
G. Laboratories
H. Laundry, dry cleaning, dyeing except walk-in/drive-up
I. Photo processing involving photo engraving
J. Printing and binding
K. Services, providing not more than 5% of the business comes from retail on-premise sales and
except repair or reconditioning of any motor vehicles
L. Wholesaling, warehousing and storage, except mini-warehousing
M. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent
12-29-3 Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Offices
B. Other accessory uses incidental to a permitted use
12-29-4 Prohibited Uses
A. Disposal or storage of toxic waste
12-29-5 Lot Area and Yard Requirements
The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both primary and accessory building along
with bufferyard requirements as described in Chapter 12-35-6. No accessory building shall be located
in a front yard.
Height Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Other
45 ft. 20' for 1 - 3 stories, if > 3 stories,
then 40% of building height.
15 ft. 20 ft. In accordance with
Performance
Standards
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 70 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 30
"I-2" GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
12-30-1 General Description
The General Industrial District is intended to provide for large scale manufacturing facilities not
otherwise permitted which have potential significant external impacts to adjacent properties.
12-30-2 Permitted Uses
A. Any use permitted in an I-1 District
B. Any other use which, in the opinion of the appropriate authority, is of similar character to those
specified above
C. Any of the following uses, when at least two hundred (200) feet from any residentially zoned
private property and at least one hundred (100) feet from any other district, except an I-1 District
or when authorized by the appropriate authority
D. Acetylene manufacturing in excess of fifteen (15) pounds per square inch
E. Acid manufacture
F. Aircraft, assembly and testing
G. Ammonia, chlorine or bleach powder manufacture
H. Animal black, lamp black, bone black or graphite manufacture
I. Asbestos and asbestos products manufacture
J. Automobile, tractor trailer, farm implement assembly or manufacture
K. Blast furnaces, steel works or rolling mills
L. Bleaching, cleaning and dyeing plant
M. Boiler shops, machine shops, structural steel fabricating shops, railway car or locomotive shops,
including repair, metal working shops
N. Box and crate manufacture
O. Brewing or distilling of liquors
P. Brick manufacture
Q. Bulk station
R. Candle or sperm oil manufacture
S. Cans and other types of containers manufacture
T. Celluloid or pyroxyline manufacture, or explosive or inflammable cellulose or manufacture or
storage
U. Cement, lime, gypsum, plaster or plaster of paris manufacture
V. Chalk manufacture
W. Charcoal manufacture
X. Chemicals, the manufacture or use of, except those which may be inflammable or explosive
Y. Coffin manufacture
Z. Cooperage works
1. Cotton ginning and cotton wadding
2. Cottonseed oil manufacture
3. Creosote manufacture or treatment
4. Dextrin, starch or glucose manufacture
5. Disinfectant, insecticide or poison manufacture
6. Distillation of coal, petroleum, refuse, grain, wood or bones except in the manufacture of
gas
7. Dyes, aniline, ink pigments and others manufacture
8. Emery cloth or sandpaper manufacture
9. Enameling, lacquering or japanning
10. Explosive manufacture or storage except for small arms ammunition
11. Fertilizer, compost - manufacture or storage
12. Fish curing, smoking or packing, fish oil manufacture or refining
13. Flammable liquids storage not to exceed a total of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 71 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
14. Flour, grain or feed milling or processing
15. Foundry works
16. Gas-generation or storage for illumination or heating
17. Gelatin, vegetable and animal manufacture
18. Glass blowing and manufacture
19. Grain elevators
20. Hair or hair products manufacture
21. Hemp products manufacture
22. Linoleum, oil cloth or oiled goods manufacture
23. Lumber, preserving treatment, processing, sawmills and planing mills manufacture
24. Machinery, heavy manufacture and repair
25. Match manufacture
26. Meat, packing and processing except slaughtering and glue and size manufacture, but not
stockyards or slaughterhouses
a. Metal stamping and extrusion of metal products manufacture and plating
b. Motor testing or internal combustion motors manufacture
c. Oil, shellac, turpentine, varnish or enamel manufacture
d. Paper and pulp manufacture
e. Perfume manufacture
f. Petroleum or flammable liquids production and refining
g. Pickle, sauerkraut, sausage manufacture
h. Porcelain products manufacture
i. Poultry slaughterhouse, including packing and storage for wholesale
j. Railroad equipment manufacture
k. Rock crushing
l. Rubber products, including tires and tubes and tire recapping
m. Rubber manufacture and processing
n. Sandblasting or cutting
o. Sewage disposal plant or incinerator, sanitary landfill, recycling or composting operation
except by the municipality
p. Shoe blacking or polish or stove polish manufacture
q. Soap manufacture
r. Steam power plant, except where accessory to a permitted principal use
s. Stone and monument works employing power driven tools
t. Storage, curing or tanning of raw, green or salted hides or skins when refrigerated
storage is provided
u. Storage of flammable liquids when facilities are located at least six hundred feet (600')
from any "R" District and at least three hundred feet (300') from any other district except
"I" Districts and are enclosed by a fence at least eight feet (8') in height
v. Sugar refining
w. Tar distillation or asphalt roofing or waterproofing manufacture
x. Vinegar manufacture
y. Wax products manufacture
z. Wire or rod drawing - nut, screw or bolt manufacture
1. Wool scouring and pulling
 2. Yeast manufacture
 3. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent
12-30-3 Permitted Accessory Uses
A. Permitted accessory uses in an I-1 District
B. Other uses incidental to a principal use
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 72 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
12-30-4 When Authorized by the City Council with Recommendation from the Plan Commission
A. An establishment which has the potential to be dangerous or extremely obnoxious. Included are
those which explosives are stored, petroleum is refined, natural and liquid gas and other
petroleum derivatives are stored and/or distributed in bulk, radioactive material are compounded,
pesticides and certain acids are manufactured, and hazardous waste is treated or stored as the
establishments=s principal activity.
B. Automobile salvage and wrecking operations, and industrial metal and waste salvage operations
and junk yards not less than two hundred feet (200') from any "B" District and one thousand feet
(1,000') from any State or Federal highway enclosed on all sides with solid masonry wall at least
twelve feet (12') high; no pile of salvage, scrap or other material shall be higher than twelve feet
(12').
C. Asphalt plant
D. Aviation facilities, private and public
E. Landfill, construction debris, rubble, or sanitary
F. Recycling centers and stations
G. Resource extraction
H. Scrap and salvage services
I. Shooting range
J. Transfer station for waste
K. Disposal or storage of toxic waste
L. Any other similar uses deemed to be consistent
12-30-5 Prohibited Uses
A. Any prohibited use in an I-1 District, except auto salvage yard
12-30-6 Lot Area and Yard Requirements
The following minimum requirements shall be observed for both primary and accessory building along
with bufferyard requirements as described in Chapter 12-35-6. No accessory building shall be located
in a front yard.
Height Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Other
75 ft. < 50 ft. then 20 ft. > 50
ft. then 40% of bldg.
height
15 ft. < 50 ft. then 20 ft. > 50
ft. then 30 ft.
In accordance
with Performance
Standards
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 73 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 31
"PUD" PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
12-31-1 Purpose
The purpose of the planned unit development (PUD) district is to promote to the extent possible:
A. A maximum choice in the types of environment available to the public by allowing a development
that would not be possible under the strict application of the other sections of this Ordinance.
B. Permanent preservation of common open space and recreation areas and facilities.
C. A pattern of development to preserve natural vegetation, topographic, and geologic features.
D. A creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities that results in better
development, design and the construction of aesthetic amenities.
E. An efficient use of the land resulting in more economic networks of utilities, streets, and other
facilities.
F. A land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort, morals, and welfare.
G. To improve stormwater management practices and reduce flooding, erosion, and sedimentation
through the retention of open space, vegetation, and natural drainage patterns.
H. To implement adopted land use and community policies.
I. To implement provision of the Illinois Quad Cities Greenway Plan and/or Henry County Greenway
Plan.
 J. To create neighborhoods with direct visual access to open land, with amenities in the form of
neighborhood open space, and with a strong neighborhood identity.
K. To conserve scenic views and elements of the municipalitys rural character.
The PUD district is intended to provide for a development incorporating a single type or a variety of
related uses which are planned and developed as a unit but departs from the normal standards and
requirements of other sections of this Ordinance.
The planned unit development may provide amenities not otherwise required by law and may establish
facilities and open space greater than the minimums required by law. Such development may consist
of conventionally subdivided lots or provide for development by a land use and zoning plan which
establishes the location and extent of the features of the planned unit development in keeping with the
purpose of the plan.
The foregoing purposes and principals shall not be interpreted to permit the reduction of standards set
forth in this section.
12-31-2 Procedure
The owner, owners, or bona fide buyer of any tract of land may petition the Plan Commission for a
change to the PUD zoning district in accordance with Chapter 5. A planned unit development shall be
authorized in accordance with the following procedures:
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 74 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
A. Application procedure.
1. The application for a rezoning to the PUD zoning district shall be accompanied by an
application plan meeting the requirements of Chapter 12-31-3 Section A. and show
evidence that the proposed development will conform to the official city plan and to the
purpose of the PUD district set forth in Chapter 12-31-1. The City Council with
recommendation from the Plan Commission shall grant or deny said application pursuant to
the provisions contained in Chapter 5. Approval of the PUD zoning district shall constitute
an expression of approval by the City Council of the application plan as a guide to the
preparation of the preliminary PUD plan. The applications shall be accompanied by a filing
fee in an amount equal to that prescribed by Chapter 5.
2. To reduce the number of steps involved in the approval of a planned unit development, a
preliminary PUD plan meeting the requirements of Chapter 12-31-2 Section B. and Chapter
12-31-3 Section B. may be submitted in lieu of an application plan required in (a) above.
This type of application shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount equal of one
hundred dollars ($100.00).
B. Approval of the preliminary plan.
1. Supporting data in accordance with Chapter 12-31-3 Section B.
a. Copies of the preliminary PUD plan and supporting data shall be submitted to the
Zoning Officer for certification as to conformity with these regulations,
recommendations, and suggestions regarding the overall design, if any.
b. Copies of the preliminary PUD plan shall be submitted to the Plan Commission who
shall hold public hearings on the application for a preliminary PUD plan giving notice of
the times and places as required by state law by publishing a notice thereof at least
once in a publication having general circulation within the city. Following the public
hearings, a recommendation of approval or denial of the preliminary PUD plan shall be
made by the Plan Commission to the City Council. If needed, the City Council shall
review the preliminary PUD plan and grant or deny any exceptions or variances needed.
2. Findings: The Plan Commission shall set forth the reasons for the recommendation, and
said recommendation shall set forth how the proposal would be in the public interest,
including but not limited to findings of facts on the following:
a. In what respects the proposed plan is consistent with the stated purpose of the planned
unit development requirements.
b. The extent to which the proposed plan meets the requirements and standards of the
planned unit development district.
c. The extent to which the proposed plan departs from the zoning and subdivision
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property, including but not limited to the
density, dimension, area, bulk and use, and the reasons why such departures are
deemed to be in the public interest.
d. The physical design of the proposed plan and the manner in which said design makes
adequate provision for public services, provides adequate control over vehicular traffic,
provides for and protects designated common open space, and furthers the amenities
of light, air, recreation, and visual enjoyment.
e. The relationship and compatibility of the proposed plan to the adjacent properties and
neighborhood.
f. The desirability of the proposed plan to physical development, tax base, and economic
well-being of the entire community.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 75 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
g. The conformity with the intent and spirit of the comprehensive plan.
h. Specific points noted on the plan that have impact on its design, function, and visibility in
the community.
3. Following receipt of the recommendation by the Plan Commission and approval by the City
Council, the Plan Commission shall, within sixty (60) days, recommend approval, modification
within limits of a minor change, or disapproval of the planned unit development plan. As a
condition to the approval of the preliminary PUD plan, the Plan Commission shall set forth
findings of fact in accord with Chapter 12-31-2 on which they base their approval and
describing how the proposal meets the standards of Chapter 12-31-4.
4. All conditions, documents, and plans required by the Plan Commission must be delineated on
the plat or agreed to in writing prior to City Council approval.
5. The Plan Commission may require such special conditions as they may deem necessary to
insure conformance with the intent of all comprehensive plan elements, the stated purpose of
the planned development district and established city policies.
6. Approval of a preliminary planned unit development plan shall not constitute approval of the
final plan. Rather it shall be deemed an expression of approval to the layout submitted on the
preliminary plan as a guide to the preparation of the final plan which will be submitted for
approval of the city. The final plan shall be approved as the final land use and zoning plan if it
conforms substantially with the preliminary land use and zoning plan.
The final plan may be considered as a preliminary and final plan and may be submitted for
preliminary and final approval, if all of the land is to be developed at one time, and if all
requirements hereof are met.
7. The provisions of Chapter 5 shall be applicable to the preliminary PUD plan.
C. Approval of final plan. The final planned unit development plan shall be submitted to the Zoning
Officer who shall refer same to the Plan Commission. The final PUD plan shall conform to the
preliminary PUD plan as approved or subject to minor changes, and may be submitted in stages
with each stage reflecting the approved preliminary plan; provided, however, that such stage
conforms to all requirements of these regulations. The required procedure for approval of a final
plan shall be:
1. A final planned unit development plan and other supporting data required for approval shall be
in accord with the provisions of Chapter 12-31-3. Final plans must be submitted for approval
in accordance with agreed-to scheduling, but not later than five (5) years from the approval of
the preliminary plan by the City Council. The City Council may grant an extension in time or
the developer may resubmit an application; in the event that same is not done, the appropriate
authority shall initiate such zoning changes as it deems necessary to preserve the public
interest. If construction falls more than two (2) years behind the schedule filed with the final
plan, the plan becomes subject to revocation. The Plan Commission shall monitor all pending
PUD projects and inform the City Council of those six (6) months or more behind schedule.
2. The final plan and supporting data shall be submitted to the appropriate authority for
certification that the final plan is in conformity with these regulations and in agreement with the
approved preliminary plan.
3. After review of the final plan, the Plan Commission shall submit the planned unit
development plan to the City Council with a recommendation for approval, disapproval, or
approval with minor modifications as reviewed at the public hearing. Any changes or
modifications which arise subsequent to the public hearing shall be specifically noted and
referred to the Zoning Officer who shall determine whether the change constitutes a major
or minor change and whether another public hearing is required.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 76 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
4. The City Council shall, within sixty (60) days, approve, disapprove, or extend the time period
for another sixty (60) days in taking action on the final plan.
5. All conditions, documents, and plans required by the council must be delineated on the plan
or agreed to in writing prior to the City Council approval.
D. Recording the final planned unit development plan. The construction of any public
improvement in the planned unit development shall be initiated only after recoding of the final
PUD plan has been recorded with the County recorder, and shall be issued in full conformance
with this Ordinance.
E. Changes in the planned unit development. The planned unit development shall be developed
according to the approved and recorded final plan, recorded approved plan and supporting data
together with all recorded amendments shall be binding on the applicants, their successors,
grantees and assigns, and shall limit and control the use of premises and location of structures in
the planned unit development project as set forth therein.
1. Major changes. A change in the approved preliminary PUD plan or final PUD plan which
alters the concept or intent of the planned unit development including a change in usage,
the configuration, increase in floor area or the height of buildings, an increase in intensity, a
reduction of proposed open space, a change in road locations or standards, a change in the
final governing agreement, provisions or covenants, or other major changes, shall be
approved only by submission of a new preliminary PUD plan in accordance with the
procedures as previously set forth for the approval of preliminary and final PUD plans. All
approved major changes in the final PUD plan shall be recorded with the County recorder
as amendments to the final PUD plan.
2. Minor changes. The City Council may approve minor changes in the planned unit
development which do not change the concept or intent of the development, without going
through the "preliminary approval" steps. Minor changes shall be any change not defined as
a major change.
12-31-3 Specific Content
The planned unit development plans and supporting data shall include at least the following
information:
A. Application stage:
1. General site information. Data regarding site conditions, and characteristics, available
community facilities and utilities, existing covenants and other related information.
2. Sketch plan. A drawing in simple sketch form showing the proposed location and extent of
the land uses, streets, lots, and other features.
B. Preliminary plan stage:
1. Design plan. A drawing of the planned unit development shall be prepared at a scale of
either one inch equals one hundred (100) feet or one inch equals fifty (50) feet, or such
other scale that may be recommended by appropriate city authority. Any change in scale
between the preliminary and final plan shall be accompanied by a signed statement from the
developer attesting that there have been no modifications. All plans shall show the general
location of proposed streets (public and private), all buildings and their use, common open
space, recreation facilities, parking areas, service areas, and other facilities to indicate the
character of the proposed development. The submission may be composed of one or more
sheets and drawings and shall include:
a. Boundary lines: Bearing and distances.
b. Easements: General location, width, and purpose.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 77 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
c. Public and private streets on and adjacent to the tract: Street names, right-of-way
widths, existing or proposed centerline elevations, pavement type, walks, curbs, gutters,
culverts, distance to nearest intersection, etc.
d. Utilities (public or private) on and adjacent to the tract: Location, size and invert
elevations of sanitary, storm and combined sewers; location and size of water mains;
location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone lines and street lights on the
tract. The direction and distance to the nearest usable water mains and sewers
anticipated to be utilized by the development and elevations of sewers. Drainage district
boundaries and appropriate design criteria necessary for storm drainage plans.
e. Existing ground elevations on the tract: For land that slopes less than one-half of one
(2 of 1) percent, show one foot contours; show spot elevations at all breaks in grades
along all drainage channels or swales and at selected points not more than one
hundred (100) feet apart in all directions; for land that slopes more than one-half of one
(2 of 1) percent show two (2) foot contours.
f. Subsurface conditions on the tract, if required by the commission or council: Location
and results of tests made to generally ascertain subsurface soil, rock, and ground water
conditions; depth to ground water unless test pits are dry at a depth of five (5) feet: The
location and results of soil percolation tests if individual sewage disposal systems are
proposed.
g. Other conditions are on the tract: Water courses, flood plains, marshes, rock outcrop,
wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot or more in diameter, houses, barns,
accessory buildings and other significant features.
h. Other conditions on adjacent land: Approximate direction and gradient of ground
slopes, including any embankments or retaining walls; character and general location of
buildings, including a notation on the front setback, railroads, power lines, towers, and
other nearby nonresidential land uses or adverse influences; owners of adjacent
unplanted land; for adjacent platted land refer to subdivision plan by name and show
approximate percent built up; typical lot size and dwelling type.
i. Zoning on and adjacent to the tract.
j. Proposed public improvements: Highways or other major improvements planned by
public authorities for future construction on or near the tract.
k. Open space: All parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use of all property
owners with the purpose indicated.
l. General location, purpose, and height, in feet or stories of each building other than
single-family residences on individually platted lots.
m. Map data: Name of development, north point and scale, date of preparation, acreage of
site and name and address of developer, designer, and engineer.
n. Miscellaneous: Such additional information as may be required by the appropriate
authority or found in the subdivision control ordinance.
2. Character. Explanation of the character of the planned unit development and the reasons
why it has been planned to take advantage of the flexibility of these regulations.
3. Ownership. Statement of present and proposed ownership of all land within the project,
including present tract designation according to official records in offices of the county
recorder.
4. Schedule. Development schedule indicating:
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 78 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
a. Stages in which project will be built with emphasis on area, density, use and public
facilities such as open space to be developed with each stage shall be shown on the
plan and through supporting graphic material.
b. Completion date or dates of new construction for above and below ground facilities,
utilities, and buffer planting.
c. If different land use types are to be included within the planned unit development, the
schedule must normally include the mix of uses to be built in each stage.
5. Covenants. Proposed agreements, provisions, or covenants which will govern the use,
maintenance, and continued protection of the planned development and any of its common
open space.
6. Density. Provide information on the density of residential uses and the number of dwelling
units by type.
7. Use. Provide a list of uses planned for the ancillary and nonresidential uses.
8. Service facilities. Provide information on all service facilities and off-street parking facilities.
9. Architectural plans. Preliminary architectural plans for all primary buildings shall be
submitted in sufficient detail to permit an understanding of the style of the development, the
design of the building and the number, size, and type of dwelling units.
10. Facilities plans (public and/or private). Preliminary plans for:
a. Roads, including classification, width of right-of-way, width of pavement, typical
construction details, and plan and profile drawings.
b. Sanitary sewers.
c. Storm drainage and erosion.
d. Water supply system, if required by the appropriate authority.
e. Lighting program, if required by the appropriate authority.
f. Grading.
C. Final plan stage.
1. Final detailed plan. A final land use and zoning plan shall be prepared. The purpose of the
land use and zoning plan is to designate the land subdivided into conventional lots as well
as the division of other land, not so treated, into common open areas and building areas.
The final land use and zoning plan shall include, but not be limited to:
a. An accurate legal metes and bounds description of the entire area under immediate
development within the planned development.
b. A subdivision plan of all subdivided lands in the same form and meeting all the
requirements of a normal subdivision final plan.
c. An accurate legal metes and bounds description of each separate unsubdivided use
area, including common open space.
d. Designation of the exact location of all buildings to be constructed in unsubdivided
areas.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 79 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
e. Tabulations on separate subdivided use area, including land area, number of buildings,
number of dwelling units, and dwelling units per acre.
f. Architectural plans unless waived by the appropriate authority during the preliminary
stage.
2. Common open space documents. All common open space shall be either conveyed to a
municipal or public corporation, conveyed to nonprofit corporation or entity established for
the purpose of benefiting the owners and residents of the planned unit development or
retained by the developer with legally binding guarantees, in a form approved by the city
attorney, that the common open space will be permanently preserved and maintained as
open area. All land conveyed to a nonprofit corporation or like entity shall be subject to the
right of said corporation to impose a legally enforceable lien for maintenance and
improvement of the common open space.
3. Engineering data. All public utilities or improvements required by the City in the
development of a planned unit development shall be constructed only after the approval of
the final plan. Supporting data to be submitted with the final plans shall include final
engineering drawings (construction plans), as required by the appropriate authority.
4. Guarantee deposit. Prior to the acceptance by the appropriate authority of public utilities
and improvements, the contractor(s) for the owner of the land shall furnish to the City a
good and sufficient bond with surety to secure to the City the actual construction and
installation of such public utilities or improvements according to the City specifications within
two (2) years from the date of approval by the appropriate authority of the final plan or a
petition to the appropriate authority to provide the required public facilities or improvements
and to assess the cost thereof against the subdivided property in accordance with the local
requirements regarding special assessments; provided, however, that the subdivider or
property owners shall be responsible for any differences between the cost of the public
utilities or improvements and the amount that can be legally assessed by the City against
the subdivided property, and shall furnish the necessary waivers to permit the assessment
of the entire costs of the public utilities or improvements. A maintenance bond shall be
provided for the repairs necessitated by defects in material or workmanship not to exceed
four (4) years from the date of completion as certified by the appropriate authority.
5. Certificates, seals, and signatures required for the dedication of lands and recording
document, as set forth in the subdivision regulations.
6. Covenants. Final agreements, provisions, or covenants which will provide for the use,
maintenance, and continued protection of the planned unit development, if applicable.
12-31-4 Standards
The planned unit development must meet the following standards:
A. Comprehensive plan. A planned unit development must conform with the intent and spirit of the
comprehensive plan.
B. Size. The site of the total planned unit development must be under single ownership and/or
unified control and be not less than sixty thousand (60,000) square feet in area.
C. Compatibility. The uses permitted in a planned unit development must be of a type and so
located so as to exercise no undue detrimental influence upon surrounding properties.
D. Space. Space between buildings shall be subject to approval during the review process.
E. Open Space Land Use and Design.
1. Permitted open space uses. The following uses are permitted in open space land areas:
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 80 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
a. Conservation of open land in its natural state (for example, woodland fallow field, or
managed meadow).
b. Agricultural and horticultural uses, including raising crops or livestock, wholesale
nurseries, and associated buildings, including residences that are specifically needed to
support an active, viable agricultural or horticultural operation. Specifically excluded are
commercial livestock operations involving swine, poultry, and other animals likely to
produce highly offensive odors.
c. Pastureland for horses used solely for recreational purposes. Equestrian facilities shall
be permitted but may not consume more than 65% of the minimum required open
space land.
d. Silviculture, in keeping with established standards for selective harvesting and
sustained-yield forestry.
e. Neighborhood open space uses such as village greens, commons, picnic areas
community gardens, trails, and similar low-impact passive recreational uses. Motorized
off-road vehicles, rifle ranges, and other uses similar in character and potential impact
are specifically excluded.
f. Active non-commercial recreation areas, such as ballfields, playgrounds, courts and
bikeways, provided such areas do not consume more than half of the minimum required
open space land or five acres, whichever is less. Ballfields, playgrounds, and courts
shall not be located within 100 feet of abutting properties and shall not be illuminated for
activity after dark. Parking facilities for the same shall also be permitted and shall
generally be gravel-surfaced, properly drained, provide safe ingress and egress, and
contain no more than ten parking spaces.
g. Golf courses may comprise up to 75 percent of the minimum required open space land,
but shall not include commercial driving ranges or miniature golf. Not more than 10% of
the remaining open space land may be wetland, submerged, or used for stormwater
management. Golf course parking areas and any associated structures shall not be
included within the minimum open space requirement. Parking and access ways may
be paved and lighted. Golf courses included as part of the open space shall be
designed to maximize the extent of fairways that front along adjacent public roads.
Naturalistic plantings comprises of indigenous species shall be established in the buffer
areas between the fairways and the adjacent roadways.
h. Stormwater drainage and detention areas designed, landscaped, and available for use
as an integral part of the open space.
i. Easements for drainage, access, sewer or water lines, bike paths, or other public
purposes.
j. Underground utility rights-of-way. Utility and street rights-of way may traverse
conservation areas. Street rights-of way shall not count toward the minimum required
open space land, but underground utility rights-of way shall.
2. Open space design standards. The following standards shall be adhered to in the design of
the open space and greenway areas:
a. Open space shall be laid out in general accordance with the open space and greenway
networks.
b. Long, narrow strips of open space are discouraged, except where designed to protect
linear resources such as streets or trails or to provide connections between larger open
space areas.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 81 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
c. Fragmentation of open space into isolated unlinked pieces is discouraged, except to
provide neighborhood parks and common areas.
d. Dedicated open space land shall generally remain undivided and may be owned and
maintained by a homeowners association, land trust, another conservation organization
recognized by the municipality, or by a private individual (typically as part of "noncommon" conservation land used for rural resource activities, such as equestrian
facilities, tree nurseries, etc.). However, in no case shall less than 25 percent of the
property be available for the common use and passive enjoyment of the subdivision
residents. These ownership options may be combined so that different parts of the
open space land may be owned by different entities.
e. The open space shall include land dedicated for public recreational use as outlined in
the City subdivision regulations.
f. Where the proposed development adjoins public parkland, a natural open space buffer
at least 50 feet deep shall be provided within the development along its common
boundary with the parkland, within which no new structures shall be constructed, nor
shall any clearing of trees or understory growth be permitted (except as may be
necessary for street or tail construction). Where this buffer is unwooded, the City may
require vegetative screening to be planted, or that it be managed to encourage natural
forest succession through "no-mow" policies and the periodic removal of invasive alien
plant and tree species.
3. Other requirements.
a. No portion of any building lot may be used for meeting the minimum open space
required. However, active agricultural land with farm buildings, excluding areas used for
residences, may be used to meet the minimum required open space land.
b. Pedestrian and maintenance access, excluding those lands used for agricultural or
horticultural purposes in accordance with the permitted open space uses specified
herein, shall be provided to open space land in accordance with the following
requirements:
 Each neighborhood shall be provided with one centrally located access point to the
open space per 25 lots, a minimum of 30 feet in width.
 Access to open space land used for agriculture may be appropriately restricted for
public safety and to prevent interference with agricultural operations.
c. All open space land areas that are not wooded or farmed shall be landscaped,
revegetated, or managed to encourage natural succession to meadow or woodland.
F. Yards.
1. The required yards along the periphery of the project should be at least equal in width or
depth to that of the adjacent zoning district.
2. All other yards shall be subject to approval during the review process.
G. Parking requirements. Adequate, adjacent parking shall be provided based on design and use.
H. Traffic. That adequate provision be made to provide ingress and egress so designed as to
minimize traffic congestion in the public streets. The appropriate authority or council may require
a professional traffic engineer to investigate and submit a traffic study.
I. Low Density Conservation Standard. Open space shall comprise a minimum of 50 percent of
the development site. In no case shall the gross density of the development exceed 1.4
development units per acre. A development unit is defined as the entire impervious developed 
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 82 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
area of the unit including the building footprint and surfaced parking, driveways, sidewalks, etc.
No more than 20% of the minimum open space land may be wetland, submerged or used as a
stormwater retention facility. The open space requirement shall include land dedicated for public
recreational use in accordance with the subdivision regulations of this City.
J. Medium Density Conservation Standard. Open space shall comprise a minimum of 30
percent of the development site. In no case shall the gross density of the development exceed
2.0 development units per acre. A development unit is defined as the entire impervious
developed area of the unit including the building footprint and surfaced parking, driveways,
sidewalks, etc. No more than 20% of the minimum open space land may be wetland, submerged
or used as a stormwater retention facility. The open space requirement shall include land
dedicated for public recreational use in accordance with the subdivision regulations of this City.
K. Other standards. The planned unit development may depart from strict conformance with the
required density, dimension, area, height, bulk, use, and other regulations for the standard zoning
districts and other provisions of this Ordinance to the extent specified in the preliminary land use
and zoning plan and documents authorizing the planned unit development so long as the planned
unit development project will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals,
comfort, or general welfare. All new construction shall conform to City specifications and
regulations.
12-31-5 Conditions and Guarantees
Prior to the granting of any planned unit development, the City Council may stipulate such conditions
and restrictions upon the establishment, location, design, layout, height, density, construction,
maintenance, aesthetics, operation and other elements of planned unit development as deemed
necessary for the protection of the public interest, improvement of the development, protection of the
adjacent area and to secure compliance with the standards specified in Chapter 12-31-4. In all cases
in which planned unit developments are granted, the City Council shall require such evidence and
guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith
are being and will be complied with.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 83 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 32
"RCO" RIVERFRONT CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT
12-32-1 General Description
The intent of the Riverfront Corridor Overlay District (RCO) is:
A. To recognize, preserve, maintain and promote economically viable uses that are a benefit to the
City;
B. To maximize public benefit for further development of the riverfront area;
C. To provide for improved scenic and aesthetic controls;
D. To recognize the riverfront area as a visual, environmental and recreational resource that affect
and benefits the City as a whole;
E. To protect adjacent properties from the negative effects of incompatible development;
F. To establish a physically attractive pattern of development for the general welfare of the City.
The RCO extends along the Rock River in the corporate limits of the City of Colona. The exact
boundary of the RCO is delineated on the official City zoning map. The Riverfront Corridor
Overlay District regulations supplement and control (where inconsistent) the regulations of
underlying district(s). All other applicable provisions and standards of this Ordinance and other
pertinent ordinances shall remain in effect.
12-32-2 Permitted Principal Uses
A. All uses permitted by right in the underlying zoning district(s).
12-32-3 Other Uses
A. Uses authorized by the City Council with recommendation from the Plan Commission.
12-32-4 Applicable Regulations
A. All requirements of the underlying zoning district(s) concerning site planning, building height, lot
area, and yard depths shall remain applicable except where modified by the following sections.
12-32-5 Public Pedestrian/Bike Easement
For the benefit of the public, access to or along the riverfront is encouraged. This will serve to provide
open areas and vehicle-free areas for use by the general public. The desired design standards for
such access are as follows:
A. A public pedestrian/bike easement of at least twenty (20) feet in width running in continuous
length through the property for properties ordering the river. The easement shall be adjacent to
the riverfront by an alternative location may be proposed if the riverfront location is not possible.
B. The easement should connect to any adjacent public pedestrian/bike easement in a physically
logical and efficient manner.
C. Such pedestrian/bike easements should be located in a safe and logical fashion and be usable
by pedestrians and bicyclists.
D. The City shall be responsible for the cost, installation, and maintenance of the asphalt surfacing,
lighting, signage, security and fencing where needed, and any other facilities necessary for the
public use along the pedestrian/bike easement.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 84 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
12-32-6 Development Incentives
A. If a public pedestrian/bike easement of a least twenty (20) feet in width running continuously
through the property is provided by the owner, the maximum building height allowable may be
increased up to four (4) stories, not to exceed fifty (50) feet. The granting of this increase shall
also be dependent upon design and topographical considerations.
B. If a public pedestrian/bike easement of at least twenty (20) feet in width running continuously
through the property is provided by the owner, the required setbacks from public right-of-way may
be varied as long as design, floodplain, safety, topographic and view considerations are
satisfactorily addressed; provided, however the setback may not be reduced to less than ten (10)
feet.
C. For every four hundred (400) square feet of dedicated public pedestrian easement which is at
least twenty (20) feet wide that is provided by the owner, one parking space may be deducted
from the required parking total. This provision shall not apply to residential use within the RCO.
Regardless of waivers or exemptions herein above granted or the requirements set forth in the
off-street parking regulations of the City of Colona, required parking spaces shall never be
reduced to less than fifty percent (50%) of the normal required total number of spaces.
12-32-7 Site Plan Requirement
All applicants for proposed uses in the RCO shall be required to submit a site plan for review and
recommendation by the Plan Commission and approved by the City Council prior to, or in conjunction
with, a zoning change, conditional use or building permit. The Plan Commission shall review site
plans for proposed uses requiring approval. The site plan shall include the following information:
A. A drawing(s) at a scale of one hundred (100) feet or less to the inch indicating:
B. The legal description of the property;
C. Existing topography and the proposed finished grade of the site, shown with contour intervals of
two (2) feet;
D. Location and description of existing and proposed utility services on and adjacent to the
development, including sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains, fire hydrants, and other
utilities;
E. All existing and proposed easements;
F. The location and size of each existing and proposed structure or use on the site;
G. The location and width of streets adjacent to or on the property;
H. The location and width of streets adjacent to or on the property;
I. The dimensions and capacities of parking areas and loading areas, including the location and
type of illumination and landscaping;
J. The types of surfacing, such as paving, turf or gravel to be used on the site;
K. A drainage plan for the site;
L. The location and height of all existing proposed walls, fences, and screen plantings, landscaping
and buffer areas; and
12-32-8 Traffic Analysis
A traffic study shall be required for developments that are expected to generate large volumes of
traffic to and from a site. The Zoning Officer and/or City Engineer shall determine if a traffic study is
required for a site. The analysis shall be performed by a registered professional engineer. The
analysis shall include the anticipated or projected trip generation per day (ADT) and peak hourly traffic
resulting from the proposed use; access points and driveways to and from the site; parking areas and
number of parking spaces; stacking areas, sight distances from the access points; distance from
proposed access points to existing intersections and driveways within five hundred (500) feet; and
other information necessary for proper review by the City.
12-32-9 Performance Standards for Site Development
A. Landscaping and Screening - Commercial, industrial, office and multi-family developments shall
be required to provide landscaping or screening adequate to achieve the following objectives:
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 85 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
To screen incompatible land uses and protect residential areas from negative effects such as
noise, glare and litter;
To provide a visually attractive site design;
To encourage the creative use of landscaping to frame or enhance views and vistas and
discourage the obstruction of existing views; and
To be sensitive to the environmental nature of the riverbank by limiting its alteration except as
necessary.
B. Illumination - Exterior lighting on buildings or in yard and parking areas shall not produce any
hazards, nuisances, or unsightly glare for adjacent land uses, pedestrians and motorists.
C. Refer to Chapters 7, 33, 34 and 35 standards in Title 12 of this City code for specific
development.
D. Signs freestanding
12-32-10 Submission of Site Plan
A site plan shall be submitted at the time of application for a rezoning, an authorized use, and if
applicable, for a variance. If only a building or sign permit the site plan shall be submitted at the time
of application for the permit. The site plan shall be submitted to the appropriate official. A processing
fee of twenty-five ($25) dollars shall be paid to the City at the time the site plan is submitted. This fee
shall not be required if the site plan is submitted at the same time as an application for a zoning
change or authorized use.
12-32-11 Review Process
Upon receiving a site plan, the Zoning Officer shall schedule a public hearing for review by the Plan
Commission. The Plan Commission shall review and make a recommendation to the City Council for
site plans requiring a zoning change, or only a building or sign permit. The City Council shall review
and take final action on site plans requiring a zoning change, or only a building or sign permit. The
Plan Commission shall review and approve site plans for uses requiring the City Council authorization
or variances, if applicable. A site plan approved by the City Council shall not require other authority
review before the issuance of a building permit.
12-32-12 Notice of Public Hearing
If a site plan is submitted as part of an application for a zoning change, authorized use or variance, the
appropriate notification procedure established in the Ordinance shall be followed. If only a building or
sign permit is required, at least fifteen (15) days before the public hearing, a notice stating the time
and place of the hearing shall be placed in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Colona.
Notice shall also be delivered personally or by mail at least five (5) days before the hearing to the
applicant, respective owners of record or property adjoining or adjacent to the subject parcel within the
City=s planning jurisdiction, and the City Council.
12-32-13 Findings of Fact
Site plans reviewed by the appropriate authority(s). Appeals shall be approved, approved with
conditions, or disapproved. In any case, the reviewing body shall make the following specific findings
of fact concerning the site plan:
A. Whether the proposed development conforms to the standards and requirements of the
Riverfront Corridor Overlay District;
B. Whether the proposed development is consistent with the land use recommendations and
development policies;
C. Whether the proposed development is designed to prevent traffic congestion and access
problems along adjacent streets;
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 86 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
D. Whether the proposed development is an attractive design and an efficient use of land;
E. Whether the proposed development is compatible with adjacent land uses and is designed to
protect adjacent properties from adverse effects such as noise, glare, litter and unattractive
features;
F. Whether the proposed development will be adequately served by public facilities; and
G. Whether the proposed development will have any negative environmental or physical impacts on
the site or on adjacent properties.
12-32-14 Exemptions from Site Plan Requirements
One and two family residences are exempt from the site plan requirements of the RCO. In addition, a
site plan shall not be required for the renovation or expansion of an existing structure or use unless
access points would be changed or a substantial increase in traffic to the site would be generated.
12-32-15 Amendments to Approved Site Plans
Any amendment or change to an approved site plan must be submitted to the appropriate official for
review. The Zoning Officer shall determine if the proposed amendment is a major change requiring
review and approval by the City Council. Minor changes can be approved by the Zoning Officer.
12-32-16 Site Plan Review Requirements Outside Riverfront Corridor Overlay District
Riverfront Corridor Overlay District site plan review requirements that also apply city-wide for site plans
requiring a zoning change, authorized use and/or variances. The same notification and public hearing
process shall also be followed.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 87 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 33
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
12-33-1 Compliance with Provisions
A. New Uses: Any use established in the business or industrial zones after the effective date hereof
shall comply with the minimum performance standards contained in this Chapter.
B. Existing Uses: Existing business and industrial uses which are not in compliance with the
performance standards contained in this Chapter are exempt, except where a use did not comply
with performance standards in effect prior to the effective date hereof (effective date).
Conditions which do not comply shall not be increased in scope or magnitude. Such uses shall
be permitted to be enlarged or altered, provided the addition or change conforms with the
applicable performance standards.
12-33-2 Certification May Be Required
When necessary, the Zoning Officer and/or City Engineer may require of the applicant certification by
a registered professional engineer or other qualified person, at the expense of the applicant, that the
performance standards for a proposed use can be met.
12-33-3 Smoke Emissions
The emission of smoke from any operation or activity shall not exceed a density or equivalent opacity
permitted by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) .
12-33-4 Particulate Matter
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any process which emits particulate air contaminants
exceeding the air quality standards of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) or its
successor.
A. Prior to the City issuing a certificate of occupancy, an applicant must submit to the appropriate
official documentation of the IEPA approval of the applicants "application and permit to install or
alter equipment or control equipment" if such a permit is required under the applicable IEPA
standards.
B. In the event the IEPA lowers its air quality standards, the IEPA standards in effect on the
adoption date of this Ordinance shall remain applicable. Under these circumstances, prior to the
City issuing a building permit, an applicant must submit to the Appropriate Official documentation
from a licensed engineer demonstrating that the use complies with the IEPA standards (on the
adoption date of this Ordinance).
C. In the event the IEPA raises its air quality standards, the new IEPA standards shall apply, and the
applicant must comply with the requirements of Section 12-33-4B.
12-33-5 Toxic Matters
The release of airborne toxic matter from any operation or activity shall not exceed the fractional
quantities permitted below of the threshold limit values adopted by the American Conference of
Governmental Industrial Hygienists. If a toxic substance is not listed, verification that the proposed
level of toxic matter will be safe and not detrimental to the public health or injurious to plant and animal
life will be required. The measurement of toxic matter shall be on the average of any twenty-four (24)
hour sampling period.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 88 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
A. All B Zones and the ORT Zone. In all B zones and in the ORT zone, the release beyond lot lines
of airborne toxic matter shall not exceed one-eighth (1/8) of the threshold limit values.
B. I-1 and I-2 Zones. In the I-1 and I-2 zones, the release of airborne toxic matter shall not exceed
one-eighth (1/8) of the threshold limit values beyond zone boundary lines.
12-33-6 Vibration
Earth borne vibrations from any operation or activity shall not exceed the displacement values below.
Vibration displacements shall be measured with an instrument capable of simultaneously measuring in
three (3) mutually perpendicular directions. The maximum vector resultant shall be less than the
vibration displacement permitted. The maximum displacements shall be determined by the following
formula:
D = K
 f
where
D = displacement in inches
K = a constant given in table below
f = the frequency of the vibration transmitted through the ground in cycles per second
Zone and Place
of Measurement
Continuous
Impulsive
(at least 1 second rest
between pulses which
do not exceed 1 second
duration)
Less Than
8 Pulses Per
24 Hour Period
B Zones and ORT Zone:
At Lot Line
0.003 0.006 0.015
I-1 Zone and I-2 Zone:
1. At Zone Boundary Line
2. At R Zone, Recreational
 Area or School Boundary
 Line
0.030
0.003
0.060
0.006
0.150
0.015
12-33-7 Glare Illumination
See Illumination Provisions, Chapter 34.
12-33-8 Sewage Waste
Sewers and sewage discharge shall meet the appropriate City code and all IEPA requirements.
12-33-9 Storage
A. The open storage of materials and equipment shall except for sales display shall be subject to
the following requirements:
1. Storage of materials and equipment shall be completely screened from view. An eight foot
(8') solid wall fence with a level A bufferyard as described in Chapter 34 will be required.
2. All combustible material shall be stored in such a way as to include, where necessary,
access drives to permit free access of firefighting equipment.
B. The bulk storage of flammable liquids and chemicals, when stored in above-ground tanks, shall
occur no closer than the lot line or any principal building than the distance indicated by the
following table:
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 89 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
 Minimum
 Capacity Separation Distances
 Per Container Above Ground
 (Gallons) Containers
Less than 125 None
 125 to 250 10 Feet
 251 to 500 10 Feet
 501 to 2,000 25 Feet
2,001 to 30,000 50 Feet
30,001 to 70,000 75 Feet
70,001 to 90,000 100 Feet
C. The underground bulk storage of flammable liquids shall be located in accordance with the
Uniform Fire Code regarding tank storage underground, except the minimum distance between
such underground tanks and any R zone boundary shall be at least ten feet (10').
12-33B10 Screening
See bufferyard requirements as described in Chapter 37.
12-33-11 Noise
 The following requirements shall apply in all districts:
A. The sound pressure level, to be measured as described below, shall not exceed the following
decibel levels in the designated octave bands when adjacent to the designated types of use
districts:
 Octave Band, Sound Level,
Cycles Per Second Districts In Decibels
All Residential
 B-1, B-2, B-3
0 to 75 73 58
76 to 150 69 54
151 to 300 65 50
301 to 600 61 46
601 to 1,200 55 40
1,201 to 2,400 48 33
2,400 to 4,800 41 26
Over 4,800 35 20
B. Objectionable sounds of an intermittent nature which are not easily measured shall be controlled
so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses.
C. Method of Measurement: Measurement is to be made at the nearest boundary of the nearest
residential area or at any other point along the boundary where the level is higher. The sound
levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band filter as
prescribed by the American Standards Association.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 90 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 34
ILLUMINATIONS PROVISIONS
Parking Facility and Exterior Security Lighting:
12-34-1 Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish lighting requirements for personal safety and crime
prevention while regulating any spill-over of light and glare on operators of motor vehicles,
pedestrians, and land uses near a light source to promote personal and traffic safety and to prevent
the creation of public nuisances.
12-34-2 Lighting Plan
Except for single family and two family dwellings, plans for required parking lot and security lighting
shall be approved by appropriate officials and the police department prior to approval and issuance of
permits. Plans, at appropriate scale, shall be based on accurate, approved final site plans and shall
depict all exterior lighting as to its location, orientation and configuration. This must include, but not be
limited to:
A. Luminaire height;
B. Luminaire and standard technical specifications;
C. Intensity of illumination measured at the least point of illumination and the greatest point of
illumination when measured from ground level;
D. Type of light source (Metal Halide, High Pressure Sodium, etc.);
E. Hours of illumination; and
F. Photometric plan superimposed on the site plan for each classification of lighting with points no
greater than 30 feet apart.
12-34-3 Illumination Performance Standards
A. Lighting standards in all zoning districts except those containing single family and two
family dwellings
1. Wall or roof lighting may be used to illuminate the pedestrian walkways, entrance areas, and
yard areas within 30 feet of the building. No wall or roof lighting shall be used to illuminate
areas for motor vehicle parking or access unless the police department and the appropriate
officials find the following:
a. That the proposed lighting is not in conflict with the stated purpose in this section.
b. That the proposed lighting will not unreasonable harm or restrict public health, safety,
and welfare or create a nuisance; and
c. The proposed luminaire has a cutoff angle of less than or equal to 66 degrees.
2. Any open area used for motor vehicle parking, storage, or access shall be illuminated with
free-standing luminaries. Free-standing luminaries are permitted to be a maximum of 30
feet in height with a 3 foot support, for a maximum height from the ground of 33 feet. When
a luminaire is located within 500 feet of a protected residential property, the maximum
permitted luminaire height shall be 25 feet. All measurements shall be taken from the
average elevation of the finished grade within 10 feet of the structure or fixture to the highest
point of the luminaire. All luminaries must have a total cutoff angle equal to or less than 90
degrees. The use of exterior lighting with a cutoff angle greater than 90 degrees shall be
permitted only when the police department and appropriate official find the following:
a. That the lighting is not in conflict with the stated purpose in this section;
b. That the proposed lighting will not unreasonably harm or restrict public health, safety,
and welfare or create a nuisance; and
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 91 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
c. The proposed lighting will not result in an impairment of vision creating a hazard for
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
3. In no instance shall Low Pressure Sodium fixtures be used to illuminate non-protected
residential property unless the police department find the following:
a. That the proposed lighting is not in conflict with the stated purpose in this section;
b. That the proposed lighting will not unreasonably harm or restrict public health, safety,
and welfare or create a nuisance; and
c. The color distortion effect of Low Pressure Sodium lighting will not create a hindrance to
crime prevention and investigation.
B. Intensity of lighting in all zoning districts except those containing single family and two
family dwellings
1. The amount of illumination attributable to exterior lighting from a property shall not exceed 1
foot-candle when measured at any boundary line with an adjoining property. This provision
may be waived by the issuing authority when:
a. The proposed lighting is not in conflict with the stated purpose of this section;
b. The proposed lighting will not unreasonably harm or restrict public health, safety, and
welfare or create a nuisance; and
c. The proposed lighting will not result in an impairment of vision creating a hazard for
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
2. All parking lot and parking structure lighting located within 300 feet of a protected residential
property line may be illuminated not more than one (1) hour before the start of business and
shall be extinguished within one (1) hour after the end of business except as approved by
the police department after finding the following:
a. The property has been identified as an area where the incidence or potential for crime
warrant additional lighting;
b. Additional lighting is required to increase visibility of a property which is not readily
accessible for police during routine patrol; and
c. The use of timers, sensors, or other devices that produce a reduced lighting level that
does not conflict with the stated purpose in this section.
C. Glare/Illumination
In all zoning districts, any lighting shall be arranged to reflect the light away from adjoining
property. A person shall not conduct a use that has a source of illumination that produces glare
clearly visible beyond a property line or creates a sensation of brightness within a visual field so
as to cause annoyance, discomfort, or impairment of vision. The use of lenses, deflectors,
shields, louvers, or prismatic control devices shall be used to eliminate nuisance and hazardous
lighting to facilitate compliance with this requirement.
D. Parking structures
Luminaries used for illumination of designated pedestrian walkways in parking structures shall be
of a significantly different color value than luminaries used for illuminating vehicle parking and
drive aisles.
12-34-4 Compliance
Any new lighting installed after the effective date of this Ordinance shall be in compliance with the
requirements of this Ordinance. Any lighting in existence before the effective date of this Ordinance
that does not comply with its requirements shall be considered legally non-complying and may remain,
subject to the following provisions:
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 92 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
A. Alterations to existing lighting
1. When policies and support structures are removed and replaced for reasons other than acts
of God or accidents, they must be replaced with luminaries, policies and supports that
comply with this section; and
2. When luminaries are replaced, they must be replaced with luminaries that comply with all
provisions of this section.
B. Removal and replacement of parking lot surface
When less than 50% of the gross area of the parking lot surface on a particular site is removed
and replaced, only the parking area replaced must be provided with lighting in compliance with
this section. If greater than 50% of the parking area on a particular site is removed and replaced
at one time, the entire parking lot on the site where the construction activity occurs must be in full
compliance with this section.
1. A parking lot or portion thereof is "removed and replaced" when any portion of the existing
parking surface material is removed and a new surface is installed.
C. New parking lots or parking lot additions
When a new parking lot or addition to an existing parking lot is constructed, the new lot or lot
addition must be provided with lighting in compliance with this section.
D. New structures, additions, or replacements
When a site is improved with new structures, or additions to, or replacements of existing
structures, the lighting for the new structure, addition or replacement on the site must be
upgraded with complying lighting. The parking lot lighting must be upgraded with complying
lighting over a portion of the parking area that is equivalent to the amount of parking that would
be required for the new structure, addition or replacement. In the event that the new structure,
addition or replacement is accompanied by new or replaced parking area, the amount of
upgraded lighting area shall be that required under this section.
E. Change of type of occupancy
When the type of occupancy of a site is changed, the lighting for the site shall be upgraded, to
comply with this section for the structure and the parking lot be upgraded for the required parking
for the occupancy as established in this code. For purpose of determining the type of occupancy
of a site, the occupancy classifications of the city code shall be utilized.
F. Unoccupied sites
When a site has been unoccupied for a period of one year, the lighting shall be upgraded to fully
comply with this section prior to any reoccupation of the site.
G. Development application
When a development application is made for a site, the city council may as a condition of
approval require compliance with any or all of the performance standards of this section and the
extent of compliance required in such cases may be greater than that otherwise required in this
section, if deemed reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare and to
achieve the proposes of this section.
12-34-5 Point of Measurements
Any light intensity measurement taken at the property line shall be measured at the greatest point of
illumination of said property line. Any measurements to determine the minimum and maximum
lighting levels internal to a site will be measured by positioning the meter horizontally at ground level at
the greatest and least points of artificial illumination.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 93 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
12-34-6 Applicability
Modifications to the requirements of this section may be approved as part of a final development plan
for a planned development overlay district, pursuant to the provisions provided:
A. That any deviations from lighting standards established by this section are clearly delineated in
the plan submission reviewed by the Plan Commission and approved by the City Council;
B. That any deviations are consistent with the purposes of this section;
C. That the minimum light level proposed provides a minimum of 75 percent of the illumination
required in this section;
D. That the height of support poles above grade does not exceed the maximum permitted by this
section by more than 25 percent, except that no development shall be allowed for increased
support pole height within 500 feet of a protected residential property; and
E. That no increase in glare occurs as a result of deviation from the adopted standards.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 94 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 35
LANDSCAPE AND BUFFERYARD REQUIREMENTS
12-35-1 Site Plans
If a building or parking lot permit is applied for and no zoning action is required, an administrative site
plan approval will be required.
12-35-2 Site Plan Review
An application for a building or parking lot permit shall promptly be forwarded to the Zoning Officer
and/or City Engineer. Review must be completed within fifteen (15) days of the receipt by the City of a
complete site plan review application. If, in the judgment of the Zoning Officer and/or City Engineer,
the site plan review application does not contain sufficient information to enable the appropriate city
officials to properly carry out its responsibilities, the appropriate officials may request additional
information from the applicant. In that event, the 15 day period previously referred to shall be
suspended, pending the receipt of all information requested by the appropriate officials.
12-35-3 Appeal Process
If the appropriate officials approve a site plan, a building or parking permit may then be issued. If the
appropriate officials do not approve a site plan, the applicant may appeal the appropriate officials
decision to the appropriate authority. A notice of appeal must be filed with the appropriate official no
later than fifteen (15) days after receipt by the applicant of the decision of the appropriate officials.
12-35-4 Exemption from Site Plan Requirements
One and two family residences are exempt from city-wide site plan review requirements. In addition,
site plans shall not be required for renovation or expansion of an existing structure or use unless
access points would be changed or a substantial increase in traffic to the site would be generated.
12-35-5 Parking Lots
A. Permits for Off-Street Parking Lots  No person shall expand an existing parking lot or
construct a new parking lot of five (5) spaces or more without having first obtained a written
permit therefor, issued by the appropriate official, or his designee representative. Prior to
obtaining a permit for such expansion or new construction, the applicant shall submit to the
appropriate official or his designated representative, a landscape/site plan as required in the
Zoning Ordinance, and plans showing the construction specifications for all off-street parking lots
and he shall provide for proper inspection of construction.
B. Construction  All off-street parking lots required to obtain a permit as identified in the above
section shall be laid to the line and grade of, and shall conform to surface thickness and other
specifications of the appropriate city official or his designated representative.
C. Landscaping and Screening Requirements for Off-Street Parking Lots  The provisions of
this section for the installation and maintenance of landscaping and screening requirements are
intended to protect the character and stability of residential, commercial, industrial and
conservation areas, and to enhance the aesthetic and visual image of the city.
1. Parking lots of five (5) or more spaces shall be set back ten feet (10') from the front property
line(s). Landscaping requirements with the front yard(s) include that the yard be seeded or
sodded with lawn. Rock cover may be used, but may not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the
landscaped front yard setback. In addition, one canopy tree for every five (5) parking spaces
and a minimum of five percent (5%) ground cover landscape coverage of shrubs and
evergreens/conifers shall be required.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 95 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
The ten foot (10') front yard setback may be reduced to five feet (5') if there is a continuous
twenty-six inch (26") solid wall/fence or shrubbery hedge provided. Sodding, rock ground
cover, canopy tree and ground cover landscape coverage requirements will still be applied if
a solid wall/fence is provided. Sodding and/or rock ground requirements will still be applied
if a shrubbery fence is provided.
2. Parking lots of five (5) or more spaces shall be setback five feet (5') from side and rear
property lines. Landscaping requirements within the side and rear yards include that the
yard be seeded or sodded with lawn. Rock ground cover may be used, but may not exceed
twenty percent (20%) of the landscaped side and rear yard setback. In addition, one canopy
tree for every five (5) parking spaces and a minimum of five percent (5%) ground landscape
coverage of shrubs and evergreens/conifers shall be required.
When a side and/or rear yard is adjacent to a residential use, a continuous four foot (4')
solid wall/fence or shrubbery hedge shall also be provided with the five foot (5') setback
yard. If a four-foot (4') shrubbery hedge is provided, canopy tree and ground landscape
coverage shall not be required.
3. Wherever landscaping and screening requirements may interfere with traffic vision, the
height and placement shall be determined by the City Engineer.
4. Trees and other landscaping shall be of a species which are hardy to the area and have
measured diameters of such identified in the Minimum Standards for Plantings section of
this appendix. Prohibited trees are identified in the section so identified in this appendix.
5. Subject to the approval of the appropriate official, alternate landscaping plans may be
substituted for consideration.
6. A landscape/site plan will be required to be submitted for staff review prior to issuing a
parking lot development permit for parking lots of five (5) spaces or more. The following
basic standards should be set:
a. Drawn to scale;
b. Identify location of landscaping or other features;
c. Specify nature of materials (i.e., species, variety, etc.);
d. Specify number of plants, shrubs, trees, etc., by species.
7. Landscaping and screening must be maintained in good condition, free of refuse and debris,
and provide a healthy, neat and orderly appearance at least equal to the original installation.
It shall be the owner=s responsibility to see that the landscaping is maintained.
D. Appeal Process  If the appropriate officials approve a site plan, a parking lot permit may then
be issued. If the appropriate officials do not approve a site plan, the applicant may appeal the
appropriate officials decision to the appropriate authority. A notice of appeal must be filed with
the appropriate official no later than fifteen (15) days after receipt by the applicant of the decision
of the appropriate officials.
12-35-6 Bufferyard Requirements
A. Intent  The provisions of this section are to provide specific landscape screening and bufferyard
requirements to reduce the incompatibility between zoning districts of different intensity and type.
These bufferyards will lessen the adverse impact of more intense land uses upon residential
areas and/or other areas of less intense use by reducing noise, visual and other environmental
impacts.
B. Requirements  In addition to landscaping and screening requirements for off-street parking
areas, bufferyard standards will also apply for site plans requiring a zoning change, special use
permit and non-exempt site plan review requirements. The bufferyard requirement is determined
by the difference between the zoning district of the subject property and the zoning district of
adjacent properties. The specific requirements are identified in the following sections and the 
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 96 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
accompanying table: Schedule of Bufferyard Requirements. Landscaping and screening
requirements for off-street parking areas apply to the side of the property abutting a public street
right-of-way. A list of prohibited trees is provided in the section entitled "Prohibited Trees".
C. Description of Bufferyards A through D
1. Type A Buffer  The standard buffer within Type A is eight feet (8') wide and contains the
following number of required plants per one hundred feet (100'):
a. 1 canopy tree;
b. 1 understory tree;
c. 6 shrubs;
d. 1 evergreen/conifer.
Depending on the space available, the applicant may choose one of several alternative
buffer widths to provide a Type A buffer, each with a different amount of required plantings
reflected as a multiplier of the required plant units per one hundred feet (100'). The
alternatives include the following:
a. Twenty-foot (20') wide buffer with fifty percent (50%) of the required plant units per one
hundred feet (100').
b. Sixteen-foot (16') wide buffer with sixty percent (60%) of the required plant units per one
hundred feet (100').
c. Twelve-foot (12') wide buffer with eighty percent (80%) of the required plan units per
one hundred feet (100').
d. Four-foot (4') wide buffer with ninety percent (90%) of the required plant units and a
continuous hedge set back three feet (3') from the property line or fence.
2. Type B Buffer - The standard buffer with Type B is ten feet (10') wide and contains the
following number of required plant per one hundred feet (100'):
a. 2 canopy trees;
b. 2 understory trees;
c. 6 shrubs;
d. 2 evergreens/confers.
Depending on the space available, the applicant may choose one of several alternative
buffer widths to provide a Type B buffer, each with a different amount of required plantings.
Type B buffer alternatives range from a twenty-five foot (25') wide buffer with fifty percent
(50%) of the required plantings to a five-foot (5') wide buffer with ninety percent (90%) of the
required plantings and a continuous hedge or fence.
3. Type C Buffer  The standard buffer within Type C is fifteen feet (15') wide and contains
the following number of required plantings per one hundred feet (100'):
a. 3 canopy trees;
b. 2 understory trees;
c. 9 shrubs;
d. 3 evergreens/conifers.
Depending on the space available, the applicant may choose one of several alternative
buffer widths to provide a Type C buffer, each with a different amount of required plantings.
Type C buffer alternatives range from a twenty-five foot (25') wide buffer with sixty percent
(60%) of the required plantings to a six foot (6') wide buffer with ninety percent (90%) of the
required plantings and a continuous fence.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 97 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
4. Type D Buffer  The standard buffer within Type D is fifteen feet (15') wide and contains
the following number of required plants per one hundred feet (100'):
a. 3 canopy trees;
b. 2 understory trees;
c. 15 shrubs;
d. 5 evergreens/conifers.
Depending on the space available, the applicant may choose one of several alternative
buffer widths to provide a Type D buffer, each with a different amount of required plantings.
Type D buffer alternatives range from a twenty-five foot (25') wide buffer with sixty percent
of the required plantings to an eight-foot (8') wide buffer with ninety percent (90%) of the
required plantings and a continuous fence.
12-35-7 Minimum Standards for Plantings
A. Canopy Trees  Two inches (2") diameter, six inches (6") above ground level, and ten feet (10')
in height when planted.
B. Understory Tree  One inch (1") diameter, six inches (6") above ground level, and six feet (6') in
height when planted.
C. Shrubs  Twenty-four inches (24") in height when planted; forty percent
(40%) or more must reach a mature height of six feet (6') or more.
D. Evergreens/Conifers  Two inches (2") in diameter, six inches (6") above ground level, and six
feet (6') in height when planted. Twenty feet (20') minimum height at maturity.
12-35-8 Prohibited Trees
The following weak-wooded trees and generally undesirable trees for urban conditions shall
be prohibited for use in meeting any of the landscaping/screening requirements for off-street parking
areas and/or bufferyard requirements:
A. Ailanthus (tree of heaven)
B. Box Elder
C. European Mountain Ash
D. European White Birch
E. Poplar
F. Siberian Elm
G. Silver Maple
H. Willow
I. All fruit bearing including Crab Apple, Bradford Pear, Purple-Leaf Plum, Mulberry, Russian Olive
J. Sweet Gum
K. Hawthorne
L. Pin Oak
M. Gingko
12-35-9 Maintenance of Landscaping And Screening
Bufferyard landscaping and screening must be maintained in good condition, free of refuse and debris
and provide a healthy, neat and orderly appearance at least equal to the original installation. It shall
be the owners responsibility to see that the landscaping is maintained.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 98 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
12-35-10 Schedule of Bufferyard Requirements
ZONING OF ADJACENT PROPERTY
SUBJECT PROPERTY
R-1
R-2
R-3
R-4
R-5
R-6
R-7
O-1 B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 U-1 ORT C-1 C-2 I-1 I-2
R-1
R-2
R-3
N N N N N N N N N N N N N
R-4
R-5
R-6
R-7
A N N N N N N N N B B N N
O-1 A A N N N N N N N B B N N
B-1 B A N N N N N N N B B N N
B-2 C B N N N N N N N B B N N
B-3 C B C N N N N N C B B N N
B-4 C C C N N N N A C B B N N
U-1 C C N N N N N N N B B N N
ORT D D N N N N N N N B B N N
C-1 N N N N N N N N N N N N N
C-2 A N N N N N N N N N N N N
I-1 C C D B A N N B C C C N N
I-2 D D D B A A A C C D D N N
A. Approximate bufferyard requirement:
A - 8 feet (8') in width;
B - 10 feet (10') in width;
C - 15 feet (15') in width;
D - 15 feet (15') in width;
N - No buffer required.
B. Position of property abutting public right-of-way is governed by landscaping for parking
lot requirements.
12-35-11 Appeal Process
If the appropriate officials approve a site plan, a building permit may then be issues. If the appropriate
officials do not approve a site plan, the applicant may appeal the appropriate officials decision to the
appropriate authority. A notice of appeal must be filed with the appropriate official no later than fifteen
(15) days after receipt by the applicant of the decision of the appropriate officials.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 99 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 36
VALIDITY AND REPEAL
Should any section, subsection, clause or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, the
same shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof, other than that which is so
declared to be invalid. All other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance
are hereby repealed.
Colona Zoning Ordinance 4/02 - 100 - Word\Ordinance\Colona Zoning Ordinance gm/sv
CHAPTER 37
WHEN EFFECTIVE
This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after the earliest period allowed by law.