VILLAGE OF DWIGHT
COMPREHENSIVE AMMENDMENT
TO THE
\ '
DWIGHT ZONING ORDINANCE. I I
I
Effective November 2006

(
(
VILLAGE OF DWIGHT
COMPREHENSIVE AMENDMENT
TO THE
DWIGHT ZONING ORDINANCE
PRESIDENT
Jared Anderson
TRUSTEES
Justin Eggenberger
Nick Kester
Marla Kinkade
Tim Dougherty
Jerry Curtis
Randy Irvin
VILLAGE CLERK
Patricia Drechsel
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
Kevin J McNamara
Effective March 13, 1995
I
~l
!
! I I
I
I l
I I
I
I
I
I

( TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION PAGE
1.00 TITLE 1-1
2.00 INTENT AND PURPOSE 2-1
3.00 RULES AND DEFINITIONS 3-1
3.01 RULES 3-1
3.02 DEFINITIONS 3-1
4.00 GENERAL PROVISIONS 4-1
4.01 INTERPRET A TI ON 4-1
4.02 SEP ARABILITY 4-1
4.03 REPEAL 4-1
4.04 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS 4-2
4.05 USE AND BULK REGULATIONS 4-2
4.06 LOTCOVERGE 4-3
4.07 LOT AREA AND DIMENSION 4-5
4.08 HOME OCCUPATIONS 4-6
4.09 ACCESS TO PUBLIC STREETS 4-6
4.10 NUMBER OF BUILDINGS ON A ZONING LOT 4-6
4.11 REZONING OF PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC AREAS 4-6
4.12 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS 4-7
4.13 TEMPORARY BUILDINGS 4-7
4.14 EXISTING SPECIAL USES 4-8
4.15 USES NOT SPECIFICALLY PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS 4-8
4.16 REGULATIONS OF DISH-TYPE SATELLITE
SIGNAL-RECEIVING ANTENNAS t 4-8
4.17 SMOKE DETECTORS 4-10
4.18 HEIGHTH OF FINAL GRADE 4-11
4.19 TAP ON FEES 4-12
5.00 NON-CONFORlVIING BUILDINGS AND USES 5-1
5.01 CONTINUATION OF AN EXISTING TRADITIONAL
USE 5-1
5.02 DISCONTINUANCE OF AN EXISTING TRADITIONAL
USE 5-1
5.03 CONTINUANCE OF AN EXISTING TRADITIONAL
STRUCTURE 5-2
5.04 DISCONTINUANCE OF AN EXISTING TRADITIONAL
STRUCTURE 5-2
5.05 TRANSFERABILITY OF A STRUCTURE OR USE 5-3
( 5.06 CHANGE OF NONCONFORMING USE 5-3
5.07 ADDITIONS AND ENLARGEMENTS 5-3

( TABLE OF CONTENTS-Continued
SECTION PAGE
5.08 USE DISTRICT CHANGES 5-4
5.09 EXEMPTED BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES 5-4
5.10 CONVERSION TO SPECIAL USE 5-4
6.00 ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS 6-1
6.01 DISTRICTS 6-1
6.02 MAPS 6-1
6.03 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES 6-1
6.04 ZONING OF PUBLIC WAYS 6-2
6.05 ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND 6-2
7.00 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS 7-1
7.01 R-1, ONE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT 7-1
7.02 R-2, ONE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT 7-3
7.03 R-3, GENERAL RESIDENT DISTRICT 7-5
8.00 BUSINESS DISTRICTS 8-1
8.01 B-1, RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT 8-1
( 8.02 B-2, SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT 8-7
8.03 B-3, RETAIL PARKING DISTRICT 8-13
9.00 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 9-1
9.01 I-1, INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 9-1
9.02 P-1, PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 9-2
9.03 CARGO CONTAINERS 9-5
{
9A.OO AGRICULTURE DISTRICT 9A-1
9A.Ol AGRICULTURE ZONING DISTRICT 9A-l
9A.02 LIVINGSTON COUNTY AG DISTRICT RULES
AND REGULATIONS 9A-2
9A.03 GRUNDY COUNTY AG DISTRICT RULES
AND REGULATIONS 9A-12
10.00 F-1, FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT 10-1
10.01 PURPOSE 10-1
10.02 DEFINITIONS 10-1
10.03 BASE FLOOD ELEV A TION 10-6
10.04 DUTIES OF THE BUILDING INSPECTOR 10-7
10.05 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT 10-8
10.06 PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS
( AND RESULTING DAMAGES 10-9
10.07 PROTECTING BUILDINGS 10-10
10.08 SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS 10-15
11

TABLE OF CONTENTS - Continued
SECTION PAGE
10.09 PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER ST AND ARDS 10-16
10.10 CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION 10-16
10.11 VARIANCES 10-17
10.12 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY 10-19
10.13 PENALTY 10-19
10.14 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS 10-20
10.15 SEVERABILITY 10-20
11.00 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 11-1
11.01 JURISDICTION 11-1
11.02 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS-NOISE 11-1
11.03 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS- VIBRATION 11-1
11.04 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS - SMOKE AND
PARTICULATE MATTER 11-2
11.05 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS-TOXIC MATTER 11-2
11.06 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS-ODOROUS MATTER 11-2
11.07 PERFORtvIANCE STANDARDS - FIRE AND
EXPLOSION 11-3
( 11.08 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS-GLARE 11-3
11.09 PERFORMANCE ST AND ARDS - RADIATION
HAZARDS 11-3
11.10 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS - WATER
POLLUTION 11-3
12.00 SIGNS 12-1
12.01 PERMIT REQUIRED I 12-1
12.02 APPLICATIONS 12-1
12.03 EXEMPTIONS FROM PERMITS 12-1
12.04 INSPECTION 12-2
12.05 REMOVAL OF SIGNS 12-2
12.06 PROHIBITIONS 12-2
12.07 TRAFFIC HAZARDS 12-3
12.08 ILLUMINATION 12-3
12.09 ON PREMISES SIGNAGE 12-3
12.10 GROUND SIGNS 12-4
12.11 WALL SIGNS 12-4
12.12 ROOF SIGNS 12-4
12.13 PROJECTING SIGNS 12-5
12.14 TEMPORARY AND/OR PORTABLE SIGNS 12-6
12.15 MARQUEE SIGNS 12-6
I 12.16 AWNING AND CANOPY SIGNS 12-6
\
12.17 NONCONFORMING SIGNS 12-7
111

TABLE OF CONTENTS -Continued
SECTION PAGE
13.00 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 13-1
13.01 PURPOSE 13-1
13.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS - PARKING AND
LOADING 13-1
13.03 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS -PARKING 13-2
13.04 LOCATION OF ACCESSORY OFF-STREET PARKING
FACILITIES 13-4
13.05 SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS 13-4
14.00 FENCES 14-1
14.01 RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, AND
INDUSTRIAL 14-1
14.02 RECREATIONAL PURPOSE FENCES 14-1
14.03 PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS AND OTHER
BODIES OF WATER 14-2
15.00 ADMINISTRATION 15-1
( 15.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS 15-1
15.02 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER 15-1
15.03 ZONING CERTIFICATES 15-2
15.04 OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATE 15-2
15.05 DENIAL/APPEAL 15-3
15.06 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 15-3
15.07 APPEALS 15-5
15.08 VARIATIONS f 15-5
15.09 PLAN COMMISSION 15-7
15.10 AMENDMENTS 15-8
15.11 SPECIAL USES 15-8
15.12 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 15-11
15.13 CHANGES AND MODIFICATIONS OF THE
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT AFTER
APPROVAL OF THE FINAL PLAN 15-18
15.14 STANDARDS 15-19
15.15 FEES 15-23
15.16 VIOLATION, PENALTY, ENFORCEMENT 15-24
(
iv

(
(
(
VILLAGE OF DWIGHT ZONING ORDINANCE
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
VILLAGE OF DWIGHT:
That this ordinance be applicable to but not limited to classifying, regulating and
restricting the location of trades and industries and the location of buildings and
structures designed for specific uses; regulating and determining the area of yards, courts
and other open spaces within and sunounding such buildings; establishing the boundaries
of districts for said purposes; establishing a Zoning Board of Appeals and Plan
Commission; providing for changes and amendments; prescribing penalties for the
violation of its provisions shall be adopted as follows:
Section 1.00 - TITLE
This ordinance shall be known, cited and referred to as the "Dwight Zoning Ordinance."
1-1
/
(
(
(
Section 2.00 - INTENT AND PURPOSE
This ordinance is adopted for the following purposes:
1. To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general
welfare of the people;
2. To divide the Village of Dwight into zones or districts restricting and regulating
there in the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of
buildings, structures and land for residence, business, manufacturing and other
specified uses;
3. To protect the character and the stability of the residential, business and
manufacturing areas within the Village of Dwight and to promote the orderly and
beneficial development of such areas;
4. To provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to property;
5. To regulate the intensity of use of lot areas, and to determine the area of open
spaces surrounding buildings, necessary to provide adequate light and air and to
protect the public health;
6. To establish building lines and the locations of buildings designed for residential,
business and manufacturing, or other uses within such areas;
7. To fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall conform
therein;
8. To prohibit uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the character or
development or intended uses within specified zoning districts;
9. To prevent additions to or alteration or remodeling of existing buildings or
structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations imposed
hereunder;
10. To limit congestion in the public streets and protect the public health, safety,
convenience and general welfare by providing for the off-street parking of motor
vehicles and the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles;
11. To protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards in the interest
of public health, safety, comfort and general welfare;
12. To prevent the over crowding of land and undue concentration of structures, so far
as is possible and appropriate in each district, by regulating the use and bulk of
buildings in relation to the land surrounding them;
2-1
13. To conserve the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the Village of
Dwight;
14. To provide for the gradual elimination of non-conforming uses of land, buildings
and structures which are adversely affecting the character and value of desirable
development in each district;
15. To define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative officers and
bodies as provided herein;
16. To encourage the construction and maintenance of a full range of housing
opportunities so as to enable all persons working within the jurisdiction to reside
therein;
17. And to prescribe the penalties for the violation of the provisions of this ordinance
or any amendments thereto.
2-2
(
(
(
Section 3.00 - RULES AND DEFINITIONS
3.01 RULES
In the construction of this ordinance the rules and definitions contained in this section
shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise:
1. Words used in the present tense shall include the future;
2. Words in the singular number include the plural number, and words in the
plural number include the singular number;
3. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases"arranged for," "designed
for," "intended for," "maintained for," and "occupied for";
4. The word "shall" is mandatory;
5. The word "may" is permissive;
3.02 DEFINITIONS
Abandonment: An action to give up one's rights or interests in property.
Accessory Building or Use: An "accessory building or use" is one which:
1. Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use;
2. Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or
principal use served;
3. Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants of the
principal building or principal use served; and
4. Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or principal use
served with the single exception of such accessory off-street parking
facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same zoning lot
with the building or use served.
An "accessory building or use" includes, but is not limited to, the following:
1. A children's playhouse, garden house and private greenhouse;
2. A shed, detached garage or building for domestic storage;
3. Incinerators incidental to residential use;
3-1
4. Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock on the same lot with any
retail service or business use, unless such storage is excluded by the district
regulations;
5. Storage of goods used in or produced by manufacturing activities on the
same lot or parcel of ground with such activities unless such storage is
excluded by the district regulations;
6. A nonpaying guest home or rooms for guests within an "accessory
building," provided such facilities are used for the occasional housing of
guests of the occupants of the principal building and not for permanent
occupancy by others as housekeeping units;
7. Servant's quarters comprising part of an accessory garage and solely for
occupancy by a servant or household employee (and his or her family) of the
occupants of the principal dwelling;
8. Swimming pool, private, for use by the occupant and his guests;
9. Off-street motor car parking areas, and loading and unloading facilities;
10. Signs (other than advertising signs) as permitted and regulated in each
district incorporated herein;
11. Carports;
12. Public utility facilities - telephone, electric, gas, water and sewer lines, their
supports and incidental equipment.
13. Decks, when they are not attached to the principal structure.
14. Any other body of water in excess of twenty-four (24) inches.
15. Dog pens and/or dog runs.
Acreage: Any tract or parcel ofland having an area of one acre or more which has not
heretofore been subdivided or platted.
Agriculture: All the processes of planting, growing, harvesting of crops in the open and
the raising and feeding of livestock and poultry; including farming, farm buildings and
farm dwellings, truck gardens; flower gardens, dairying, greenhouses and commercial
vegetables.
Airport: Any area of land which is used or intended for use for the landing and taking
off of aircraft, and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended for use for airport
buildings or other airport facilities located thereon.
3-2
(
(
(
Alley: A public way, not more than thirty (30) feet wide, which affords only a secondary
means of access to abutting property.
Alteration, Structural: Any change which would tend to prolong the life of the
supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or
girders.
Animal, Hospital: Any building or portion thereof designed or used for the care,
observation or treatment of domestic animals.
Apartment: A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family structure, which is arranged,
designed, used or intended to be used as a single housekeeping unit. Basic kitchen
facilities, i.e., sink, stove and refrigerator permanently installed must always be included
for each apartment.
Apartment Hotel: See Hotel, Apartment.
Auditorium: A room, hall or building made a part of a church, theater, school,
recreation building or other building assigned to the gathering of people as an audience,
to hear lectures, plays and other presentations.
Automatic Smoke Detector: An approved, listed detector for sensing visible or
invisible particles of combustion and when activated will provide an alarm suitable to
warn occupants of the presence of smoke or other products of combustion, whether
visible or invisible, in a manner and in a timely fashion to avoid and/or facilitate the
escape from smoke and/or fire. All automatic smoke detectors shall be assumed to be
self-activating and automatic. Any smoke detector not in working order including but not
limited to a failure to have installed any adequate power source (being charged batteries
or otherwise) to properly operate such smoke detector, and any smoke detector
inoperative, shall be treated for the purpose of this Ordinance as though such smoke
detector is not on the premises to be served.
Awning: A roof-like cover which projects from the wall of a building or overhangs the
public way.
Banks and Financial Institutions: Commercial banks, currency exchanges, savings and
loan associations, brokerage offices and other similar financial institutions, but not
including loan offices, finance companies and pawn shops.
Base Flood: The flood having a one-percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100 year flood.
Basement: A story partly or wholly underground. Where more than one-half of its
height is above the established curb level or above the average level of the adjoining
ground where the curb level has not been established, a basement shall be counted as a
3-3
story for the purposes of height measurement.
Bedroom: Any room other than a living room, dining room, kitchen, bathroom or utility
room, for the purpose of this ordinance, shall be considered a bedroom.
Billboard: Any structure or portion thereof upon which are signs or advertisements used
as an outdoor display. This definition does not include bulletin boards used to announce
church services or to display court or other public office notices, or signs offering the sale
or lease of the premises on which the sign is located.
Block: A tract of land bounded by streets, or in lieu of a street or streets, by public parks,
cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead lines or shore lines of waterways, or
corporate boundary lines of municipalities.
Boarding House: A building other than a hotel or restaurant where meals are provided
for compensation to three (3), but not more than twelve (12) persons, who are not
members of the keepers' family.
Borrow Pit: Any place or premises where dirt, oil, sand, gravel or other material is
removed by excavation or otherwise below the grade of surrounding land, for any
purpose other than the necessary and incidental to grading or to building construction or
operation on the premises.
Buildable Area: The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum open space
requirements have been complied with.
Building: Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the land and
entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by space or by walls in which
there are no communicating doors, windows or openings; and which is designed or
intended for the shelter, enclosure or protection of persons, animals or chattels.
Any structure with interior areas not normally accessible for human use, such as gas
holders, oil tanks, water tanks, grain elevators, coal bunkers, oil cracking towers and
other similar structures, are not considered as buildings.
Building, Completely Enclosed: A building separated on all sides from the adjacent
open space, or from other buildings or other structures, by a permanent roof and by
exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows and normal entrance or exit doors.
Building, Detached: A building surrounded by open space on the same zoning lot.
Building Height: The vertical distance measured from the sidewalk level or its
equivalent established grade opposite the middle of the front of the building to the highest
elevation of the roof in the case of a slant or flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard roof;
and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge of gable, hip or gambrel roof;
provided that where buildings are set back from the street line, the height of the building
3-4
I
(
(
(
may be measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the
building.
Building Line: The line nearest the front of and across a zoning lot, establishing the
minimum open space to be provided between the front line of a building or structure and
the street right-of-way line.
Building, Non-Conforming: Any building which does not conform to the regulations
herein prescribing the maximum floor area ratio, required yards, coverage, height and
setbacks, minimum required spacing between buildings on a single lot, and minimum
required usable space for the district in which the building is located.
Building Permit: A permit issued by the Building Official of the Village of Dwight for
the construction, alteration, removal or demolition of a building or structure within the
Village of Dwight.
Building, Principal: A non-accessory building in which the principal use of the zoning
lot on which it is located is conducted. A deck which is attached to the principal building
shall be considered a part of the principal building and be required to maintain all of the
required setbacks, etc. relating to construction and additions to principal buildings.
Building Setback Line: A line parallel to the street line at a distance from it, regulated
by the front yard requirements set up herein.
Building, Temporary: Any building not designed to be pe1manently located in the place
where it is or where it is intended to be placed or affixed.
Bulle The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings or structures and
location of same with respect to one another and includes the following:
a. Size and height of buildings;
b. Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines, streets, or
other buildings;
c. All open spaces allocated to the building;
d. Amount of lot area per dwelling unit;
e. Required parking areas.
Bus Lots: Any lot or land area used for the storage or layover of passenger buses or
motor coaches.
Business and Professional Office: The office of an engineer, doctor, dentist, attorney,
real estate broker, insurance broker, architect, or other similar professional person, and
3-5
any office used primarily for accounting, correspondence, research, editing or
administration.
Carport: A roofed-over area attached to the principal building for vehicle storage.
Which may be open on three (3) sides.
Cellar: A story having more than one-half (Y:z) of its height below the curb level or
below the highest level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be counted as a story
for the purpose of height measurement.
Clinic or Medical Health Center: A medical center or, medical clinic is an
establishment where licensed doctors of medicine engage in the practice of medicine,
operating on a group or individual basis, with pooled facilities such as coordinated
laboratory, x-ray and allied departments, for the diagnosis and treatment of humans,
which need not, but may include, a drug prescription counter (not a drug store) for the
dispensing of drugs and pharmaceutical products to the patients of the said organization.
In addition to the above, the medical center or medical clinic may include the space for
the practice of dentistry.
Club or Lodge, Private: A non-profit association of persons who are bona fide
members paying annual dues, which owns, hires or leases a building or portion thereof,
the use of such premises being restricted to members and their guests.
Cluster Subdivision: A land subdivision with a majority of the individual building sites
abutting directly on parks or other common open space.
Conforming Building or Structure: Any building or structure which: (a) complies with
all the regulations of this ordinance or of any amendment thereof governing bulk of the
district in which said building or structure is located; or (b) is designed or intended for a
permitted use or conditioned permitted use, as herein allowed in the district in which it is
located.
Court, Outer: An open, unoccupied space opening onto a street, alley or yard.
Curb Level: The level of the established curb in front of the building measured at the
center of such front. Where a building faces on more than one street, the "curb level"
shall be the average of the levels of the curbs at the center of the front of each street.
Where no curb elevation has been established, the mean level of the land immediately
adjacent to the building shall be considered the "curb level."
Day Care Center: A "day care center" is an institution or place in which are received
three (3) or more children, not of common parentage, apart from their parents or guardian
for part or all of a day, but not later than 9:00 P.M. The term "day care center" includes
but is not limited to the following: nursing schools, child care centers, day nurseries,
kindergartens and play groups, but does not include bona fide kindergartens or nursing
schools operated by public or private elementary or secondary school systems.
3-6
(
(
Decibel: A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound. Sound level meters
which are employed to measure the intensity of sound are calibrated in "decibels."
Development: Any man-made change to real estate, including:
a. Construction, reconstruction, or placement of a building or any addition to
a building;
b. Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180
days;
c. Installing utilities, construction of roads, or similar projects;
d. Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, bridges, or culverts;
e. Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, or other
nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface;
f. Storage of materials; or
g. Any other activity that might change the direction, height, or velocity of
flood or surface waters.
Development does not include maintenance of existing buildings and facilities such as reroofing;
resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that
do not involve filling, grading or construction of levees.
Dish: That part of a satellite signal receiving antenna characteristically shaped like a
saucer or dish.
Dish-Type Satellite Signal-Receiving Antenna: Also refen-ed to as "earth stations" or
"ground stations" shall mean one, or a combination of two or more of the following:
a. A signal-receiving device (antenna, dish antenna, or dish-type antenna),
the purpose of which is to receive communication or other signals from
satellites in earth orbit and other extraten-estrial sources;
b. A low-noise amplifier (LNA) which is situated at the focal point of the
receiving component and the purpose of which is to magnify, store,
transfer and/or transmit electronic or light signals;
c. A coaxial cable the purpose of which is to can-y or transmit said signals to
a receiver.
3-7
District: The area into which the Village of Dwight has been divided for which uniform
regulations governing the use, size and intensity of land and buildings, and open space
about buildings is established.
Driveway: A private road connecting a house, garage, or other building with the street.
Dwelling: A building or portion thereof, but not including house trailer or.mobile home,
designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, including one (1) family dwelling
units, two (2) family dwelling units, and multiple family dwelling units, but not including
hotels, motels, boarding or lodging houses.
Dwelling Unit: One (1) or more rooms in a residential structure which are arranged,
designed, used or intended to be used by one family, plus not more than four ( 4) lodgers,
for living or sleeping purposes, and which include complete kitchen facilities
permanently installed.
Dwelling, Attached: A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or more
sides by a party wall or walls.
Dwelling, Detached: A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space and is not
connected to any other dwelling unit by roof, walls or porches on the same lot.
Dwelling, Semi-Detached: A dwelling joined to one other dwelling by a party wall or
vertical cavity wall, and above ground physically unifying horizontal structural elements.
Dwelling, One-Family: A dwelling unit designed exclusively for use and occupancy by
one (1) family.
Dwelling, Two-Family: A building designed or altered to provide dwelling units for
occupancy by two (2) families.
Dwelling, Multiple-Family: A building or portion thereof, designed or altered for
occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of each other.
Dwelling, Rental Unit: One or more rooms in a residential structure, including a private
residence, commercial apartments, duplexes, hotels and/or motels for which rent is
received by the owner thereof either on a daily, weekly, monthly, or other basis, and
which may or may not include a complete kitchen facility permanently install~d.
Dwelling, Row (Party Wall): A row of two (2) to eight (8) attached one-family, party
wall dwellings, not more than two and one-half (22) stories in height nor more than two
(2) rooms in depth, measured from the building line.
Dwelling Group: Two (2) or more one-family, two (2) family or multiple-family
dwellings or boarding or lodging houses, located on one (1) zoning lot, but not including
tourist courts or motels.
3-8
(
(
(
Educational Institution: Public, parochial, charitable or non-profit junior college,
college or university, other than trade or business schools, including instructional and
recreational uses, with or without living quarters, dining rooms, restaurants, heating
plants, and other incidental facilities for students, teachers and employees.
Efficiency Unit: A dwelling unit consisting of one (1) principal room for living,
sleeping and eating, plus facilities for cooking and complete bath and toilet facilities.
Family: One (1) or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a group of
not more than five (5) persons (excluding servants) who need not be related by blood,
marriage or adoption, living together and maintaining a common household but not
including sororities, fraternities or other similar organizations.
Fence: A structure which is a barrier and is used as a boundary or means of protection or
confinement.
Flood: A general and temporary condition of inundation of normally dry land areas from
the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from
any source.
Flood Protection Elevation (FPE): The elevation of the base flood plus one foot at any
given location in the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
Floodway: That portion of SFHA required to store and convey the base flood. The
floodway for SFHA's in the Village shall be according to the best data available to the
Illinois State Water Survey Floodplain Information Repository.
Floor, Gross Area (For the Purpose of Determining Requirements for Off-Street
Parking and Off-Street Loading): The floor area shall mean the sum of the gross
horizontal area of the several floors of the building or portion thereof, devoted to such
use, including accessory storage areas located within selling or working space, such as
counters, racks or closets, and any basement floor area devoted to retailing activities, to
the production or processing of goods or to business or professional offices.
However, floor area for the purpose of measurement of off-street parking spaces shall not
include floor area devoted primarily for storage purposes. The following areas shall not
be included for the purpose of measurement of off-street parking spaces:
a. Floor area devoted to off-street parking or loading facilities, including
aisles, ramps and maneuvering space;
b. Basement floor area other than area devoted to retailing or service
activities, of the production or processing of goods, or to business or
professional offices.
3-9
Flood Plain: The areas adjoining a watercourse which have been or hereafter may be
covered by the regional flood.
Freeway: A major highway having no intersections at grade and having fully controlled
access, hence "free" from conflicts and interruptions.
Frequency: The number of oscillations per second in a sound wave measuring the pitch
of the resulting sound.
Frontage: All the property fronting on one side of a street between the nearest
intersecting streets or between a street and a right-of-way, waterways or other similar
barrier.
Garage, Private: Any accessory building or an accessory portion of the principal
building which is intended for and used to store the private passenger vehicles of the
family or families resident on the premises, and in which no business, service or industry
connected directly or indirectly with the automotive vehicles is carried on; provided that
not more than one-half (2) of the space may be rented for the private vehicles of persons
not resident on the premises, except that all the space in a garage of one ( 1) or two (2) car
capacity may be so rented. Such a garage shall not be used for more than two (2)
commercial vehicles and the load capacity of such vehicles shall not exceed two and
one-half (2Yz) tons.
Garage, Public: A building other than a private garage, used for the care, incidental
servicing and sale of motor vehicle supplies, or where motor vehicles are parked or stored
for remuneration hire or sale within the structure.
Golf Course: Public, semi-public, or private grounds over which the game of golf is
played, including accessory buildings and land uses incidental thereto, and consisting of
. at least fifty (50) acres for each Standard nine (9) hole course, and twenty-five (25) acres
for each nine (9) hole "par 3" course.
Grade, Street: The elevation of the established street in front of the building measured
at the center of such front. Where no street grade has been established, the Village
Engineer shall establish such street grade or its equivalent for the purposes of this section.
Ground Floor Area: The lot area covered by a principal building measured at grade
from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, but excluding open porches or terraces,
garages or carports.
Grounding Rod: A metal pole permanently positioned in the earth to serve as an
electrical conductor through which electrical current may safely pass and dissipate.
Guest House: Living quarters within a detached accessory building located on the same
premises with the principal building for use by temporary guests of the occupants of the
premises. Such quarters shall have no kitchen facilities nor be rented or other-wise used
3-10
(
(
(
\
(
as a separate dwelling.
Home Occupation: See Subsection 4.08.
Hospital or Sanitarium: An institution devoted primarily to the maintenance and
operation of facilities for the diagnosis, treatment or care for not less than twenty-four
(24) hours in any week of three (3) or more non-related individuals suffering from illness,
disease, injury, deformity or other abnormal physical conditions.
Hotel, Apartment: A hotel in which at least ninety percent (90%) of the hotel
accommodations are for occupancy by the permanent guests. An apartment hotel having
not less than fifty (50) guest rooms may have a dining room open to the public which is
accessible only from an inner lobby or corridor.
Hotel, Motel, Inn or Auto Court: An establishment containing lodging
accommodations, designed for use by transients, or travelers or temporary guests. ·
Facilities provided may include maid service, laundering of linen used on the premises,
telephone and secretarial or desk service, meeting rooms, and restaurants.
Junkyard: An open area where waste, scrap metal, paper, rags, or similar materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including auto
and building wrecking yards, but excluding similar uses taking place entirely within a
completely enclosed building.
Kennel, Commercial: Any lot or premises or portion thereof on which more than four
( 4) dogs, cats or other household domestic animals over four ( 4) months of age, are kept,
or on which more than two (2) such animals are boarded for compensation or kept for
sale.
Laboratory, Commercial: A place devoted to experimental study such as testing and
analyzing. Manufacturing, assembly or packaging of products is not included within this
definition.
Launderette: A business that provides coin operated self-service type washing, drying,
dry-cleaning, and ironing facilities, providing that: (a) not more than four (4) persons,
including owners, are employed on the premises; and (b) no pick-up or delivery service is
maintained.
Loading and Unloading Space or Berth, (Off-Street): An open, hard-surfaced area of
land, other than a street or a public way, the principal use of which is for the standing,
loading and unloading of motor vehicles, tractors and trailers, to avoid undue interference
with public streets and alleys. Such space shall not be less than ten (10) feet in width,
twenty-five (25) feet in length, and fourteen (14) feet in height, exclusive of access aisles
and maneuvering space.
Lodging or Rooming House: A building with not more than five (5) guest rooms where
3-11
lodging is provided for compensation pursuant to previous arrangement, but not open on
a daily, overnight or per meal basis to transient guests.
Lot: Parcel ofland legally described as a distinct portion or piece ofland ofrecord.
Lot Area: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by vertical planes containing the
front, side and rear lot lines.
Lot of Record: An area designated as a lot on a plat of subdivision, recorded or
registered pursuant to statute.
Lot, Corner: A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two (2) or more
intersecting streets; or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a single street, the
interior angle of which is one hundred and thirty degrees (130°) or less.
Lot Coverage: The area of a zoning lot occupied by the principal building or buildings
and accessory buildings.
Lot Depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines of a lot
measured within the lot boundaries.
Lot Frontage: The front of a lot shall be that boundary of a lot along a public street; for
a corner lot the owner may elect either street line as the front lot line.
Lot Line: A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate ownership
except that where any portion of the lot extends to the abutting street or alley, the lot line
shall be deemed to be the street or alley line.
Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner or reversed corner lot.
Lot Line, Front: The front property line of a zoning lot.
Lot Line, Interior: A side lot line common with another lot.
Lot Line, Rear: The lot line or lot lines most nearly parallel to and most remote from
the front lot lines.
Lot Lines, Side: Lot lines other than front or rear lot lines are side lot lines.
Lot, Reversed Corner: A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the side of another
lot, whether across an alley or not.
Lot Through: A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel
streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot both street lines shall be deemed
front lot lines.
3-12
(
(
(
Lot Width: The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured within the
boundaries, or the minimum distance between the side lot lines within the buildable area.
Manufacture: The production, making or processing of products or commodities for
general consumption of the public or for sale to specialized institutions or organizations.
Also included in the subassembly, lubrication, or processing of parts or components for
use in other products or commodities.
Marquee or Canopy: A roof-like structure of a permanent nature which projects from
the wall of a building and may overhang the public way, and is designed and intended to
protect pedestrians from adverse weather conditions.
Mobile Homes: Any trailer, as defined herein, used for residential purposes, but not
including sports or camping trailers and which carries with it a title for the structure.
Mobile Home Camp or Parle Any premises occupied or designed to accommodate one
(1) or more families living in a mobile home.
Motel: See Hotel.
Motor Freight Terminal: A building in which freight, brought to said building by
motor trucks, is assembled and sorted for routing in either intrastate or interstate shipment
by motor truck.
Motor Vehicle Laundry: A building or portion thereof containing facilities for washing
motor vehicles using production-line methods with a chain conveyor, blower, steam
cleaning device or other mechanical devices, including self-service devices.
Motor Vehicle Service Station: A place where gasoline, stored only in underground
tanks, kerosene, lubricating oil or grease, for operation of motor vehicles, are offered for
sale directly to the public, on the premises, and including minor accessories and the
servicing of motor vehicles, possibly including major motor vehicle repairs; and
including the washing of motor vehicles where no chain conveyor, blower or steam
cleaning device is employed. When the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor
fuels or oils is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises shall be
classified as a public garage. Motor vehicle service stations shall not include sale or
storage of motor vehicles or trailers (new or used.)
Motor Vehicle and Trailer Sales Area: An open area, other than a street, used for the
display or sale of new or used motor vehicles or trailers, and where repair work may be
performed on the premises.
Motor Vehicle Wrecking Yard: Any place where three (3) or more motor vehicles, not
in running condition, or parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being restored to
operation, or any land, building or structure used for wrecking or storing of such motor
vehicles or parts thereof, and including the commercial salvaging of any other goods,
3-13
articles or merchandise.
Nameplate: A sign indicating the name and address of a building or the name of an
occupant thereof and the practice of a permitted occupation therein.
Net Site Area: The area of a zoning lot, parcel or tract, excluding boundary rights of
way.
Non-Conforming Building or Structure: Any building or structure lawfully
established which: (a) does not comply with all the regulations of this ordinance or of
any amendment hereto governing bulk of the district in which such building or structure
is located; or (b) is designed or intended for a non-conforming use.
Non-Conforming Use: Any building, structure or land lawfully occupied by a use or
lawfully established at the time of the adoption of this ordinance or amendments thereto,
which does not conform after the passage of this ordinance or amendments thereto with
the use regulations of this ordinance.
Noxious Matter: Material which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by
chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effects upon the psychological,
social or economic well-being of humans.
Nursing Home or Rec Home: A commercial establishment for the care of children or
the aged or infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, but not
including facilities for the treatment of sickness or injuries for surgical care.
Occupancy Certificate: A certificate issued by the Building Inspector stating the
occupancy and use of land or a building or structure referred to therein which complies
with the provisions of this ordinance.
Octave Band: A means of dividing the range of sound frequencies into octaves in order
to classify sound according to pitch.
Octave Band Filter: An electrical frequency analyzer, designed according to standards
formulated by the American Standards Association and used in conjunction with a sound
level meter to take measurements in specific octave intervals (American Standard for
Sound Level Meters, A.S.A. No. 244,3-1 944).
Open Sales Lot: A lot or parcel of land used or occupied for the purpose of buying,
selling, or trading of all goods and commodities and including the storage of same prior
to sale or exchange.
Ordinance: Reference to "ordinance" shall be construed as the Dwight Zoning
Ordinance.
Parking Area, Private: An open, hard-surfaced area, other than a street or public way,
3-14
(
(
(
designed, arranged and made available for the storage of private passenger motor
vehicles only for occupants of the building or buildings for which the parking area is
developed and is accessory.
Parking Area, Public: An open, hard-surfaced area, other than a street or public way,
intended to be used for the storage of passenger motor vehicles and commercial vehicles
under one and one-half (1 Y,) tons capacity, and available to the public, whether for
compensation, free or as an accommodation to clients or customers.
Parking Space, Motor vehicle: Space within a public or private parking area of not less
than one hundred and eighty (180) square feet nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet),
exclusive of access drives, aisles, ramps, columns or office and work areas, for the
storage of one (1) passenger automobile or commercial vehicle under one and one-half
(I Y,) tons capacity.
Particulate Matter: Material which is suspended in or discharged into the atmosphere
in finely divided form as liquid or solid at atmospheric pressure and temperature.
Performance Standard: A criterion to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic or noxious
matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or heat generated by or inherent in
uses ofland or buildings.
Plan Commission: The Plan Commission of the Village of Dwight, as constituted by
ordinance.
Planned Unit Development (PUD): A parcel or tract ofland having an area as herein
required in district regulations, which is planned as a whole for development, initially
under unified ownership or control, and which is or is intended to be the site for two (2)
or more principal buildings or one (1) or more principal building for two (2) or more
principal uses and within which allowable exceptions in the district regulations are
specified. The minimum area for a Planned Unit Development shall be: (a) for
residential - four (4) acres; (b) for business - five (5) acres; (c) for industrial - ten (10)
acres; and ( d) for permanent - two (2) acres.
Porch: A roofed-over structure, projecting out from the wall or walls of a main structure
and commonly open to the weather in patt.
Principal Use: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or
accessory use.
Public Open Space: Any publicly-owned open area, including but not limited to the
following: Parks, playgrounds, forest preserves, beaches, waterways, parkways and
streets.
Public Utility: Any person, firm, corporation or municipal department, duly authorized
to furnish under public regulation to the public, electricity, gas, steam, telephone,
3-15
transportation or water.
Railroad Rights-of-Way: A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities for track
operation, but not including depot loading platforms, stations, train sheds, warehouses,
car shops, car yards, locomotive shops, water towers, etc.
Receiver: A television set or radio receivers.
Reservoir Parking Spaces: Those off-street parking spaces allocated for temporary
standing of motor vehicles awaiting entrance into a particular establishment.
Restaurant: Any land, building or part thereof, other than a boarding house, where
meals are provided for compensation, including a cafe, cafeteria, coffee shop, lunch
room, drive-in stand, tearoom and dining room, and including the serving of alcoholic
beverages when served with and incidental to the serving of meals.
Ringelmann Number: The number of the area on the Ringelmann Chart that coincides
most nearly with the visual density of smoke emission.
Riverine Special Flood Hazard Area: Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river,
creek, intermittent stream, ditch, or any other identified channel. This term does not
include areas subject to flooding from lakes, ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other
areas not subject to overbank flooding.
Sign, Awning: Any sign affixed directly on or attached to an awning.
Sign, Canopy: Any sign mounted on or supported by a canopy.
Sign, Ground: Any sign supported by one or more uprights or braces placed upon or set
into the ground.
Sign, Identification: A struct1,1re, building wall or other outdoor surface used to display
and identify the name of the individual, business, profession, organization or institution
occupying the premises upon which it is located.
Sign, Illuminated: Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs, or outline
illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a part of the sign proper.
Sign, Marquee: Any sign mounted on or supported by a marquee.
Sign, Off Premises: Signs not located at the site of that which is advertised or identified.
Sign, On Premises: Signs located at the site of that which is advertised or identified.
Sign, Projecting: Any sign other than a wall sign which is attached to a building and
extends beyond the line of said building.
3-16
(
(
(
Sign, Roof: Any sign effected, constructed and maintained wholly upon or over the roof
of any building.
Sign, Temporary and/or Portable: Any sign, banner, pennant, valance, to be displayed
for a limited time only or any sign set upon the ground unsecured. A portable sign shall
be defined as any sign set upon or affixed to any device or ground with wheels or skids or
framing so as to afford portability by persons or auxiliary devices.
Sign, Wall: A sign, impressed or painted on, or attached to a wall with the exposed face
of the sign in a plane approximately parallel to the plane of the wall.
Smoke Units: The number obtained by multiplying the smoke density in Ringelmann
numbers by the time of emission in minutes. For the purpose of this chart, Ringelmann
density reading is made at least once every minute during the period of observation; each
reading is then multiplied by the time in minutes during which it is observed; and the
various products and added together to give the total number of "smoke units" observed
during the total period under observation.
Sonnd Level Meter: An instrument standardized by the American Standards
Association for measurement of intensity of sound.
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA): Those lands within the jurisdiction of the Village
which are subject to inundation by the base flood. The SFHAs of the Village are
generally identified as such on the Flood Hazard boundary Map of the Village prepared
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The SFHAs of those parts of
unincorporated Livingston and Grundy Counties that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the Village or that may be annexed into the Village are generally identified
as such on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map prepared for Grundy County and Livingston
County by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Story: That portion of a building included between the Surface of any floor and the
surface of the floor above it, or if there is no floor above, then the space between the floor
and the
ceiling next above it. Any portion of a story exceeding fourteen (14) feet in height shall
be considered as an additional story for each fourteen (14) feet or fraction thereof.
Story, Half: A half (12) story is that portion of a building under a gable, hip or mansard
roof, the wall plates of which on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls are not more than
four and one-half ( 412) feet above the finished floor of each story. In the case of onefamily
dwellings, two-family dwellings and multiple-family dwellings less than three (3)
stories in height, a half (12) story in a sloping room shall not be counted as a story.
Stacking Requirements: For the purposes herein, stacking requirements are the number
of cars that must be accommodated in a reservoir space while awaiting ingress or egress
to specified business or service establishments.
3-17
Streets: A public way other than an alley, which affords a primary means of access to
abutting property.
Street Frontage: All of the property fronting on one side of a street between two (2)
intersecting streets, or in the case of a dead-end street, all of the property along one (1)
side of the street between an intersecting street and the end of such dead-end street.
Street Line: A line separating a lot, piece or parcel ofland from a street.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or is
attached to something having location on the ground, including a fence or free-standing
wall. A sign, billboard or other advertising medium, detached or projecting, shall be
construed to be a structure.
Structural Alterations: See Alterations, Structural.
Swimming Club, Private (Commercial): A private club operated for profit,
maintaining and operating a swimming pool and apparatus and equipment pertaining to
the swimming pool, with specified limitations upon the number of members, for the
exclusive use of members and their guests.
Swimming Club, Private (Non-Profit): A private club incorporated as a non-profit club
or organization, maintaining and operating a swimming pool, with specified limitations (
upon the number of members, or limited to residents of a block, subdivision,
neighborhood, community or other specified area of residence, for the exclusive use of
members and their guests.
Swimming Pool, Commercial: A swimming pool and the apparatus and equipment
pertaining to the swimming pool, operated for profit, open to the public upon payment of
an hourly, daily, weekly, monthly, annual or other fee.
Swimming Pool, Private: A swimming pool and the apparatus and equipment
pertaining to the swimming pool maintained by an individual for the sole use of his
household and guests without charge for admission and not for the purpose of profit or in
connection with any business operated for profit, located on a lot as an accessory use to a
residence.
Swimming Pool, Public: A swimming pool and the apparatus and equipment pertaining
to the swimming pool, maintained and operated by a municipality or other units of
government for the general public, whether or not an admission fee is charged.
Tavern or Lounge: A building where liquors are sold to be consumed on the premises
but not including restaurants where the principal business is serving food.
Thoroughfare: A primary, secondary or collector street as designated in the
3-18
(
(
(
Comprehensive Plan for Dwight.
Tourist Home: A dwelling in which accommodations are provided or offered for
transient guests.
Toxic Materials: A substance (liquid, solid or gaseous) which, by reason of an inherent
deleterious property, tends to destroy life or impair health.
Trailer: A vehicle with or without motive power used or adaptable for living, sleeping,
business or storage purposes, having no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids,
jacks, horses or skirting, which does not meet the building code requirements and has
been or reasonably may be equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting the
structure from place to place. A permanent foundation shall not change its character nor
shall the erecting of additions to said trailer unless the trailer itself and any additions
thereto conform to all Village laws.
Trailer Sales Area: An open area, other than a street used for the display or sale of new
or used trailers, and where no repair work is done except for minor incidental repair of
trailers to be displayed and sold on the premises.
Trailer, Sports or Camping: A trailer designed for camping or other recreational
purposes.
Truck Parldng Area or Yard: Any land used or intended to be used for the storage,
parking of trucks, trailers, tractors and including commercial vehicles while not loading
or unloading, which exceed one and one-half (1 Yz) tons in capacity. .
Use: The purpose or activity for which the land, buildings and structures thereon, is
designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, and shall
include any manner of performance of such activity with respect to the performance
standards of this ordinance.
Use, Lawful: The use of any building, structure, or land that conforms with all of the
regulations of this ordinance or any amendment hereto and which conforms with all of
the codes, ordinances, and other legal requirements, as existing at the time of the
enactment of this ordinance or any amendment thereto, for the structure or land that is
being considered.
Use, Permitted: Any use which is or may be lawfully established in a particular district
or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations, and when applicable,
performance standards of this ordinance for the district in which such use is located.
Used Car Lot: A zoning lot on which used or new cars, trailers or trucks are displayed
in the open for sale or trade.
Variance: A variance is a relaxation of the terms of the zoning ordinance where such
3-19
variances will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions
peculiar to the property and not the results of the actions of the applicant, a literal
enforcement of this ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As used
in this ordinance, a variance is authorized only for height, area, and size of structure or
size of yards and open spaces. Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited
shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence
of non-conformities in the zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning district.
Yard: An open space on the same zoning lot with a principal building or of buildings,
which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level upward, except as otherwise
pe1mitted herein, and which extends along a lot line and at right angles thereto to a depth
or width specified in the yard regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is
located.
Yard, Front: A yard extending along the full length of the front lot line between side lot
lines.
Yard, Rear: A yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line between side lot
lines.
Yard, Side: A yard extending along a side lot line from the front yard to the rear yard.
Zoning Administrator: Whenever the term "Zoning Administrator" is used, it shall
mean the Zoning Administrator appointed by the President and Village Board and such
deputies or assistants as have been or shall be duly appointed. That officer is hereby
authorized and it is his duty to administer and enforce the provisions of the zoning
ordinance, making such determinations, interpretations and orders as are necessary
therefore, and requiring such plats, plans and other descriptive material in connection
with applications for permits as are necessary for him to judge compliance with this
ordinance.
Zoning Board: The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of Dwight, Illinois
Zoning Lot: A single tract of land within a single block which (at the time of filing for a
building permit) is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed
or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. Therefore, a zoning lot may or
may not coincide with a lot of record.
Zoning Map: The map incorporated herein as a part hereat: designating zoning districts.
3-20
(
( SECTION 4.00 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
(
(
4.01 INTERPRETATION
1. Minimum Requirements. The provisions herein shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of public health, safety, morals
and welfare.
2. Relationship with Other Laws. Where the conditions imposed by any
. provision herein upon the use of land or buildings or upon the bulk of
buildings are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable
conditions imposed by any other provision herein, or any other law,
ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which
are more restrictive (or which impose higher standards or requirements)
shall govern.
3. Effect of Existing Agreements. This ordinance is not intended to abrogate
any easement, covenant, or another private agreement provided that where
the regulations of this ordinance are more restrictive (or impose higher
standards or requirement) than such easements, covenants or other private
agreements, the requirements herein shall govern.
4.02 SEP ARABILITY
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Village of Dwight that the several
provisions of this ordinance are separable, in accordance with the following:
1. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this
ordinance to be invalid, such judgement shall not affect any other structure,
such judgement shall not affect any other provisions not specifically
included in said judgement.
2. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application
of any provision of this ordinance to a particular property, building or other
structure, such judgement shall not affect the application of said provisions
to any other property, building or structure not specifically included in said
judgement.
4.03 REPEAL
Ordinance No. 674 passed in 1977 relating to the zoning of land is hereby repealed and
all other ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Village of Dwight unconstitutional or
conflicting with this ordinance, to the extent of the inconsistency only, are hereby
repealed.
4-1
4.04 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS
1. Change in Structures or Use. Except as may otherwise be provided, all
buildings erected hereafter, all uses ofland or buildings established
hereafter, all structural alterations or relocation of existing buildings
occurring hereafter, and all enlargements of or additions to existing uses
occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations herein which are
applicable to the zoning districts in which such buildings, uses or land shall
be located.
2. Non-Conforming Buildings, Structures and Uses. Any lawful building,
structure or use existing at the time of the enactment of this zoning
ordinance may be continued, even though such building, structure or use
does not conform to the provisions herein for the district in which it is
located, and whenever a district shall be changed hereafter, the then existing
lawful use may be continued, subject to the provisions in Section 5.00.
3. Building Permits. Where a building permit for a building or structure has
been issued in accordance with law prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, and provided that construction is begun within one (1) year of
such effective date and diligently prosecuted to completion, said building or
structure may be completed in accordance with the approved plans on the
basis of which the building permit was issued, and further may upon
completion be occupied under a certificate of occupancy by the use for
which originally designated - subject thereafter to the provisions of Section
5.00.
4.05 USE AND BULK REGULATIONS
1. Use. No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and
no building or part thereof, or other structure shall be erected, raised,
moved, re-constructed, extended, enlarged or altered except in conformity
with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
2. Bulk. All new buildings and structures shall conform to the building
regulations established herein for the district in which each building shall be
located, except that parapet walls, chimneys, cooling towers, elevator
bulkheads, fire towers, stacks and necessary mechanical appurtenances shall
be permitted to exceed the maximum height provisions when erected in
accordance with all other ordinances of the Village of Dwight.
4-2
(
(
(
4.06 LOT COVERAGE
1. Maintenance of Yards, Courts and other open spaces. The maintenance of
yards, courts and other open spaces and minimum lot area legally required
for a building shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of such
building or of the property on which it is located, as long as the building is
in existence. Furthermore, no legally required yards, courts or other open
space, or minimum lot area allocated to any building, shall by virtue of
change of ownership or for any other reason, be used to satisfy yard, court,
other open space or minimum lot area requirements for any other building.
2. Division of Zoning Lots. No improved zoning lot shall hereafter be divided
into two or more zoning lots unless all improved zoning lots resulting from
each such division shall conform with all the applicable bullc regulations of
the zoning district in which the property is located.
3. Location of Required Open Space. All yards, courts and other open spaces
allocated to a building or dwelling group shall be located on the same
zoning lot as such building or dwelling group.
4. Required Yards for Existing Buildings. No yards now or hereafter provided
for a building existing on the effective date of this ordinance shall
subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced below if already less than
the minimum yard requirements of this ordinance for equivalent new
construction.
5. Permitted Obstructions in Required Yards. The following shall not be
considered to be obstructions when located in the required yards as
specified:
a. In All Yards:
(1) Open terraces not Over four (4) feet above the average level of the
adjoining ground, but not including permanently roofed over terrace
or porch;
(2) Awnings and canopies, but not projecting more than three (3) feet,
and at least seven (7) feet above the average level of the adjoining
ground;
(3) Steps, four ( 4) feet or less above grade, which are necessary for
access to a permitted building or for access to a zoning lot from a
street or alley;
(4) Chimneys projecting two (2) feet or less into the yard;
( 5) Arbors, trellises, flag poles, fountains, sculptures, plant boxes and
4-3
other similar ornamental objects;
(6) Fences, as provided for in Section 14.00 of this ordinance.
(7) Flowers, landscaping, trees, shrubs and gardens.
b. In Front yards. One-story bay windows projecting three (3) feet or less
into the yards; and over hanging eaves and gutters projecting three (3)
feet or less into the yard;
c. In Rear Yards. Enclosed, attached or detached on-street parking spaces,
open off-street parking spaces, accessory shed, tool rooms and similar
buildings or structures for domestic or agricultural storage; balconies,
breezeways and open porches; one-story bay windows projecting three
(3) feet or less into the yard. In any residential district, no accessory
building shall be nearer than five ( 5) feet to the side lot line, nor nearer
than five (5) feet to the rear lot line, nor nearer than ten (10) feet to any
principal building unattached.
d. In Side Yards. Over hanging eaves and gutters projecting into the yard
for a distance not exceeding forty percent ( 40%) of the required yard
width, but in no case exceeding two (2) feet.
e. Nonobstructions in Required Yards. Except as herein before set forth in
Section 4.06, 5. a.b.c.d. above, any obstruction that does not otherwise
violate any provision of this ordinance may be placed in any yard
subject to the following restrictions:
(1) When located in a side yard, the obstruction may not be located in a
required side yard.
(2) When located in a rear yard, the obstruction may be placed no nearer
than five (5) feet from the rear lot line but not in any required side
yard.
(3) When located in a front yard, the obstruction may be placed no
nearer than twenty (20) feet from the front lot line but not in any
required side yard.
6. Vision Clearance -- Comer Lots. No building or structure erected and no
planting or other obstruction to the vision of drivers of motor vehicles shall
be located:
a. I.n any residential district, exceeding a height of three (3) feet above the
street grade within twenty-five (25) feet of the intersecting street lines
bordering corner lots; and
4-4
(
b. In any Manufacturing district, within twelve (12) feet of the intersecting
street lines bordering a corner lot, provided that this regulation shall not
apply to that part of a building above the first floor.
c. All trees with overhanging branches located in any residential,
commercial or industrial district shall be not less than six ( 6) feet above
the centerline of the street.
7. Exceptions for Existing Developments
a. Where forty percent ( 40%) or more of the frontage on one side of a
street between two (2) intersecting streets is developed with buildings
that have observed (within a variation of five (5) feet or less) a front
yard greater in depth than required herein, new buildings shall not be
erected closer to the street than the average front yard so established by
the existing building.
b. Where forty percent ( 40%) or more of the frontage on one side of a
street between two (2) intersecting streets is developed with buildings
that have not observed a front yard as herein required then:
( 1) Where a building is to be erected within one hundred ( 100) feet of
existing building on both sides, the minimum front yard shall be a
line drawn between the contiguous front corners of the two (2)
existing buildings.
(2) Where a building is to be erected within one hundred (100) feet of an
existing building on one (1) side only, it may be erected as close to
the street as the existing building.
4.07 LOT AREA AND DIMENSION
1. Contiguous Parcels. When two or more parcels of land, each of which lacks
adequate area and dimension to qualify for a permitted use under the
requirements of the use district in which they are located, are contiguous and
are held in one ownership, they shall be used as one zoning lot for such use.
2. Lots or Parcels of Land of Record. Any single lot or parcel ofland, held in
one (1) ownership which was ofrecord at the time of adoption of this
ordinance, that does not meet the requirements for minimum lot width and
area, may be utilized for a permitted use, provided that yards, courts or
usable open spaces are not less than seventy-five percent (75%) of the
minimum required dimensions of areas.
4-5
4.08 HOME OCCUPATIONS
In all Residence Districts, an occupation operated for profit shall be permitted
provided that:
1. It is conducted entirely within the dwelling and not more than one accessory
building by a member of the family residing in the dwelling and when such
home occupation is incidental and secondary to the dwelling for dwelling
purposes;
2. There is no display or activity that will indicate from the exterior of the
dwelling that it is being used in whole or in part for any use other than a
dwelling as stipulated in Section 12.00 - Signs;
3. No product assembled or made on the premises shall be offered for sale on a
retail basis in any dwelling unit;
4. A home occupation conducted by a professional person may be for the
consultation, instruction or performance of religious rites for the general
practice of the profession and assistance needed in order to practice said
profession; and
5. Teaching of musical instruments, arts and crafts, dancing and shall be
conducted only in a single family detached dwelling and then, to not more
than four (4) pupils at one (1) time.
4.09 ACCESS TO PUBLIC STREETS
Except as otherwise provided for herein, every building shall be constructed or
erected upon a lot or parcel of land which abuts upon a public street unless a
permanent easement of access to a public street was of record prior to the
adoption of this ordinance.
4.10 NUMBER OF BUILDINGS ON A ZONING LOT
Except in the case of a planned unit development, not more than one ( 1) principal
detached residential building shall be located on a residential lot within an R-1 or
an R-2 Zoning District, nor shall a principal detached residential building be
located on the same zoning lot with any other principal building in an R-1 or an
R-2 Zoning District
4.11 REZONING OF PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC AREAS
An area indicated on the zoning map as a public park, recreation area, public
4-6
(
(
school site, cemetery, or other similar open space, shall not be used for any other
purpose than that designated, and when the use of the area is discontinued, it shall
automatically be zoned to the most restricted adjoining district until appropriate
zoning is authorized by the Village Board of Trustees within three (3) months
after the day of application filed for rezoning.
4.12 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS OR USES
1. Location. When a side yard is required, no part of an accessory building or
use shall be located or permitted closer than five feet (5 ')to the side lot line
along such side yard. Further, such accessory building or use shall not be
located or permitted in any side or front yard.
2. Time of Construction. An accessory building or structure may be
constructed on any lot prior to the start of construction of the principal
building to which it is accessory provided that the construction of the
principal building is completed within one year of the issuance of the
building permit for the accessory building or structure.
3. Percentage of Required Rear Yard Occupied. No accessory building or
buildings shall occupy more than forty percent ( 40%) of the area of a
required rear yard.
4. Height of Accessory Buildings in Required Rear Yards. No accessory
building or portion thereof located in a required rear yard shall exceed
fifteen (15) feet in height or seventy-five (75%) of the height of the principal
building, whichever is greater.
5. On Reversed Corner Lots. On a reversed corner lot in a residential district,
no accessory building or portion thereof located in a required rear yard shall
be closer to the side lot line abutting the street than the required front yard
on the adjacent lot to the rear. Further, in the above instance, no such
accessory building shall be located within five (5) feet of any part of a rear
lot line which coincides with a side lot line or portion thereof of property in
a residential district.
4.13 TEMPORARY BUILDINGS
1. A temporary real estate office may be allowed in conjunction with a new
housing development, limited to the selling or renting of new units in such
development, but in no case to be in operation for more than one year
following completion of construction of said housing development.
2. Temporary buildings for construction purposes may be allowed in any
district for a period not to exceed the completion date of such construction.
4-7
4.14 EXISTING SPECIAL USES
Where a use is classified as a special use and exists as a permitted use at the date
of the adoption of this ordinance, it shall be considered a legal use, without further
action of the Village Board of Trustees, the Zoning Administrator, the Board of
Appeals, or the Plan Commission.
4.15 USES NOT SPECIFICALLY PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS
When a use is not specifically listed in the actions devoted to Permitted Uses, it
shall be assumed that such uses are hereby expressly prohibited unless by a
written decision of the Plan Commission it is determined that said use is similar to
and not more objectionable than uses listed. Such uses may then be permitted.
*4.16 REGULATION OF DISH-TYPE SATELLITE SIGNAL-RECEIVING
ANTENNAS (Rev. 04/13/2015)
1. Dish Antennas (Earth Stations). Satellite dish antennas in excess of thirty-six
inches (36") shall be allowed to be constructed only in rear yards or in
interior side yards and a permit shall be necessary for their construction as an
accessory use, which use shall conform to all requirements as stated in this
Section.
2. Other Television or Radio Towers or Antennas. Other radio or television
towers or antennas as accessory uses shall not have an antenna height
exceeding fifty-five feet (55'), shall not be more than three feet (3') from the
principal building, and shall not be so positioned as to be a hazard to any
utility line.
4.17 SMOKE DETECTORS
1. Installation. In each residential, business, industrial or other district
described in this ordinance, at least one smoke detector shall be located on
each floor of each rental dwelling unit.
2. Enforcement. Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or resists the enforcement of any
of the provisions of this section related to the installation of smoke detectors
shall upon conviction be fined fifty dollars ($50) per smoke detector not
installed pursuant to the specifications of this ordinance, with each ten (10)
days that the violation is permitted to exist after the first such violation
constituting a separate offense.
4-8
.(
(
(
Prior to any occupancy permit being issued in any structure wherein smoke
detectors are required by this section, the Building Inspector shall not issue any
such occupancy permit until the provisions with respect to this section have been
complied with.
The Building Inspector is hereby authorized to make reasonable inspections of
any building or other premises from time to time wherein smoke detectors are
required pursuant to this section for the purposes of enforcement hereof.
4.18 HEIGHTH OF FINAL GRADE
1. The final yard grade shall be at its highest point as the level of the attached
garage floor. The grade at the garage floor shall not be less than twelve (12)
inches and not more than twenty-four (24) inches above the average height
of the curb. In the event there is no street curb immediately abutting the
front yard of the zoning lot, then the grade at the building foundation shall
be measured from the highest point on the street at the center of the lot. All
grades shall generally slope from the building foundation to the top of the
street curb or street pavement, as the case may be, and all sides shall have an
equal grade and be consistent with good drainage and conform with adjacent
properties within the variation as allowed by this section.
2. The foregoing notwithstanding, the final yard grade of any improved lot
may not vary by more than twenty-five percent (25%) from the height of
final grade of an immediately adjacent improved lot. An improved lot for
the purposes of this paragraph shall be a lot on which there exists a principal
building. If there is more than one adjacent improved lot abutting the
improved lot in question, and if due to variations in the height of final
grades of abutting lots the twenty-five percent (25%) limitation set forth
above is not feasible, then the final grade of the improved lot in question
shall be the average height of the final grades of all improved lots abutting
the improved lot in question.
3. This section shall apply for all building permits issued for construction in
residential districts. Prior to issuance of a building permit, it shall be the
Builder's responsibility to place a grade stake at the street curb or street
pavement with the proposed height of the final grade clearly labeled and
marked on the stalrn. The stake shall be painted or marked with lath with
bright ribbon, flagging, or other suitable means so that it is clearly visible.
The Builder shall notify the Village when the grade stake has been set and is
ready for inspection. The Village Inspector shall check the proposed height
of the final grade for compliance with this Ordinance and notify the Builder
as to whether the subject grade is approved or disapproved within five (5)
working days ofreceipt of the notice. Village Inspector will document all
grades on the rear of the Building Permit. If the Village Inspector
4-9
disapproves of the proposed height of the final grade, the reason(s) for
disapproval shall be indicated to the Builder and the Builder shall make
necessary corrections to the grade stake and re-notify the Village for reinspection.
Builder may commence with excavation and construction
activities upon issuance of the building permit by the Village Inspector.
4. Upon completion of construction, Builder shall notify Village and the
Village Inspector shall recheck the height of the final grade to verify that it
is within 0.10 feet of the proposed height, and in conformance with this
Ordinance.
5. Failure to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance may result in a fine
up to One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) per occurrence.
4.19 TAP ON FEES
The Village Board shall establish a schedule of tap on fees applicable for
connection to Village services including but not limited to water, waste water and
storm water. Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in
full, no action shall be tal<en on any application.
4-10
(
(
(
Section 5.00 NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
5.01 CONTINUATION OF AN EXISTING TRADITIONAL USE
I. On the effective date of this ordinance, any use that would have been lawful
except for the provisions of this ordinance, excluding Section 5.00, and which is
then existing on any lot, lots or other parcel within the corporate limits of the
Village of Dwight shall be treated as a conforming use on the lot, lots or parcel on
which it then exists for the purposes of interpretation, enforcement and
administration of this ordinance, nothing to the contrary herein with-standing
except as shall be noted in 5.02 below, and such use or uses shall be called for the
purpose of this ordinance an Existing Traditional Use.
2. Although an Existing Traditional Use shall be treated as a conforming use on a
lot, lots or other parcel because of its existence on such lot, lots or parcel at the
· effective date of this ordinance as set forth in 5. 01 (1) above, it shall not be
deemed to be a conforming use generally within the zoning district where such
lot, lots or other such parcel exists unless so provided elsewhere in this ordinance.
5.02 DISCONTINUANCE OF AN EXISTING TRADITIONAL USE
1. Any Existing Traditional Use that would have been treated as a non-conforming
use except for the provisions of 5.01 above, shall be treated as a conforming use
until such Existing Traditional Use is discontinued. An Existing Traditional Use
shall be discontinued only by the following methods:
a. The owner or owners of the lot, lots or parcel upon which the Existing
Traditional use is located files with the Village Clerk a written stat&ment
to the effect that the Existing Traditional Use should be discontinued; or
b. The use on said lot, lots or parcel is changed from the Existing Traditional
Use to a conforming use under the provisions of this ordinance; or
c. If the Existing Traditional Use existed within a structure in which the
Existing Traditional Use was the primary use, and such structure is
destroyed by fire or otherwise destroyed or demolished to the extent that
the Existing Traditional Use can no longer be carried on therein, then the
Existing Traditional use shall be treated as a non-conforming use if such
Existing Traditional Use is not revived within two (2) years from the date
the structure within which the Existing Traditional use existed was
destroyed or demolished; or
d. If the Existing Traditional Use existed within a structure in which the
Existing Traditional use was not the primary use, and such structure is
5-1
destroyed by fire or otherwise destroyed or demolished to the extent that
the Existing Traditional use can no longer be carried on therein, then the
Existing Traditional Use shall be treated forming use if such use is not
revived within two (2) years from the date the structure in which the
Existing Traditional Use was carried on was destroyed or demolished; or
e. If the Existing Traditional Use is not performed or carried on in a
structure, such use shall be treated as a non-conforming use if
discontinued for a period of two (2) consecutive years.
5.03 CONTINUANCE OF AN EXISTING TRADITIONAL STRUCTURE
1. On the effective date of this ordinance, any structure that would have been lawful
except for the provisions of this ordinance, excluding Section 5.00, and which is
then existing on any lot, lots or other parcel within the corporate limits of the
Village of Dwight shall be treated as a conforming structure on the lot, lots or
parcel on which it then exists for the purpose of interpretation, enforcement and
administration of this ordinance, nothing to the contrary herein withstanding
except as shall be noted in 5.04 below, and such structure or structures shall be
called for the purpose of this ordinance an Existing Traditional Structure.
2. Although an Existing Traditional Structure shall be treated as a conforming
structure on a lot, lots or other parcel because of its existence on such lot, lots or
other such parcel at the effective date of this ordinance as set forth in 5.03 (1)
above, it shall not be deemed to be a conforming structure generally within the
zoning district where such lot, lots or other such parcel exists unless so provides
elsewhere in the ordinance.
t
5.04 DISCONTINUANCE OF AN EXISTING TRADITIONAL STRUCTURE
1. Any Existing Traditional Structure that would have been treated as a
non-conforming structure except for the provisions of 5.03 above shall be treated
as a conforming structure until such Existing Traditional Structure is eliminated.
An Existing Traditional Structure shall be discontinued only by the following
methods:
a. The owner or owner of the lot, lots or other parcel upon which the
Existing Traditional Structure is located files with the Village Clerk a
written statement to the effect that the Existing Traditional Structure
should be discontinued; or
b. The structure on said lot, lots or other parcel is changed from the Existing
Traditional Structure to a conforming structure under the provisions of this
ordinance; or
5-2
(
(
(
c. If the Existing Traditional Structure is destroyed by fire or otherwise
destroyed or demolished, and at such time an Existing Traditional Use had
been the primary use carried on therein, the Existing Traditional Structure
may be rebuilt, replaced or structural repairs may be made thereto to
continue the Existing Traditional Use if the Existing Traditional Structure
is rebuilt, replaced or structural repairs made thereto within two (2) years
from the date such destruction or demolition occurs to the Existing
Traditional Structure, and further provided, however, that the bulk
requirements of this ordinance are met. If the Existing Traditional Use is
discontinued, any re-building, replacing or structural repairs must be
conforming within the requirements of this ordinance.
d. If an Existing Traditional Structure is destroyed by fire or otherwise
destroyed or demolish_ed, and the primary use carried on therein was a
conforming use at the time of such destruction or demolition under the
provisions of this ordinance, and any rebuilding, replacement or structural
repairs thereto shall be conforming within the provisions of this ordinance.
5.05 TRANSFERABILITY OF A STRUCTURE OR USE
The applicability of any provision set forth in this Section S .00 shall be deemed to pass
with the ownership of any real property upon which any Use and/or Structure as defined
in this Section 5.00 exists, provided however that any determination of any time period
set forth in this Section 5.00 shall not begin to run anew upon the transfer of any real
estate affected hereunder, but rather any time period running shall continue to nm
although ownership of the affected real estate may have changed.
f
5.06 CHANGE OF NONCONFORMING USE
The non-conforming use of any building, structure or portion thereof, which is designed
or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located, may be changed to
another non-conforming use thereof only if such other use is permitted by a Special Use
Permit as authorized in the Administrative Section 15 .00.
5.07 ADDITIONS AND ENLARGEMENTS
1. No non-conforming use may be enlarged or extended in such a way as to occupy
any required usable open space or any land beyond the boundaries of the zoning
lot as it existed on the effective date of this ordinance, or to displace any
conforming use in the same building or on the same parcel.
2. A building or structure which is non-conforming with respect to yards or any
5-3
other element of bulk regulated herein shall not be altered or expanded in any
manner which would increase the degree or extent of its non-conformance, with
respect to the bulk regulations of the district in which it is located.
5.08 USE DISTRICT CHANGES
Whenever the boundaries of a use district shall be changed so as to transfer an area from
one use district to another use district of a different classification, the foregoing
provisions shall also apply to any non-conforming uses existing therein.
5.09 EXEMPTED BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
Wherever a lawfully existing building or other structure otherwise conforms to the use
regulations herein but is non-conforming only in the particular maimer hereinafter
specified, the building and use thereof shall be exempt from the requirements of
subsections 5.02, 5.04, and 5.07:
1. In any residential district where a dwelling is non-conforming only as to the
number of dwelling units it contains, provided no such building shall be altered in
any way so as to increase the number of dwelling units herein;
2. In any R-4 District, where a use permitted in the B-1 District occupies ground
floor space within a multiple-family dwelling located on a comer lot;
3. In any business or manufacturing district, where the use is less distant from a
residential district than that specified in the regulations for the district in which it
is located;
t
4. In any district, where an established building, structure or use is non-conforming
with respect to the standards prescribed herein for any of the following:
a. Yards - front, side, rear or transitional;
b. Off-street parking or loading;
c. Building height.
5.10 CONVERSION TO SPECIAL USE
Any non-conforming use may be made a special use by the granting of a special use
permit, as authorized in the Administrative Section 15.00.
5-4
(
SECTION 6.00 ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS
6.01 DISTRICTS
In order to accomplish the purpose of this ordinance as stated in Section 2.00, the Village
of Dwight, Illinois is hereby divided into the following districts:
R-1 One Family Residence District
R-2 One Family Residence District
R-3 General Residence District
B-1 Retail Business District
B-2 Retail and Service Business District
B-3 Retail Parking District
I-1 Industrial District
P-1 Planned Industrial District
F-1 Flood Plain District
6.02 MAPS
The boundaries of the zoning districts are established as shown on the map entitled
"Municipal Zoning Map of Dwight, Illinois'', which map is made a part hereof, and shall
have the same force and effect as if the Zoning Map, together with all notations,
references and other information shown thereon, were fully set forth and described
herein.
I
6.03 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
When uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown
on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
1. District boundary lines are either the center lines of railroads, highways, streets,
alleys or easements, or the boundary lines of sections, quarter-sections, divisions
of sections, tracts or lots, or such lines otherwise indicated.
2. In areas not subdivided into lots and blocks, wherever a district is indicated as a
strip adjacent to and paralleling a street or highway, the depth of such strips shall
be in accordance with the dimensions shown on the maps measured at right angles
from the center line of the street or highways, and the length of frontage shall be
in accordance with dimensions shown on the map from section, quarter-section or
division lines or center lines of streets, highways or railroad rights-of-way unless
otherwise indicated.
6-1
3. Where a lot held in one (1) ownership and of record on the effective date of this
. ordinance is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot shall be construed to
be within the less restricted district, provided that the construction shall not apply
ifit increases the less restricted frontage of the lot by more than twenty-five (25)
feet.
6.04 ZONING OF PUBLIC WAYS
All streets, alleys, public ways, waterways and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise
specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property
immediately abutting on such streets, alleys, public-ways, waterways, or railroad rightsof-
way serving a district boundary the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise specifically
designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such
center line.
6.05 ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND
A petition for annexation to the Village of Dwight may include a request from the
petitioner that the land being annexed shall, upon annexation, be zoned other than for
one-family residence. Should such a request be contained in the petition, the proper
authorities shall refer the matter to the Plan Commission to conduct a public hearing and
make their recommendations.
Following the recommendations of the Plan Commission, the Board of Trustees shall
proceed to take a vote as they normally do in zoning matters and notify the petitioner of
the result. The petitioner then may withdraw the petition for annexation or may continue
with it if the decision is adverse to the request. t
Should no request for zoning other than one-family residence be made, the property upon
annexation to the Village shall automatically be classified to R-1 One-Family Residence.
6-2
(
(
(
SECTION 7.00 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
7.01 R-1 ONE- FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
1. Purpose. The R-1 One-Family Residence District is established to provide low
density areas in which the principal use of land is for single-family dwellings. In
this district, community water supply and sewer facilities, essential to public
health, are available. The principal use ofland is for single-family dwellings on
large lots.
2. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted:
3.
One-family detached dwellings and permitted accessory uses.
Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas, when publicly owned and operated.
Schools, public, denominational or private, elementary and high, including
playgrounds and athletic fields auxiliary thereto.
Churches, rectories, seminaries, convents, monasteries and similar religious
institutions, including dormitories and other accessory uses required for operation.
Accessory uses, including off-street parking facilities in accordance with the
provisions of Section 13.00.
Signs, as permitted in Section 12.00.
Special Uses. The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in
accordance with the provisions of Section 15.00-Administration:
Cemeteries, including crematories and mausoleums in conjunction therewith.
Filling of holes, pits or lowlands with non-combustible and non-toxic material
free from refose and food wastes.
Golf courses, including ancillary uses normally provided, such as restaurants,
including the sale of alcoholic beverages, residential uses for guests, manager and
other employees, but not including commercially operated driving ranges or
miniature golf courses; and provided that no club house or accessory building
shall be located nearer than five hundred (500) feet to any dwelling on another
zoning lot.
Home occupations. (See Section 4.08)
Planned unit developments, under single ownership or control, in which incidental
business or recreational facilities for the convenience of the occupants may be
furnished, provided the property proposed for development shall have a gross area
of at least four (4) acres. For such developments, the Village Board may vary the
7-1
regulations herein, provided such variations are consistent with the general
purpose and intent of this ordinance and will result in better site planning and thus
be of greater benefit to both the occupants of the development and to the
community.
Private recreational areas or camps.
Public service uses, including filtration plant, pumping station and water
reservoir; sewage treatment plant; sanitary land fill; police and fire stations;
telephone exchanges, electric substations and other similar public service uses.
Radio and television stations and towers.
Railroad rights-of-way and trackage, but not including reclassification yards,
terminal facilities or maintenance facilities.
Schools-nursery, public or private.
Swimming club, private (non-profit).
Swimming club, private (commercial).
Swimming pool, public.
4. Off-Street Parking. Motor vehicle parking facilities shall be provided as
required or permitted in Section 13.00.
5. Minimum Lot Size.
a. Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be loca\ed. on a
lot having an area of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet, and a
width at the established building line of not less than eight)( (80) feet.
b. All non-residential principal uses of buildings as permitted herein shall be
located on a tract of land having an area of not less than twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet with a minimum width of one hundred (100) feet at
the building line.
c. Minimum lot sizes for special uses shall be prescribed and conditions
stipulated at the time a special use permit is authorized, but in no case
shall any such lot have an area of less than twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet and a width at the established building line of one hundred
(100) feet.
6. Yard Areas. No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards
are provided and maintained in connection with such building structure or
enlargement.
a. Front Yard. A front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
7-2
(
(
b. Side Yards. A side yard on each side of the main building of not less than
ten (10) feet, except where a side yard adjoins a street the minimum width
of such yard shall be not less than twenty (20) feet.
c. Rear Yard. A rear yard of not less than thirty (30) feet.
7. lVlaximum Lot Coverage. Not more than thirty-five (35) percent of the lot area
may be occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory buildings.
8. Building Height. No building shall exceed a height of thirty (30) feet or two and
one-half (2 2) stories, whichever is lower.
7.02 R-2 ONE - FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
1. Purpose. The R-2 One-Family Residence District is established to provide areas
of a higher density than the R-1 One-Family Residence District, but of a similar
urban character where community water and sewer facilities are available.
2. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted:
Any use permitted in the R-1 One-Family Residence District provided each such
use shall be served by public water and sanitary sewer system.
Two-family dwellings (duplexes) shall be a permitted use within the R-2 Zoning
District so long as such uses meet the same lot size and yard requirements as
required generally under the R-2 zoning requirements.
3. Special Uses. The following uses may be allowed by special use permit it\
accordance with the provisions of the Administrative Section: i
Cemeteries, including crematories and mausoleums in conjunction therewith.
Filling of holes, pits or low lands with non-combustible and non-toxic material
free from refuse and food wastes.
Funeral homes.
Golf course, regulation size of "par 3" but not including commercially operated
driving ranges or miniature golf courses.
Greenhouses and nurseries.
Home Occupations. (See Section 4.08)
Planned unit developments, tmder single ownership or control, in which incidental
business or recreational facilities for the convenience of the occupants may be
furnished, provided the property proposed for development shall have a gross area
7-3
of at least four ( 4) acres. For such developments, the Village Board may vary the
regulations herein, provided such variations are consistent with the general
purpose and intent of this ordinance and will result in better site planning and thus
be of greater benefit both to the occupants of the development and to the
community.
Private recreational areas or camps, when not operated for profit.
Public service uses, including filtration plant, pumping station and water
reservoir; sewage treatment plant; sanitary land fill; police and fire stations;
telephone exchanges; electric substations and other similar public service uses.
Radio and television stations and towers.
Railroad rights-of-way and trackage, but not including reclassification yards,
terminal facilities or maintenance facilities.
Schools-nursery, public or private.
Swimming club, private (commercial).
Swimming club, private (non-profit).
4. Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as
required or permitted in Section 13.00.
5. Minimum Lot Size.
a. Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be located on a
lot having area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet and a
width at the established building line of not less than fifty (50) feed
b. All non-residential principal uses of buildings as permitted herein shall be
located on a tract of land having an area of not less than ten thousand
(10,000) square feet and a width at the established building line of not less
than seventy-five (75) feet.
c. Minimum lot sizes for special uses shall be prescribed and conditions
imposed at the time a special use permit is authorized, but in no case shall
any such lot have an area ofless than ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
6. Yard Areas. No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards
are provided and maintained:
a. Front Yard. A front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
b. Side Yard. A side yard on each side of the main building of not less than
six (6) feet, except where a side yard adjoins a street the minimum width
of such yard shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet.
7-4
(
(
(
7.
8.
7.03
I.
2.
c. Rear Yard. A rear yard of not less than thirty (30) feet.
Maximum Lot Coverage. Not more than thirty-five (35%) percent of the lot
area may be occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory buildings.
Building Height. No building shall exceed a height of thirty (30) feet or two and
one-half (22) stories, whichever is lower.
R-3 GENERAL RESIDENCE DISTRICT
Purpose. The R-3 General Residence District is established as a general
residence district to provide for a wider variety of dwelling accommodations with
a higher density of dwelling units; to provide for multiple-family dwellings with
adequate open space for family living; to provide for and encourage the
redevelopment of older residential districts in the central area of the city; and to
provide for a transition between non-residential areas and single-family areas of
lower density.
Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted:
Any of the uses permitted in the R-1 and R-2 One-Family Residence Districts.
Boarding house, lodging house or rooming house.
Multiple-family dwellings, apartments and apartment hotels.
One-family row dwellings (party-wall) with not more than eight (8) dwellings in a
row building.
I
3. Special Uses. The following uses may be allowed by special use permit:
Any use which may be allowed as a special use in the R-1 or R-2 District.
Professional offices including medical and dental offices and medical centers.
Mobile home parks, provided that public or community sewer and water facilities
are available for each mobile home, and that each mobile home site contains not
less than three thousand (3,000) square feet of area, including parking space, but
not including roadways.
Off-street open parking areas, provided there is a need for this facility in the
interest of public necessity and convenience, and that no appropriate site is
available in nearby business or manufacturing districts.
Philanthropic or eleemosynary uses or institutions, provided that not more than
twenty (20%) percent of the gross floor area or two thousand (2,000) feet,
whichever is greater, shall be used as office space.
7-5
Planned unit developments under single ownership or control, in which incidental
business or recreational facilities for the convenience of the occupants inay be
furnished, provided the property proposed for development shall have a gross area
of at least four (4) acres. For such developments, the Village Board may vary the
regulations herein, provided such variations are consistent with the general
purpose and intent of this ordinance and will result in better site planning and thus
be a greater benefit both to the occupants of the development and to the
community.
4. Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as
required or permitted in Section 13.00.
5. Minimum Lot Size.
a. Every one-family detached dwelling hereafter erected shall be located on a
lot having an area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet and a
width at the building line of not less than fifty (50) feet.
b. All two-family dwellings hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be
located on a lot having an area of not less than eleven thousand, two
hundred fifty ( 11,250) square feet and a width at the building line of not
less than sixty ( 60) feet.
c. All structures or buildings containing three (3) or more dwelling units
shall be located on a lot which provides a minimum lot area per dwelling
unit as follows:
Type of Dwelling Unit
Apartments with three (3) or more
bedrooms
Apartments with two (2) bedrooms
Apartments with one (1) bedroom
and efficiency apartments
Land Area Per Dwelling Unit
in Sguare Feet
4,000 square feet
3,000 square feet
2,000 square feet
Provided, however, that in no case shall the minimum lot area be less than
seven thousand, five hundred (7,500) square feet with a width at the
building of not less than sixty ( 60) feet.
At no time in calculating the dwelling unit density in the R-3 General
Residence District shall it be greater than twelve (12) dwelling units per
gross acre. Existing residential buildings in the R-3 General Residence
District may be altered to provide for not more than four ( 4) dwelling
units, provided that no existing residential building is altered in such a
way as to conflict with or further conflict with the foregoing requirements.
7-6
(
I
(
d. All non-residential principal uses permitted in this district shall be located
on a lot having an area of not less than six thousand ( 6,000) square feet
and a width at the building line of not less than sixty (60) feet.
e. Minimum lot sizes for special uses shall be prescribed at the time a special
use permit is authorized, but in no case shall any such lot be less than six
thousand (6,000) square feet.
6. Yard Areas. No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the following yards
are provided and maintained:
a. Front Yard. A front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
b. Side Yards. In the R-3 General Residence District, the minimum side yard
requirements for permitted uses shall not be less than those itemized
below:
(1) For one and two-family dwellings, the same regulations shall apply as
permitted or required in the R-1 One-Family Residence District.
(2) For buildings containing three (3) or more dwelling units, a side yard
on each side of each building often (10) feet, except where a side yard
adjoins a street, in which case the minimum setback shall be twenty
(20) feet.
(3) For buildings containing three (3) or more units there may be not less
than twenty (20) feet between adjacent row buildings.
(4) For permitted non-residential buildings, interior side yards on each
side of the building shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. i
(5) For reversed corner lots, the minimum corner side yard requirements
for permitted and special uses shall be not less than twenty-five (25)
feet.
c. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than thirty (30) feet.
7. ·Maximum Lot Coverage. Not more than thirty-five percent (35%)ofthe lot area
may be occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory buildings.
8. Building Height. No building shall exceed a height of thirty (30) feet or two and
one-half (2Y:i) stories, whichever is lower.
7-7

' \
(
SECTION 8.00 - BUSINESS DISTRICTS
8.01 B-1 RETAIL BUSINESS DISTRICT
1. Purpose. The B-1 Retail Business District is established to provide areas for a
wide range of retail stores and personal service establishments which are desirable
to provide for both day-to-day and occasional shopping needs.
2. Permitted Uses. The following retail business and service uses are permitted,
provided they are operated entirely within a building - except for off-street parking
and loading facilities:
Agricultural implement sales and services;
Antiques, collectibles and craft stores;
Apparel shops;
Art and school supply stores;
Art galleries and studios;
Auto accessory store, where service is not performed within the main building;
Automobile and truck sales and service, including painting and repair;
Bakery shops, including the baking and processing of food products;
Banks, financial institutions and loan offices, including drive-in teller facilities;
Barber shops, beauty parlors, tanning salons, or similar personal service shops;
Billiard and pool rooms, amusement establishments, dance halls, gymnasiums,
meeting halls, lodge halls, fraternal organizations and clubs;
Bicycle sales and repair;
Blue printing and photostating establishments;
Boat showrooms - sales and service;
Book and stationery stores;
Candy and ice cream shops;
Camera and photographic supply shops;
8-1

(
Carpet, rug and linoleum stores;
Catalog offices for mail order stores;
Catering establishments;
China and glassware stores;
Coin and philatelic stores;
Currency exchanges;
Custom dressmaking, millinery, tailoring or shoe repair shops;
Day Care Centers/Nursery Schools;
Department stores;
Dry goods stores;
Drug stores;
Dry cleaning and pressing establishments;
Electrical appliance stores and repairs;
Florist shops and conservatories;
Food, meat and fruit stores;
Frozen food stores and food lockers;
Furniture stores and upholstery;
Garages, public, for storage of private passenger automobiles and commercial
vehicles under one and one-half(! Yz) tons;
Furrier;
Garden supply store;
Gift shops;
Glass cutting and glazing establishments;
Hardware stores;
8-2
(
( i.
(
Health and fitness facilities;
Hobby stores, including the sale of pets;
ii Hotels and motels;
Household appliance stores and repair;
Interior decorating shops, including upholstery and making of draperies, slip covers
and other similar articles;
Jewelry and watch sales and repair shops;
Laundromats;
Lawn and Garden Equipment Sales and Service;
Leather goods and luggage stores;
Locksmith;
Musical shops;
Musical instrument sales and repair, retail trade only;
Newsstands;
Office equipment sales and service;
Offices, business and professional, including medical clinics;
Optician, optometrist;
Orthopedic and medical appliance stores;
Paint and wallpaper stores;
Parking lots and garages, other than accessory, and subject to the provisions of
Section 13.00;
Photography studios;
Picture framing;
Plumbing, heating and air conditioning sales and service;
8-3

(
(
Postal substations;
Publishing and printing;
Radio and television broadcasting stations;
Restaurants, tea rooms or cafes;
Schools-music, dance, business, commercial or trade;
Second hand stores, antique and rummage shops;
Sewing machine sales and service;
Shoe and hat stores and repair;
Sporting goods stores;
Taxidermist;
Telegraph offices;
Telephone booths, public;
Theaters;
Tobacco shops;
Toy stores;
Trailer sales or rental including mobile homes and camp trailers;
Travel bureau and transportation ticket offices;
Undertaking establishments, fi.meral parlors or mortuaries;
Used passenger automobile sales on an open lot or within a building;
Variety stores;
Videotape sales and rental stores;
Accessory uses, including off-street parking and loading facilities as permitted or
required in accordance with the provisions of Section 13.00.
8-4

(
(
3. Special Uses. The following uses may be allowed by special use permit:
Other retail and service business uses not specifically listed above, when found to
have economic compatibility with established uses on adjoining property;
Animal hospitals;
Auction rooms;
Auditorium, stadium, arena, armory, gymnasium, and other similar places of public
events;
Automobile service stations, where gasoline is offered on a retail basis;
Automobile wash;
Churches, rectories and parish houses;
Cocktail lounges, taverns, liquor stores - package goods only, and any other
establishments in which beer and/or liquor is to be sold either in package or to be
consumed on the premises;
Dwelling units-second floor only;
Hospitals and sanitariums and institutions;
~ Hotels and motels, including restaurants and meeting rooms;
Lawn Care and Landscaping businesses including the storage and use oflawn care
chemicals and storage of bulk landscaping materials;
Light Manufacturing, Processing, or Assembly - This Special Use is to be
conducted without excessive noise, vibration, odor, dust, smoke or any other
condition which would be disturbing to occupants of adjacent properties, and is
allowable a$ a Special Use in an existing building with minimum floor space of
15,000 sq. ft. All qualifying businesses under this Use must provide on premises
off-street parking per Section 13.00 regulations.
Monument sales not including manufacturing or processing;
Nursing or convalescent homes;
Parks, when publicly owned and operated;
Pawn shops;
8-5

(
(
Planned unit developments, business, as defined herein;
Public utility and public service uses;
Railroad rights-off-way and trackage;
Tractor tire sales.
4. Conditions of Use. All uses permitted in this district, except residence district
uses, shall be retail and Novice establishments dealing directly with consumers and
shall be subject to the following conditions:
a. The sale of foodstuffs or articles within an enclosed building intended for
human consumption;
b. There shall be no manufacture, processing or treatment of products other
than that which is clearly incidental and essential to the retail business
conducted on the same premises;
c. Such use, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to odor, dust,
smoke, noise, vibration or other similar causes;
d. Any exterior sign displayed shall pertain only to a use conducted within the
building.
5. Yard Areas.
a. Transitional Yards. Where a B-1 Retail Business District adjoins a
residence district, transitional yards shall be provided in accordance with the
following regulations:
(1) Where lots in a B-1 Retail Business District front on the street and at
least eighty (80%) percent of the frontage directly across the
street between two (2) consecutive intersecting streets is in a
residence district, the front yard regulations for the residence
districts shall apply to the said lots in the business district;
(2) In a B-1 Retail Business District, where a side lot line coincides with a
side or rear lot line of prope1ty in an adjacent residential district,
a yard shall be provided along such side lot line. Such yard
shall be equal in dimension to the minimum side yard which
would be required under this ordinance for a residential use on
the adjacent property in the residence district;
(3) In a B-1 Retail Business District, where a rear lot line coincides with a
side lot line of property in an adjacent residential district, a yard
shall be provided along such rear lot line. Such yard shall be
8-6
(
(
(
(
6.
(4)
(5)
equal in dimension to the minimum side yard which would be
required under this ordinance for a residential uses on the
adjacent property in the residence district;
In a B-1 Retail Business District, where a rear lot line coincides with a
rear lot line of property in an adjacent residential district, a yard
shall be provided along such rear lot line. Such yard shall be
twenty (20) feet in depth;
In a B-1 Retail Business District, where the extension of a front or side
lot line coincides with the front line of an adjacent lot located in
a residence district, a yard of not less than ten ( 10) feet shall be
provided;
(6) Transitional yards shall be unobstructed except as allowed in Section
4.00.
b. Side Yards. If an interior side yard is provided, it shall be not less than ten
(10) feet;
c. Rear Yard. A rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet in depth;
Signs. Signs shall be permitted as allowed in Section 12.00.
7. Off-Street Parking and Loading. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided
as required or permitted in Section 13.00.
8. Building Height. The height of any structure shall not exceed three (3) stories, nor
shall it exceed forty-five (45) feet, except as provided herein.
8.02 B-2 SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT
1. Purpose. The B-2 Service Business District is established primarily to furnish
areas for a wide variety of necessary services, wholesale establishments, and other
business uses which would be incompatible with the uses permitted in the B-1
Retail Business District, including automobile-oriented businesses.
2. Permitted Uses. The following business uses and service establishments are
permitted, provided they are conducted wholly within an enclosed building - except
for off-street parking or loading facilities and except for establishments of the
"drive-in" type offering goods and services directly to customers waiting in parked
motor vehicles, and except where specified below as permitted on an open lot:
8-7

(
3.
(
(
Any use permitted in the B-1 Retail and Service Business District;
Ambulance Services;
Automobile washing;
Beverages, non-alcoholic, bottling and distributing;
Book binding;
Building materials sales;
Exterminating sales and service, where chemicals are stored on the prope1ty;
Farm supply stores, wholesale and retail;
Greenhouses;
Accessory uses, including off-street parking and loading facilities, as permitted or
required in Section 13.00. ·
Special Uses. The following uses may be allowed by special use permit:
Any use which may be allowed as a special use in the B-1 Retail Business District,
unless already permitted under subsection 8.02.2 above;
Other service business uses not specifically listed above when found to have
economic compatibility with established uses on adjoining property;
Cemeteries, crematories or mausoleums;
Dwelling units-on the ground floor;
I
Outdoor amusement establishments, fairgrounds, golf practicing ranges, miniatlU'e
golf, carnivals, circuses, race tracks, kiddie parks and other similar amusement
centers and including places of assembly devoted thereto, such as stadiums and
arenas;
Public passenger transportation terminals, such as heliports, bus and rail depots, but
not including airp01ts, airstrips and landing fields; provided all principal structures
and uses are not less than one hundred (100) feet from any residential district
boundary;
Adult Entertainment Establishments:
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this Section, the following terms,
phrases, and words shall have the meanings given herein.
8-8
(
(
1. Adult Booth. Any area of an Adult Entertainment Establishment set
off from the remainder of such Establishment by one or more walls or
other dividers or partitions and used to show, play, or otherwise
demonstrate any Adult Materials or to view any live performance that
is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure,
depiction, or description of Specified Anatomical Areas or the conduct
or simulation of Specified Sexual Activities.
2. Adult Cabaret. Any Commercial Establishment that as a substantial or
significant portion of its business features or provides any of the
following:
a. Persons who appear nude or semi-nude;
b. Live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on the exposure, depiction, or description of Specified
Anatomical Areas or the conduct or simulation of Specified Sexual
Activities.
c. Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides, computer
displays, or other visual representations or recordings of any kind
( that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the
exposure, depiction, or description of Specified Anatomical Areas,
or the conduct or simulation of Specified Sexual Activities.
3. Adult Entertaimnent Establishment. An Adult Cabaret, Adult Store, or
Adult Theater, as defined in the Subsection.
4. Adult Material. Any of the following, whether new or used:
a. 1. Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or
digitally-stored materials; or
2. Films, motion pictures, video or audio cassettes, slides,
computer displays, or other visual representations or recordings of
any kind, that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
the exposure, depiction, or description of Specified Anatomical
Areas, or the conduct or simulation of Specified Sexual Activities.
b. Instruments, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed
for use in connection with Specified Sexual Activities, or that
depict or describe Specified Anatomical Areas.
( 5. Adult Store. Any Commercial Establishment (a) that contains one of
more Adult Booths; (b) that as a substantial or significant portion of its
business offers for sale, rental, or viewing any Adult Materials; or ( c)
8-9

(
!
that has a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of Adult
Materials.
6. Adult Theater. Any Commercial Establishment that as a substantial or
significant portion, of its business features or provides films, motion
pictures, video or representations or recordings of any kind that are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure,
depiction, or description of Specified Anatomical Areas, or the
conduct or simulation of Specified Sexual Activities.
7. Commercial Establishment. Any place where admission, services,
performances, or products are provided for or upon payment of any
form of consideration.
8. Nude or State of Nudity. A state of dress or undress that exposes to
view (i) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals,
public regions; anus; or female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areolae, but not including any portion of the
cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt,
leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areolae is
not exposed; or (ii) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered, or any device or covering
that , when worn simulates human male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state.
9. Protected Uses.
a. A church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship;
b. A public or private nursery school or any other public or private
school serving any one or more of grades K through 12;
c. A child care facility, licensed by the Illinois Department of
Children & Family Services;
d. A public park, playground, playing field, or forest preserve;
e. A public or private cemetery;
f. A public housing facility.
10. Residential Prope1ty. Any lot or other tract of land zoned in any of the
following districts or zones under this Code: R-1, R-2 and R-3,
including any additional Residential Zoning District designations
hereinafter created.
11. Semi-nude. A state of dress or undress in which clothing covers no
8-10
(
(
(
(
more than the human genitals, anus, pubic region, and areolae of the
female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting
straps or devices or by other minor accessory apparel such as hats,
gloves, and socks.
12. Specified Anatomical Areas. Any of the following:
a. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic
region; buttocks; anus; or female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areolae, but not including nay portion of the
cleavage of the female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt,
leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the areolae
is not exposed.
b. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered, or any device or covering that,
when worn, simulates human male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state.
13. Specified Sexual Activities. Any of the following:
a. Fondling or other erotic touching of hmnan genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breast;
b. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
c. Masturbation, actual or simulated;
d. Hmnan genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or
tumescence;
e. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in Paragraphs I, 2, 3, or 4 of this definition.
4. Conditions of Use. All special uses permitted in this district shall be retail and
service establishments dealing directly with consumers and shall be subject to the
following conditions:
a. There shall be no processing or treatment of products other than that which
is clearly incidental and essential to the retail use as permitted;
b. Outside storage of refuse material is not permitted;
c. At least ten percent (10%) of the area shall be landscaped and maintained as
open space.
8-11
(
( d.
(
(
Adult Entertainment Establishment Location Standards:
1. Requirements. Except for existing legal nonconforming uses governed
pmsuant to Subsection ( c) of this Section, Adults Entertainment
Establishments located, established, maintained, or operated on any lot in
the Village shall also comply, in addition to complying with all other
applicable regulations set forth in this Code, with the regulations set forth in
Paragraphs (2) through (7) of this Subsection. In the event of a conflict
between the provisions of any other such regulations and the regulations set
forth in Paragraph (2) through (7) of this Subsection, the regulations set
forth in Paragraphs (2) through (7) of this Subsection shall control to the
extent of any conflict.
2. Permitted Districts. Adult Ente1iainment Establishments shall only be
permitted in a B-2 Zoning District.
3. Minimmn Distance From Other Adult Ente1iainment Establishments.
No Adult Entertainment Establishment shall be located, established,
maintained, or operated on any lot that has a property line within 1,000 feet
of the property line of any other lot on which any other Adult Ente1iainment
Establishment is located, established, maintained, or operated.
4. Minimum Distance From Protected Uses. No Adult Entertainment
Establishment shall be located, established, maintained, or operated on any
lot that has a property line within 1,000 feet of the property line of any other
lot on which a Protected use is located, established, maintained, or operated.
5. Minimum Distance From Residential Prope1iy. No Adult Entertainment
Establishment shall be located, established, maintained, or operated on any
lot that has a prope1iy line within 1,000 feet of the prope1iy line of any
Residential Property.
6. Measurement. For the pmposes of this Section, distances shall be
measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest point on the prope1iy line of the lot on which the
Adult Entertainment Establishment is located to the nearest point on a
property line of (i) any Residential Property or (ii) any lot on which a
Protected use or other Adult Entertainment Establishment, as the case may
be, is located, established, maintained, or operated.
7. Limited Exception For Subsequent Protected uses, Alcoholic Business,
and Residential Property. An Adult Entertainment Establishment lawfully
operating under this Code and under the Village's Adult Use Licensing
Ordinance shall not be deemed to be in violation of the location restrictions
set forth herein solely because (i) a Protected use subsequently locates
within the minimum required distance of the Adult Ente1iaimnent
Establishment, (ii) a business that sells or dispenses alcoholic beverage
8-12
(
(
{
I
(
subsequently locates within the same building as the Adult Entertainment
Establishment, or (iii) property within the minimum required distance of an
Adult Entertainment Establishment subsequently becomes Residential
Property. This Paragraph (7) shall not apply to an Adult Entertainment
Establishment at a time when an application for an "Adult Entertainment
License under the Village's Adult Use Licensing Ordinance for that
Establishment is submitted after the License has previously expired, has
been revoked, or is at that time under suspension.
8. Existing Adult Entertainment Establishments. Any Adult Entertainment
Establishment that is deemed under the provisions ofthis Chapter to be an
existing legal nonconforming use, shall comply with the provisions of this
Chapter applicable to legal nonconforming uses.
5. Minimum Lot Size.
6.
a. Lot Area.
b. Lot Width.
c. Lot Depth.
Yard Areas.
a. Front Yard.
b. Side Yards.
Minimum lot area of twelve thousand, five hundred (12,500)
square feet;
Minimum lot width of one hundred (100) feet;
Minimum lot depth of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet;
A front yard of not less than fifty (50) feet;
No requirements except where abutting residential use or street
lines, there shall be a side yard of fifty (50) feet;
c. Rear Yard. A rear yard of not less than forty ( 40) feet.
7. Signs. Signs shall be as permitted in Section 12.00.
8. Off-Street Parking and Loading. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided
as required or permitted in Section 13.00.
9. Building Height. Height regulations shall be the same as required in the B-1 Retail
Business District.
8.03 B-3 RETAIL PARKING DISTRICT
1. Purpose. The B-3 Retail Parking District is hereby established to provide and
maintain areas within the central business district used for public parking, and
further to control by means of special uses the development within such district to
promote the ingress and egress of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and to promote
8-13
(
(
(
2.
3.
and maintain public parking and to fmiher prevent congestion within the central
business district, and to provide adequate parking for the central business district,
and to prevent dangerous and undesirable traffic conditions resulting from
congestion.
Permitted Use. Off-street ground level non-sheltered parking.
Special Uses. The following uses may be allowed by Special Use Permit:
All Permitted uses as allowed in a B-1 Retail Business District may be allowed as
special uses in this B-3 Retail Parking District.
4. Conditions of Use. All uses allowed as special uses in this district, shall be retail
and service establishments dealing directly with customers and shall be subject to
the following conditions:
a. There shall be no manufacture, processing or treatment of products other
than that which is clearly incidental and essential to the retail business
conducted on the same premises;
b. Such uses, operations or products shall not be objectionable due to odor,
dust, smoke, noise, vibration or similar causes. The performance standards
under Section 11.00 of the Dwight Zoning Ordinance shall be applied;
c. Outside storage of refuse is prohibited;
d. Outside storage of goods, products, supplies, materials, and merchandise is
prohibited;
5. Yard Areas.
a. Side Yards. If an interior side yard is provided, it shall be not less than ten
(10) feet;
b. Rear Yard. A rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet in depth;
c. Front Yard. There shall be no required front yard.
6. Signs. Signs shall be permitted as allowed under Section 12.00.
7. Off-Street Parking and Loading. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided
as required or permitted in Section 13.00.
8. Building Height. The height of any structure shall not exceed one (1) story, nor
shall it exceed twenty (20) feet, whichever is less, provided that structures existing
8-14
(
(
(
(
on the premises prior to the effective date of this Ordinance may be rebuilt to their
original height and dimensions if done so within one (I) year after destruction due
to fire, wind, or other act of God or calamity.
8-15

( SECTION 9.00 - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
(
(
9.01 I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
1. Purpose. The I-1 Industrial District is established to provide areas in which a
wide variety of industrial concerns may be located; to provide perfo1mance
standards that will adequately protect the community and to provide regulations to
assure adequate open space between uses.
2. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted:
All retail and service uses allowed by either a permitted or special use in the B-2
Service Business District shall be permitted uses in the I-1 Industrial District.
All existing industrial uses as of the effective date of this ordinance.
3. Special Uses. The following uses may be allowed by special use permit in
accordance with the provisions of the Administration Section 15.00:
4.
Any use that is not defined as a permitted use above shall be declared to be a
special use.
Off-Street Parking and Loading. Parking and loading facilities shall be
provided as required or permitted in Section 13.00.
5. Yard Areas. No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or structurally
altered unless the following yards are provided and maintained in connection with
such building:
a. Front Yard. On every zoning lot a front yard of not less than thirty (30)
feet in depth shall be provided.
b. Side Yards. On every zoning lot a side yard shall be provided along each
side lot line. Each side yard shall not be less in width than twenty (20)
feet.
c. Rear Yard. On every zoning lot there shall be a rear yard of not less than
thirty (30) feet, except where a use in the I-1 Industrial District is adjacent
to a residence district, a rear yard shall be provided and maintained of not
less than fifty (50) feet.
6. Maximum Lot Coverage. Not more than sixty (60%) percent of the lot area may
be occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory buildings.
7. Performance Standards. All permitted and special uses in the I-1 Industrial
9-1
District shall be required to meet the performance standards defined in Section
11.00.
9.02 P-1 PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
1. Purpose. The P-1 Planned Industrial District is established to provide areas for
industrial development of the highest quality, which can exist in harmony with
residential and business areas.
2. Minimum Area. The owner of a tract of undeveloped land or land cleared for
development often (10) acres or more which is designated for industrial
development on the Official Land Use Plan may submit to the Village Plan
Commission for its review a preliminary plan for the use and development thereof
for a planned industrial district, regardless of the zoning district in which such
tract is located at the time said plan is filed.
3. Permitted Uses. The following uses may be permitted in a P-1 Planned
Industrial District:
Any use permitted in and meeting the performance standards of the I-1 Industrial
District, except that there may be permitted the following attendant and accessory
uses:
Offices accessory or attendant to the principal use on a zoning lot;
Accessory service uses which are necessary to the conduct of the principal
manufacturing use;
Research facilities;
Medical clinics;
Any other attendant or accessory use approved by the Plan Commission as part of
the P-1 Planned Industrial District which the Plan Commission finds to be
compatible with the plan and which will have no undue adverse effect upon
surrounding properties.
4. Conditions of Use. All permitted uses are subject to the following conditions:
a. Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or storage
of goods, materials or products shall conform with the standards set forth
herein.
b. All business, production, servicing, and processing shall take place within
completely enclosed buildings unless otherwise specified. Within one
9-2
(
(
hundred and fifty ( 150) feet of a residence district, all storage shall be in
completely enclosed buildings or structures and storage located elsewhere
in this district may be open to the sky, but shall be enclosed.
c. Uses established on the effective date of this ordinance and by its
provisions are rendered non-conforming and shall be permitted to continue
subject to the regulations of Section 5.00.
5. Commission Findings. It shall be the duty of the Plan Commission to as certain
that the proposed project will comply with the following conditions:
6.
a. Integrated Design. That the plan provides for an industrial district
consisting of several buildings or groups of buildings of efficient and
harmonious design, together with properly arranged trafficways, parking
and loading facilities and landscaping, so arranged as to create an
attractive project readily integrated with and having no undue adverse
effect on adjoining or surrounding areas and developments.
b. Thoroughfare Access. That the industrial district will abut a street shown
on the Official Major Street Plan as a highway, primary or secondary
thoroughfare, or that direct access to such street is provided by means of
an acceptable industrial service street.
General Design Standards and Improvement Requirements. The following
minimum design standards shall be observed and the owner or developer shall
post with the Village of Dwight an adequate surety bond or furnish other kind of
guarantee, satisfactory to the Plan Commission, assuring the installation at the
expense of the owner or developer of improvements specified in the following:
a. Right-of-way and Pavements. All interior streets shall have a right-of-way
width of not less than eighty (80) feet, and all cul-de-sacs shall have a
minimum radius of seventy (70) feet. Said streets shall be provided with
pavement and concrete curb and gutter meeting the requirements of
Section 11.00, Street Improvements, of the Village of Dwight Subdivision
Ordinance;
b. Utilities. All necessary utilities shall be installed meeting Village
specifications and the subdivision regulations of the Village;
c. Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be
installed as required in Section 13.00, except that for employee parking,
one(!) space shall be provided for each two (2) employees on the
maximum shift. Customer or visitor parking, at least ten ( 10) spaces shall
be provided per plant. Loading docks shall not be placed along building
front;
9-3
d. Plant Vehicle Storage. Such storage shall be sufficient to accommodate
all plant vehicles off the street;
e. Lot Area. Minimum of one (1) acre;
f. Maximum Lot Coverage. The maximum area occupied by all buildings on
any lot shall not exceed forty-five (45%) percent of the total area of the
lot;
g. Yard Requirements. Same as permitted in the I-1 Industrial District;
h. Building Height Limit. Same as permitted in the I-1 Industrial District;
1. Distance Between Buildings. Principal buildings, fifty (50) feet;
accessory structures, twenty (20) feet;
J. Distance of Buildings from Project or Tract Boundary. If adjoining a
residential district, one hundred (100) feet; if adjoining a B-1 District, fifty
(50) feet; in all other cases, thirty five (35) feet;
k. Landscaping of Unsurfaced Areas. All unpaved areas shall be landscaped
subject to Plan Commission approval;
I. Greenbelts. The project area shall be enclosed on all sides adjacent to a
residential district by a planted strip at least fifty ( 5 0) feet wide. The plant
material, subject to Plan Commission approval, shall have initially a
height and compactness of not less than fifty (50%) percent of the
ultimately required height and compactness;
m. Signs. The erection, construction, alteration and location of signs, other
advertising structures, marquees and awnings shall be in conformity with
the provisions of Section 12.00;
n. Illumination. Exterior lighting fixtures shall be so installed as to reflect
the light away from adjacent properties.
7. Final Development Plan. Upon determination by the Plan Commission that the
proposed P-1 Planned Industrial District, as shown in the preliminary plan appears
to conform to the requirements herein and all other applicable requirements of this
ordinance, the proponents shall submit a final development plan, which plan shall
incorporate any changes or modifications required by the Plan Commission
together with an application for the necessary appropriate changes in district
classification of the site of the proposed P-1 Planned Industrial District.
8. Recommendation to Village Board of Trustees. If the final plan is found to be
in compliance with the requirements herein, the Plan Commission shall hold a
9-4
(
(
9.
10.
9.03
public hearing on both the plan and the proposed change in zoning district
classification, and submit said plan with its report and recommendation to the
Village Board.
Rezoning. The Village Board may modify the plan, consistent with the intent of
this ordinance, and may change the zoning of the site to the appropriate zoning
district classification.
Adjustments - Authorized by Plan Commission. After the final development
plan has been approved by the Village Board and in the course of carrying out the
plan, minor adjustments and rearrangements of buildings, service areas and other
features requested by the developers may be authorized by the Plan Commission.
CARGO CONTAINERS
Article 1
"Cargo Container" means a standardized reusable vessel that was originally or formerly
designed for or used in connection with the packing, shipping, transportation or freight
industry.
Article 2
That Cargo Containers shall not be allowed within any Residential or Business Zoning
District.
Article 3
In an Industrial District, Cargo Containers may be allowed as an accessory building, but
not as a principal structure.
A. No more than one (1) Cargo Container shall be allowed for each 10,000
square feet of lot area;
B. No more than ten (10) Cargo Containers shall be allowed on any one (1) lot;
C. (DELETED)
D. All Cargo Containers shall be located behind adequate screening, including
fencing, landscaping or other appropriate means, in order to minimize visual
impact;
E. All Cargo Containers located on a single lot (or adjoining lots owned or
controlled by the same person) shall be painted a uniform color. All Cargo
containers located adjacent to buildings shall be painted to match the color
9-5
of the building;
F. All Cargo Containers must have working doors and locks;
G. All Cargo Containers shall be placed so as to conform to applicable set back
requirements for accessory structures;
H. Cargo Containers may not be refrigerated;
I. All Cargo Containers shall be placed on a hard level surface, such as gravel,
concrete, asphalt or such other surface as may be approved by the Village
Board of Trustees;
J. Cargo Containers shall not be stacked vertically.
9-6
(
I
!
(
9A.OO AGRICULTURE DISTRICT
9A.Ol AGRICULTURE ZONING DISTRICT
1. Purpose:
2.
a. The Agricultural Zoning District is intended to preserve agricultural use as an
important economic and land use component of the Village of Dwight. The
regulations of the Agriculture District are designed to regulate the use of land,
buildings, and structures within areas of the Village. In this District, community
water supply and sewer facilities are generally not available. The principal use of
land is for agriculture.
b. The Agricultural Zoning District will provide for the transitional and .
temporary designation of lands for agricultural purposes until such time as
appropriate development is proposed and municipal improvements become
available.
Those Agriculture Districts in the Corporate Limits of the Village of Dwight,
which lie in Livingston County, will follow the applicable rules and regulations of
the Agriculture Zoning District of Livingston County. Those Agriculture
Districts in the corporate limits of the Village of Dwight, which lie in Grundy
County, will follow the applicable rules and regulations of the Agriculture Zoning
District of Grundy County.
9A-1

(
(
(
9A.02 LIVINGSTON COUNTY AG DISTRICT RULES AND REGULATIONS
PART II - LAND USE, PLANNING AND UTILITIES
Chapter 56 - ZONING
ARTICLE Ill. - DISTRICTS
DIVISION 2. AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
DIVISION 2. AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
Sec. 56-80. Established.
Sec. 56-81. Uses permitted.
Sec. 56-82. Special uses.
Sec. 56-83. Property development standards.
Secs. 56-84-56-109. Reserved ..
Sec. 56-80. Established.
The AG Agriculture District is established to include lands for agricultural uses.
(Ord. of ·t2-4-1973, § 5.0)
Sec. 56-81. Uses permitted.
(a) The following uses shall be permitted in the AG Agriculture District, plus such other uses as the board
may deem to be similar in nature. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in
section 56-83 and article IX of this chapter, pertaining to property development standards.
(1) Commercial greenhouse.
(2) Dwelling, farm.
(3) Dwelling, single-family.
(4) Farm, general.
(5) Farm equipment, sales and service.
(6) Home occupation.
(7) Manufactured home/mobile home (1) (ZT-1-01 ).
(8) Municipal or government building.
(9) Police station or fire station.
(10) Private swimming pool.
(11) Public park or recreational facilities.
(12) Railroad right-of-way and necessary uses.
(13) Roadside produce sales stand.
(14) School, public or private.
(15) Signs.
(16) Warehouse and storage of grain, seed and dry fertilizer storage facilities, including grain storage
and drying facilities.
Livingston County, Illinois, Code of Ordinances
9A-2
Page 1
PART II - LAND USE, PLANNING AND UTILITIES
Chapter 56 - ZONING
ARTICLE Ill. - DISTRICTS
DIVISION 2. AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
(b) The manufactured home/mobile home shall be no more than ten years of age except when the board
of appeals reviews a variance request in which the board of appeals may allow for the placement of a
mobile home/manufactured home more than ten years of age, and the manufactured home/mobile
home shall be placed on a permanent foundation. A permanent foundation means a closed perimeter
formation consisting of materials such as concrete, mortared concrete block, or mortared brick placed
on a footing extending into the ground below the frost line (a minimum of 36 inches) which shall include,
but not necessarily be limited to, basements, cellars, or crawl spaces, but does exclude the use of
piers.
(Ord. of ·J 2-4-"1973, § 5.1: Res. of 2-·1 ·1--1986, Res. of ·10-10-1995)
Sec. 56-82. Special uses.
The following uses may be permitted by special use permit in the AG Agriculture District as provided
for in article X of this chapter, pertaining to special uses.
(1) Advertising structure (ZT-1-86).
(2) Agricultural product manufacturing (ZT-1-93).
(3) Anhydrous ammonia or similar liquefied fertilizer, and bulk fertilizer storage and distribution
(commercial).
(4) Asphalt or asphaltic concrete batching plant.
(5) Assembly halls for use by nonprofit organizations.
(6) Auction sales yard.
(7) Bait sales (live).
(8) Bed and breakfast.
(9) Bottled gas, storage and distribution.
(10) Bulk storage or petroleum products.
(11) Camping facility.
(12) Compost facility (ZT-3-93).
(13) Contractor's storage yard.
(14) Country club or golf course.
(15) Craft and service occupations (ZT-2-93).
(16) Earth covered dwelling.
(17) Farm worker tenant housing.
(18) Kennel.
(19) Lodge or private club.
(20) Machine shop.
(21) Manufacturing, storage or use of explosives.
(22) Mobile home.
(23) Outdoor commercial recreational enterprise.
Livingston County, Illinois, Code of Ordinances
9A-3
Page 2
(
(
PART II - LAND USE, PLANNING AND UTILITIES
Chapter 56 - ZONING
ARTICLE Ill. - DISTRICTS
DIVISION 2. AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
(24) Penal or correctional institution.
(25) Private recreational development.
(26) Public or commercial sanitary landfill, or garbage disposal plant.
(27) Race track (outdoor).
(28) Riding stable.
(29) Seasonal hunting or fishing lodge.
(30) Shooting range (outdoor).
(31) Slaughterhouse.
(32) Theater (outdoor).
(33) Welding shop.
(34) Wholesale produce terminal.
(35) Windmills (needs to comply with article VIII of this chapter, pertaining to regulating the siting of
wind energy conversion systems in the county).
(Orel. of 12-4-1973, § 5.2; Res. of·Jo-1·1-·1983; Res. 012-11-1986; Res. of5-·J1-1993; Res. 016-8-
1993; Res. of 7-13-1993; Res. of 10-·10-·1995; Res. of ·1-·12-2006)
Sec. 56-83. Property development standards.
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and structures in the AG
Agriculture District.
(1) Minimum lot area. A lot on which a dwelling is erected or changed may not be smaller in area, in
square feet per dwelling unit, than that prescribed for it in this subsection.
a. Single-family with municipal sewage disposal system: 40,000 square feet;
b. Single-family with municipal, community or individual water supply and individual sewage
disposal system: 1 Y, acres.
(2) Lot dimensions.
a. All lots hereafter created shall have a minimum width of 150 feet and a minimum depth of
200 feet. Curve and cul-de-sac lot width shall be measured as chord distance at the building
setback line. Refer to zoning cases ZT-2-89 and ZT-3-89.
b. Exceptions. The provisions of section 56-654 shall apply.
(3) Ground floor area in square feet per dwelling unit. No dwelling may be established, erected or
changed so that its ground floor area, in square feet, is less than that prescribed by the following
table .
.
r.-·----- -· ·----·--·--·-·--- ----·-·--------------r-------- ! One-story dwelling More than one-story I
j dwelling
~-----------------------------~--------- ---
1 (1) Single-family 720 I (1) Single-family 672 · J
'. ___________________ ·---·-·--· ----· ________ ,. ___________________ ----- ---·~--------------------··------------------
Livingston County, Illinois, Code of Ordinances
9A-4
Page 3
( 4) Building height.
PART II - LAND USE, PLANNING AND UTILITIES
Chapter 56 - ZONING
ARTICLE Ill. - DISTRICTS
DIVISION 2. AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
a. No main building or structure, other than an agricultural structure, may be changed or
erected in this district so as to have a height greater than 35 feet.
b. Exceptions. The provisions of section 56-654 shall apply.
(5) Yards.
a. General yard requirements. The following are minimum yard sizes, except as otherwise
provided by this chapter.
1. Front.
(i) Lots abutting a major highway or area service highway shall have a front yard of
50 feet. ·
(ii) Lots abutting a collector or local street shall have a front yard of 40 feet.
2. Side. The minimum width of each side yard for a dwelling shall not be less than 25 feet.
3. Rear. The minimum depth of a rear yard for a dwelling shall not be less than 50 feet.
b. Exceptions. The provisions of section 56-654 shall apply.
(6) Lot coverage. The buildings on a lot may not exceed in coverage 20 percent of total lot area.
(7) Off-street parking. The provisions of section 56-654 shall apply.
(8) Outdoor advertising. Signs may be permitted in this district under the following conditions:
a. One nonflashing sign for each street frontage containing not more than 40 square feet and
pertaining only to products for sale upon the premises or services rendered thereon or
therefrom, shall be permitted in this district.
b. Name signs shall be permitted subject to the following conditions:
1. Name signs shall display only the:
(i) Name of the premises upon which it is displayed;
(ii) Name of the owner, lessee of said premises;
(iii) Address of said premises;
(iv) Nature of occupation engaged in on said premises;
(v) "For Rent" and "For Sale" signs shall be permitted;
(vi) Signs for institutional uses including churches, hospitals, rest homes, private clubs
and similar uses shall be permitted subject to the following regulations:
2. One freestanding sign for each main use per frontage:
(i) The sign shall contain only the name and address of the building, its occupants
and the services rendered.
(ii) The sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, exclusive of architectural
features. The sign structure shall not exceed eight feet in height.
(iii) The sign face may be internally illuminated but shall not be floodlighted.
Livingston County, Illinois, Code of Ordinances
9A-5
Page4
(
PART II - LAND USE, PLANNING AND UTILITIES
Chapter 56 - ZONING
ARTICLE Ill. - DISTRICTS
DIVISION 2. AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
(iv) Signs shall be set back 15 feet from public rights-of-way; however, this setback
may be reduced to ten feet subject to approval of a special use permit. In no case
shall signs be located within required rear or interior side yards.
3. One sign attached to the face of the main building:
(i) The sign shall contain only the name of the building and its occupants.
(ii) Letter or numeral heights shall not exceed one foot.
(iii) The sign shall not exceed ten square feet in area.
(iv) The sign face may be internally illuminated or floodlighted.
(9) Loading. The provisions of section 56-654 shall apply.
(Ord. of 12-4-1973, § 5.3; Res. of 2-·1 ·1-·1986)
Secs. 56-84-56-109. Reserved.
Livingston County, Illinois, Code of Ordinances
9A-6
Page 5

(
PART II - LAND USE, PLANNING AND UTILITIES
Chapter 56 - ZONING
ARTICLE Ill. - DISTRICTS
DIVISION 4. RURAL RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
DIVISION 4. RURAL RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
Sec. 56-140. Established.
Sec. 56-141. Uses permitted.
Sec. 56-142. Special uses.
Sec. 56-143. Property development standards.
Secs. 56-144-56-169. Reserved.
Sec. 56-140. Established.
The RA Rural Residence District is established to include single-family residential estate homes in a
semirural environment.
(Ord. of 12-4-1973, § 7.0)
Sec. 56-141. Uses permitted.
The following uses shall be permitted in the RA Rural Residence District, plus such other uses as the
board may deem to be similar in nature. All uses shall be subject to the property development standards in
section 56-143 and article IX of this chapter, pertaining to property development standards.
(1) Agricultural uses that do not involve the raising or boarding of livestock or the processing of animal
products.
(2) Dwelling farm.
(3) Dwelling, single-family, not more than one dwelling per lot.
(4) Home for the aged.
(5) Home occupation.
(6) Municipal or government building.
(7) Nursing home, orphanage.
(8) Plant nursery.
(9) Police station or fire station.
(10) Private swimming pool.
(11) Public library.
(12) Public park or recreational facilities.
(13) School, public or private.
(14) Signs.
(Ord. of 12-4-1973, § 7.1; Res. of ·10-8-1996)
Livingston County, Illinois, Code of Ordinances
9A-7
Page 1
PART II - LAND USE, PLANNING AND UTILITIES
Chapter 56 - ZONING
ARTICLE Ill. - DISTRICTS
DIVISION 4. RURAL RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
Sec. 56-142. Special uses.
The following uses may be permitted by special use permit in the RA Rural Residence District as
provided for in article X of this chapter, pertaining to special uses.
(1) Assembly halls for use by nonprofit organizations.
(2) Bed and breakfast.
(3) Charitable organizations.
(4) Country club or golf course.
(5) Craft and service occupations.
(6) Farm, seasonal worker housing, tenant.
(7) Greenhouse, not exceeding 1,000 square feet.
(8) Kindergarten, day nursery, day care center or day care home, other than as a part of a school
providing other grades.
(9) Lodge or private club.
(10) Mobile home (see section 56-28).
(11) Planned unit development (subject to the requirements of article VII of this chapter, pertaining to
planned unit developments).
(12) Private recreational development.
(13) Railroad right-of-way and necessary uses.
(14) Windmills (needs to comply with article VIII of this chapter pertaining to, regulating the siting of
wind energy conversion systems in the county).
(Ord. of 12-4-'1973, § 7.2; Hes. of ·I0-11-'1983; 1-10-1989; Res. of 1--10-1989; Res. of 10-10-1995;
F~es. of 1-12-2006)
Sec. 56-143. Property development standards.
The following property development standards shall apply to all land and structures in the RA district.
(1) Minimum lot area. A lot on which a dwelling is erected or changed may not be smaller in area, in
square feet per dwelling unit, than that prescribed for it in this section:
a. Single-family with municipal water supply and municipal sewage disposal system: 15,000
square feet;
b. Single-family with municipal or community water supply and individual sewage disposal
system: 22,000 square feet;
c. Single-family with individual water supply and individual sewage disposal system: one acre;
(2) Loi dimensions.
a. All lots hereafter created shall have a minimum width of 120 feet and a minimum depth of
120 feet. Curve and cul-de-sac lot width shall be measured as chord distance at the building
setback line.
Livingston County, Illinois, Code of Ordinances
9A-8
Page 2
I
\
(
\
(
PART II - LAND USE, PLANNING AND UTILITIES
Chapter 56 - ZONING
ARTICLE Ill. - DISTRICTS
DIVISION 4. RURAL RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
b. Exceptions. The provisions of article IX of this chapter, pertaining to property development
standards, shall apply.
(3) Ground floor area in square feet per dwelling unit. No dwelling may be established, erected or
changed so that its ground floor area, in square feet, is less than that prescribed by the following
table:
I--·------------·--------·------------------------------1,-------------------------- ---·-- --- -- - -----·---- --
! One story dwelling , More than one-story
!I . Id welling
:i- ----------------------r----i -------------------------------- ---I
1 (1) Single-family 720 I (1) Single-family 672 I
~----·---------------------------·--·------------------ . ___J
(4) Building height.
a. No main building or structure, other than an agricultural structure, may be changed or
erected in this district so as to have a he'1ght greater than 35 feet.
b. Exceptions. The provisions of article IX of this chapter shall apply.
(5) Yards.
a. General yard requirements. Th_e following are minimum yard sizes, except as otherwise
provided by this chapter.
1. Front.
(i) Lots abutting a major highway or area service highway shall have a front yard of
50 feet.
(ii) Lots abutting a collector or local street shall have a front yard of 40 feet.
2. Side. The minimum width of each side yard for a dwelling shall not be less than ten feet.
3. Rear. The minimum depth of a rear yard for a dwelling shall not be less than 40 feet.
b. Exceptions. The provisions of article IX of this chapter shall apply.
(6) Lot coverage. The buildings on a lot may not exceed in coverage 25 percent of total lot area.
(7) Off-street parking. The provisions of article IX of this chapter shall apply.
(8) Outdoor advertising. Signs and other commercial advertising shall be permitted in this district only
as provided in this section.
a. Name plates shall be permitted subject to the following conditions:
1. Name plates shall not exceed two square feet in area.
2. Name plates shall display only the:
(i) Name of the premises upon which it is displayed;
(ii) Name of the owner or lessee of said premises;
(iii) Address of said premises; and
Livingston County, Illinois, Code of Ordinances
9A-9
Page 3
PART II - LAND USE, PLANNING AND UTILITIES
Chapter 56 - ZONING
ARTICLE Ill. - DISTRICTS
DIVISION 4. RURAL RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
(iv) Nature of the home occupation engaged in on said premises.
b. "For Rent" and "For Sale" signs shall be permitted. Not more than two such signs, not
exceeding a total of six square feet in area, shall be permitted on any lot or parcel.
c. Subdivision signs: on site:
1. Temporary real estate signs advertising real property which has been subdivided for
purposes of sale or lease shall be permitted, subject to the following conditions:
(i) The construction of any sign shall be in strict compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and all other laws of the county.
(ii) The sign shall remain only as long as some portion of the property advertised for
sale remains unsold, or for a period of two years, whichever period is shorter.
Subject to approval of the board, said time may be extended for one year. Not
more than two such extensions may be granted.
(iii) The signs shall be located on the premises which they advertise.
(iv) No sign shall exceed 480 square feet in area.
(v) Not more than two such signs shall be permitted in any subdivision under five acres
in size. In subdivisions involving more than five acres, one additional sign shall be
permitted for each additional five acres.
2. Identification signs containing the tract name are permitted, provided there shall be not
more than one for each three lots. Said signs shall not exceed ten square feet.
3. Signs are permitted on the same lot with a model home provided they do not exceed
four in number and shall not exceed four square feet in area. Said signs shall be
removed after the developer concludes the initial sale of the lots or homes to their initial
owners.
d. Subdivision signs: off-site temporary real estate directional signs. Temporary real estate
directional signs, subject to special use, directing prospective purchasers to a subdivision
having lots or houses for sale may be erected and maintained provided said signs do not
create hazardous traffic conditions. Such signs shall be subject to the following standards:
1. The sign shall not exceed 160 square feet in area.
2. The sign shall be set back not less than eight feet from the front property line.
3. The sign shall be not less than six nor more than 18 feet above the crown of the nearest
adjacent road or the higher of the two crowns of two adjacent roads.
e. Temporary off site open house signs. Temporary open house signs shall be permitted for a
period of 48 hours provided that the sign shall be limited to a double faced sign not more
than two feet by three feet in size.
f. Signs for institutional uses including churches, hospitals, rest homes, private clubs and
similar uses shall be permitted subject to the following regulations:
1. One freestanding sign for each main use per frontage:
(i) The sign shall contain only the name and address of the building, its occupants
and the services rendered.
(ii) The sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, exclusive of architectural
features. The sign structure shall not exceed eight feet in height.
Livingston County, Illinois, Code of Ordinances
9A-10
Page4
(
\
(
PART II· LAND USE, PLANNING AND UTILITIES
Chapter 56 ·ZONING
ARTICLE Ill.· DISTRICTS
DIVISION 4. RURAL RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
(iii) The sign face may be internally illuminated but shall not be flood lighted.
(iv) Signs shall be set back 15 feet from public rights-of-way; however, this setback
may be reduced to ten feet subject to approval of a special use permit. In no case
shall signs be located within required rear or interior side yards.
2. One sign attached to the face of the main building:
(i) The same shall contain only the name of the building and its occupants.
(ii) Letter or numeral heights shall not exceed one foot.
(iii) The sign shall not exceed ten square feet in area.
(iv) The sign face may be internally illuminated.
(Ord. of 12-4-1973, § 7.3)
Secs. 56-144-56-169. Reserved.
Livingston County, Illinois, Code of Ordinances
9A-11
Page 5
/',
9A.03 GRUNDY COUNTY AG DISTRICT RULES AND REGULATIONS Page 1 of 1
q-1-4-1: AG RIC UL TURAL (A) DISTRICT:
{
(
(his district is intended to permit agriculture to be the primary use of land and restrict residential uses or
activities that interfere with agriculture.
A. Character: This district is entirely rural in character. The minimum lot size requirements and open space
ratios for uses and other controls are set so that, at full development, the area will remain rural in
appearance and open space can be used for agricultural purposes.
B. Uses: Agriculture is the primary use of the land. Other uses that are accessory to the agricultural use
are permitted on farmsteads to enhance the total value of the agricultural operation to its owner.
Residential uses are limited in this district and require the permanent set aside of adjacent lands that
preserve natural areas or agriculture.
C. Water And Sewer: Water supply and sanitary sewage disposal is normally provided by wells and septic
systems on an individual Jot basis. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
8-1-4-2: AGRICULTURAL RESIDENTIAL (AR) DISTRICT:
This district is intended to provide a higher density of residential development than is otherwise permitted
in the agricultural (A) district. Residential development is permitted for those tracts of land within or
adjacent to agricultural areas where it is determined that:
A. Such land, by virtue of its physical characteristics, is not well suited for agricultural purposes;
B. The development of the land for residential use will not substantially impair the use of adjacent
properties for agricultural use; and
C. The development of rural land for residential use will not substantially impact the existing road system,
increase the requirements for public services, or change the rural character of the area. (Ord. 10-001,
1-12-2010)
9A-12
ll/1 'J /'1(\1 ')

Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of8
1 Q-2-2-1: LAND USE TABLES:
\
(
(he following three (3) tables provide the information on uses permitted in each district:
A. Symbols Used In The Use Tables: The following symbols are used in tables 8-2-2-1A, "Agricultural,
Residential, And Institutional Uses"; 8-2-2-1 B, "Nonresidential Uses"; and 8-2-2-1 C, "Temporary Uses'',
of this section, to indicate whether a particular use is permitted, permitted by administrative review
(subject to administrative review use standards), permissible by special use review (subject to special
use standards), or prohibited within each zoning district:
1. "P" indicates a permitted use, where the use is permitted as a matter of right, subject to the general
standards of section 8-2-3, "General Use Standards'', of this chapter, and all other applicable
provisions of this UDO.
2. "A" indicates an administrative review use, which is subject to additional review by the land use
director for compliance with the standards of section 8-2-3, "General Use Standards'', of this chapter,
and the applicable performance standards of section 8-2-4, "Administrative Review Use Standards",
of this chapter. Not all properties or project designs may meet these requirements; thus, the use may
not be allowed to be established on every parcel within the district.
3. "S" indicates a special use, which is allowed only upon granting a special use permit as provided in
section 8-14-6, "Special Use Permits'', of this title. The planning commission, zoning board of
appeals, planning and zoning committee, and county board review special use permit applications
for compliance with the standards of section 8-2-3, "General Use Standards'', of this chapter, and the
applicable performance standards of section 8-2-5, "Special Use Standards'', of this chapter. Not all
properties or project designs may meet these requirements; thus, the use may not be allowed to be
established on every parcel within the district.
4. "N" indicates a prohibited use that is not permitted in that district. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
TABLE 8-2-2-1A
AGRICULTURAL, RESIDENTIAL, AND INSTITUTIONAL USES
I P = Permitted use II S = Special use
A= Permitted use with administrative review IJ N = Prohibited use . ... .
Zoning District Review
General Use
Or Special
Use
Land Use A AR PR R CG Cl I Standard1 Standard
I Agricultural uses: IDDDDDDD
[ Agriculture IEJEJ0~0~~
II II ,,-----i11r--111r-1
9A-13
h++-.-...//,,rnrn.r .-.fa_,.J;.,..,.,...,..,......-l:+;,... .. ,.. .,,..,........,./,.,.,...,..l,...\..,,....,,...J,.-/..,...,.:...,.+.....,,..,.,,, ...,.i,...,. 0/1 'i /')f\1 ')
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 2 of 8
Boarding/riding stables l_
Sec. 8-2-4-1
of this
chapter J
Borrow pits for interchange and LJ
highway use
Sec. 8-2-4-4
of this
chapter
Cargo container storage unit LJ
Sec. 8-2-4-5
of this
chapter
I Farmstead 10 II In tensive agriculture 10 Keooel ICJ Sec. 8-2-5-14
of this
chapter
IIR e sidential uses: ID Gm"p home• IL] Sec. 8-2-4-6
of this
chapter
Live-work units LJ Sec. 8-2-5-16
of this
chapter
Manufactured home park or subdivision LJ
I Multi-family 10
Sec. 8-2-5-17
of this
chapter
I I
Poultry keeping l~:e J
Sec. 8-2-4-7
of this
chapter
Single-family CJ Sec. 8-2-4-1 O
of this
chapter
Single-family attached [:] and two-family
Single-family cluster [J Sec. 8-2-5-29
of this
chapter
I Home uses: ID
I Home childcare II p I
I
I I
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 3 of 8
( I LJWlJJl_ll Sec. 8-2-3-4 of this · · L _I
chapter
Home occupation LJWITJLTI Sec. 8-2-3-5
of this
chapter
I Miscellaneous uses: IDDDDDDD I I
Solar collector WITIJLtl Sec. 8-2-4-
systems 11 of this
chapter
I Solecfa'm CJJDLJDLTI Sec. 8-2-5-
30 of this
chapter
\ institutional uses: IDDDDDDDI II I
College/university CJLJUlLITJ Sec. 8-2-5-5
of this
chapter
Correctional facility LJLJWLITJ Sec. 8-2-5-7
of this
chapter
Daycare facility [ slLJITl"II"I Sec. 8-2-5-8
of this
chapter
Hospitals 00000!:EJI I
Institutional L][" ILIT J~LI Sec. 8-2-5-
residential 1} of this
chapter
Places of public fjIT1rm1 Sec. 8-2-5-
assembly 22 of this
chapter
Private club LJWTI Sec. 8-2-5-
24 of this
chapter
Public service facility LtITJLJTJ Sec. 8-2-4-8
of this
chapter
Utilities, LJCTJLJITJLJ Sec. 8-2-4-
neighborhood 13 of this
chapter
9A-15
h++...,., // ........ , .. .i---1 !--- - ..J!.C: ---- - ---- J_ - ..J - L - - l _ J ____ : __ ,. __ - -- - --1. --
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 4 of 8
Notes:
1.All general use standards enumerated in section 8-2-3, "General Use Standards", of this
chapter, shall apply to all land uses enumerated in this table, as appropriate. Listings in this
column are provided as a convenient reference to certain applicable standards.
2. See section 8-2-3-1 of this chapter.
3. Only applicable to R-40 and R-200 lots.
(Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010; amd. Ord. 2011-012, 7-12-2011; Ord. 2012-010, 4-10-2012; Ord. 2012-
011, 4-10-2012; Ord. 2012-015, 4-10-2012; Ord. 2012-016, 4-10-2012)
TABLE 8-2-2-1B
NONRESIDENTIAL USES
I P = Permitted use II S = Special use I
A= Permitted use with administrative review I N = Prohibited use I
Zoning District
Land Use A AR PR R CG Cl I
I Commercial uses: IDDDDDDDI
Agricultural support and other rural services ~tJtJEJ~rJEJI I IB ed and breakfast lrJtJtJEJtJrJEJI Car wash lrJtJtJEJ~[JrJI
I Commercial lodging IEJ00EJ~~[~]
I Commercial retail lrJtJtJEJ~rJ~[
Drive-in/drive-through facility rJtJtJEJ~[JrJ[
[ Garden center lrJtJtJEJ~rJrJ[
Heavy retail and service rJrJtJEJ~rJEJ[
I Light automobile service llNl!Nl!NllNl!PllPllPll
Admin. Review
General Use Or Special
Standard1 Use Standar
- I Sec. 8-2-5-2 of
this chapter 'I Sec. 8-2-4-3 of
this chapter I Sec. 8-2-5-4 of
this chapter
I
I Sec. 8-2-5-6 of
this chapter I Sec. 8-2-5-9 of
this chapter
I Sec. 8-2-5-11 of
this chapter
[ Sec. 8-2-5-12 o'
this chapter
.
.. ·.
ii
9A-16
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 5 of 8
( I II_ L JLlJl 1 1 Hr~t: 37
I Ministorage units ll~tJ~tJtlrJrJI I Sec. 8-2-5-18
: of this chapter
I Mixed use ll~tJrltJtlrJrll I Sec. 8-2-5-19
: of this chapter
II O ffice 11~0EJEJ00~ Restaurant lrJ~rltJrJr:JrJI I Sec. 8-2-4-9 of
this chapter
I Services IEJ0EJEJ00EJ
I Shopping center 11~0~EJ00EJ I
Vehicle sales, rental, and tJ~rltJtlr:Jrll Sec. 8-2-5-31
service of this chapter
I Veterinary practice !l:JtJrltJtlrJrll Sec. 8-2-5-32
of this chapter
,(
' .
Recreation and amusement uses: DDDDDDCll I
Campgrounds and RV rltJrltJtJrJEJI I Sec. 8-2-5-3 of
parks this chapter
Commercial amusement, indoor tJtJrltJrJr:JEJI I I
Commercial amusement, tJtJrltJrJr:Jt] I outdoor I Recreation, indoor lrltJ~rlrJr:JEJI Sec. 8-2-5-26
of this chapter
Recreation, outdoor rltJ~rlrJrJEJI I Sec. 8-2-5-27
. of this chapter
II In dustrial uses: IDDDDDDD Adult uses ltJtJrltJtJrJEJI I Sec. 8-2-5-1 of
this chapter
I Disposal I (Regulated by separate county resolution)
l ) I Extraction ltJtJrltJtJrJrll I Sec. 8-2-5-10
: of this chapter
I Heavy industry IEJ0EJEJ0El~
111111111111111
9A-17
L .LL II ' ,.
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 6 of 8
[ Light ind us try [~~l!:J~l_r'JJ~~
Outdoor cargo container tJLJLJLJLI: ltJ Sec. 8-2-5-20
storage and handling of this
facilities chapter
I
Private airstrip LJ[JLJ[J[JLJLJ Sec. 8-2-5-23
of this chapter
Salvage activities [[JlJ"fNJLJ[J Sec. 8-2-5-28
of this
chapter
Utilities, community s s s s A s p Secs. 8-2-4-
12, 8-2-5-33
of this
chapter
Warehousing and transportation rJtJtJrltJtI:JI I I
IIM iscellaneous uses: IDDDDDDDI I A;"'°'" [~][J[JN_ll N•-l~IJ Sec. 8-2-4-2
of this chapter
I Cemeteries IEJ00~0EJ[~JI I
Landscape waste [J[J N l:llllJ Sec. 8-2-5-15
composting and organic of this
waste composting facility chapter
Parking (stand alone lot) [J[J N l"Ipr1·1 Sec. 8-2-5-21
and transit facilities of this
chapter
Private pipelines [J[JLJ•J~]~J8_] Sec. 8-2-5-25
of this
chapter
Solar collector systems [][JITJ[JLJ[J Sec. 8-2-4-11
of this chapter I Soloc teem' ILJDDDDDlJ Sec. 8-2-5-30
of this
chapter
Utility scale wind energy WLJLJLJLJLJ Sec. 8-2-5-34
conversion systems of this
chapter I
9A-18
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php .9/13/2013
i
\
{
\
(
Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
Wireless
telecommunications
facilities
Note:
Regulated by 55 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/5-12001.1 LJ
Page 7 of 8
1.All general use standards enumerated in section 8-2-3, "General Use Standards", of this
chapter, shall apply to all land uses enumerated in this table, as appropriate. Listings in this
column are provided as a convenient reference to certain applicable standards.
(Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010; amd. Ord. 2012-015, 4-10-2012; Ord. 2012-016, 4-10-2012)
TABLE 8-2-2-1 C
TEMPORARY USES
I P = Permitted use II S = Special use
A = Permitted use with administrative review II N = Prohibited use I
' l~1AR 1EEJ;::'11~~ General
Use
Land Use Standard1
I Temporary uses: IDDDDDDDI
Commercial outdoor sales event EJ~rJl:JrJtJrJI
Contractor's office EJ~tltJ~tJl:JI
I Farm stand 1rJ~rJrJ~tJrJ1 Model homes IEJ~tltJ~tJEJI
I Sales office 11J~rJrJ~tJr11
I Special events lrJ~rJl:J~rJEJI
Note:
Admin. Review
Or Special
Use Standard
II Sec. 8-2-6 of this
chapter I Sec. 8-2-6-2 of this
chapter I Sec. 8-2-6-3 of this
chapter I Sec. 8-2-6-4 of this
chapter I Sec. 8-2-6-6 of this
chapter
I Sec. 8-2-6-5 of this
chapter
1.All general use standards enumerated in section 8-2-3, "General Use Standards", of this
9A-19
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 8 of 8
chapter, shall apply to all land uses enumerated in this table, as appropriate. Listings in this
column are provided as a convenient reference to certain applicable standards.
(Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
9A-20
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of2
l'l-2-2-2: UNLISTED USES: (
l
A Unlisted Uses Prohibited: Any use that is not listed in section 8-2-2-1, table 8-2-2-1 A, "Agricultural,
Residential, And Institutional Uses"; 8-2-2-1 B, "Nonresidential Uses"; or 8-2-2-1 C, "Temporary Uses",
of this chapter is prohibited.
B. New And Similar Uses: It is not the intent to prohibit legitimate similar uses or new uses similar to those
that are listed. The director shall decide whether the proposed use is either a subcategory of a
permitted or special use, or a use that is functionally similar to a permitted or special use.
C. Decision Criteria: The following decision criteria shall be evaluated when the land use department
decides whether a proposed use is a subcategory of, or functionally similar to, a permitted or special
use:
1. Parking demand;
2. Average daily and peak hour trip generation (cars and trucks);
{ 3. Water demand·,
\\
4. Solid waste generation;
5. Impervious surface;
6. Noise;
7. Lighting;
8. Dust;
9. Odors;
10. Use and storage of hazardous materials;
11. Character of buildings and structures;
12. Character of operation; and
13. Hours of operation.
( ·Effect Of The Land Use Department's Determination:
9A-21
()/1 '1 /'"'lf\1 ')
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 2 of2
1. If the land use department approves an application for a decision pursuant to this section, then the
land use shall be applied with the same restrictions as the land use to which it was compared for the
purposes of the favorable decision. ,-
2. If the land use department determines that a proposed land use is not a subcategory of, or
functionally similar to, an already listed land use, then the proposed use is a prohibited use. (Ord. 10-
001, 1-12-2010)
9A-22
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of2
( Q-2-3-1: ACCESSORY AGRICULTURAL USES:
Accessory agricultural uses include growing crops or keeping farm animals on a parcel where this use is
not the principal use of the parcel. This is a common accessory use in Grundy County where a
homeowner will have a large garden or a small greenhouse on the property for the individual's own use.
Accessory farm animals are allowed by right in the A, AR, and PR zoning districts. This use is permitted in
combination with the keeping of other livestock so long as the maximum number of allowed animal units
(horses and other types of animals) in the relevant zoning district is not exceeded. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-
2010)
Accessory agricultural uses include:
Field crops.
Greenhouse for private use only.
Nursery for private use only.
The keeping of farm animals for personal use only and subject to the following standards:
A. All buildings where animals will be present shall be set back at least one hundred feet (100') from
all property lines.
B. At least one acre of continuous pasture to be used for roaming and grazing must be provided for
horses, mules, or cows.
C. Small birds, small reptiles, fish, and small mammals like gerbils, rabbits, mice, and similar small
animals are not limited in number.
D. There shall not be more than one animal unit per acre or part thereof. The following table shows
the value in animal units for mature animals permitted per acre of land:
TABLE 8-2-3-1
ANIMAL UNITS PER ACRE
I II Number Of Minimum
Animal : Animal Units Lot Size
I Horse, mule II 1 = 1 unit II 2 I
I cow I 1 = 1 unit II 2 I
I Pig 1 = 1 unit II 2 I
I Sheep I 2 = 1 unit II 2 I
I Goat II 2 = 1 unit II 2 I
9A-23
Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
I Fowl, poultry 1
Furbearing
animals2
Notes:
II 20 = 1 unit II 1 I
1. PR zoning district regulations are at section 8-2-4-7 of this chapter.
2. Except dogs and cats, which are regulated by section 4-2-7 ofthis code.
(Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010; amd. Ord. 2012-011, 4-10-2012)
9A-24
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php
Page 2 of2
9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of2
('-2-3-2: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
All accessory structures shall meet the following standards:
A. Timing Of Construction: An accessory use or structure of one thousand (1,000) square feet is allowed
prior to construction of the principal structure, with issuance of a building permit for said principal
structure.
B. Use Restrictions: Accessory structures shall not be used for residential occupancy or commercial
purposes.
C. Location Of Structures: The following standards apply to the location of freestanding accessory
structures:
1. Permitted locations of accessory uses and structures are shown in table 8-2-3-2, "Permitted
Locations Of Accessory Uses", of this section.
TABLE 8-2-3-2
PERMITTED LOCATIONS OF ACCESSORY USES
I I Yard I
I Fmot
1
Interior I Rear1 I Use Or Structure Side
I IG arages or carports, detached 101 x 10 Open sided summer houses and gazebos IOI x2 10
Sheds and storage buildings for garden equipment and household items DI x2 ICJ I IS wimming pools, private 11~1 x2 10 Decks more than 2 feet above grade IOI x2 10
Notes:
1.lf the rear yard is also a street yard, the permitted accessory structure must be located at least
1 O feet from any property line.
2.The structure may be located in a side yard (excluding street yard) of a lot having an area of 1
acre or more in size, provided that the structure is located at least 20 feet behind the extended
front plane of the principal building.
9A-25
L.1....___./f ________ ,_ ___ 1• ____ _ 1•_i- _ J_ - _1_1 _J_{ ___ • __ _;_ ---- __ l_ f"'\/1'l/,-.,A1"J
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 2 of2
2. The location of freestanding accessory structures to multi-family or attached dwellings shall be
approved during the land development review process to ensure that essential access is safe and
the structures do not create a nuisance to the adjoining properties.
D. Swimming Pools: Swimming pools must be fenced with at least a four foot (4') fence with a gate that is
self-latching and self-locking. Alternatively, a swimming pool may be equipped with a power safety
cover that complies with the international building code in place of the fence; or a barrier may be
mounted on top of the pool to protect it from unauthorized use.
E. Maximum Building Area: The maximum area for accessory buildings and structures on any lot shall not
exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet.
F. Maximum Height: One story or twenty five feet (25'), whichever is lower.
G. Height Measurement: Accessory structure height is calculated by measuring the vertical distance from
the average finished ground level around the base of the structure to the highest point on the structure.
(Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
9A-26
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of3
(Q-2-3-5: HOME OCCUPATION:
Home occupation accessory uses are permitted in the agricultural (A), agricultural residential (AR),
planned residential (PR), residential (R), and commercial general (CG) districts subject to the following
requirements:
A. Ownership Of Business: Home occupations shall be managed and owned by a person residing in the
dwelling unit. It shall be conducted within the premises of such home and shall be incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.
B. Maximum Floor Area: Home occupations shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the gross floor
area of the principal building, including the cellar or basement. No more than twenty five percent (25%)
of the floor area of an accessory building shall be devoted to such occupation.
C. Employees: No more than one person shall be employed who is not a member of the family residing in
the dwelling.
t..J. Access: The entrance to the space devoted to such occupation shall be from within the dwelling or the
normal entrance to the accessory building.
E. Building Character: There shall be no displciy, storage, or activity that will indicate from the exterior of a
dwelling that it is being used for any use other than as a dwelling.
F. Outdoor Storage: No outdoor storage is allowed.
G. Outdoor Display Of Merchandise: No commercial display of materials, merchandise, goods, or
equipment shall be visible from the exterior of the dwelling unit unless located in the CG district.
H. Signage: One nameplate, no more than three (3) square feet, is permitted unless located in the CG
district.
( 1. It shall only contain the name of the occupant's business.
2. It shall not be illuminated.
9A-27
C\11 'l /'/(\1 '2
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 2 of3
3. It shall be set back at least twenty five feet (25') from the street lot line.
I. Deliveries: Stock in trade, including that which is produced on the premises, shall not require receipt or
delivery of merchandise, goods, or equipment by other than U.S. postal service mail, similar parcel
delivery service, or by a private passenger automobile or up to a three-quarter (3/4) ton pickup truck.
J. Commercial Vehicles: Irrespective of subsection I of this section, the home occupation shall not involve
vehicles over seven thousand (7,000) pounds or trailers parked on the premises in a place that is
visible from adjoining property or public rights of way, which identifies by sign, logo, or emblem the
occupation, business, or activity. This restriction is exempted in the CG district, where commercial
vehicles are allowed.
K. Nuisance: The home occupation shall not create or cause any perceptible noise, glare, odor, smoke,
electrical interference, or vibrations that constitute a public or private nuisance to neighboring
properties.
L. Risk: The home occupation shall not be more dangerous to life, personal safety, or property than any
other activity ordinarily carried on with respect to a dwelling unit used solely for residential purposer ··
M. Parking:
1. Parking for no more than five (5) vehicles is permitted unless located in the CG district.
I
2. Parking spaces shall not be located in the required front yard.
N. Hours Of Operation: Home occupations shall not be generally open to the public at times earlier than
six o'clock (6:00) AM. nor later than ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
0. Prohibited Operations: The following uses are prohibited as home occupations:
1. Retail sales.
2. Professional services, teaching, counseling, instruction, or any group activity involving more than five
(5) persons at a time. The performance of religious rites shall be exempted from this provision.
3. Storage of hazardous materials. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
9A-28
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of2
(
0 -2-3-11: RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT:
A. Agricultural And Agricultural Residential Lot Splits: Single-family detached dwellings are permitted in
both the agricultural (A) and the agricultural residential (AR) zoning districts as follows:
1. Agricultural And Agricultural Residential Zoning Districts Minimum Lot Size Requirements: A and AR
zoning districts are allowed to have only one lot for a dwelling that is a minimum of 1.5 acres in size.
The lot or tract of the land must be a lot of record as of July 8, 1980. Exceptions are only permitted
for attached accessory units. (See section 8-2-3-2, "Accessory Structures", of this chapter.)
2. Survey And Recording Of Lots: Prior to the establishment of a residential Jot, a legal description of
the plat of survey, approved by a registered surveyor, of the proposed residential Jot shall be
provided. This survey shall show the lot lines of each Jot(s) and the overall tract used to satisfy the
five (5) acres per dwelling unit density requirements. The agricultural tract used to satisfy the density
requirements must be surveyed and must be recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds.
3. Agricultural Residential Maximum Number Of Units: One additional dwelling unit up to a maximum of
seven (7) additional units shall be permitted for lots of record as of July 8, 1980, provided the overall
tract of land on which the lots are to be located contain an additional three (3) acres or more for each
such dwelling unit.
4. Adjustment Of Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot size may be increased subject to plan policies
and/or septic system standards.
B. Extensions Of Residential Lots: In order to retain agricultural land in agricultural use and in order to
provide for low density residential development on lands poorly suited to agricultural use in the
agricultural (A) district, peninsular extensions of residential lots to the required public right of way may
be granted.
1. The residential Jots shall conform to subsection A of this section and the conditions of this subsection
when the proposed residential lot:
a. Is made up of more than fifty percent (50%) of nonprime soils as defined in the county's land
evaluation and site assessment (LESA); or
b. Is a Jot of record at the effective date hereof which is five (5) acres or less in size; or
c. Is a lot of record at the effective date hereof which is more than five (5) acres, but Jess than 10.01
acres in size and is neither square nor rectangular in shape; or
d. Is classified as woodlands where more than fifty percent (50%) of the acreage of the lot contains
deciduous or evergreen trees; or
( e. Is classified as nonfloodplain where more than fifty percent (50%) of the acreage of the lot is not in
a floodplain as determined by the latest national flood insurance program flood insurance rate
map.
9A-29
()/1 '1 /'1()1 '1
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 2 of2
Peninsular extensions are excluded from computation of the minimum lot area.
2. Access driveways on said peninsular extensions shall meet the following minimum standards:
a. A minimum driveway width of eighteen feet (18') and a clearance of thirteen feet six inches (13'6")
above grade.
b. A driveway greater than two hundred feet (200') in length must receive specific design approval
from the fire protection district in which it is located.
c. A spacing requirement such that any access driveway must be separated from the nearest access
driveway along the same road by at least:
(1) One thousand five hundred feet (1,500') if average daily traffic on the road is five hundred (500)
or more vehicles per day.
(2) One thousand two hundred fifty feet (1,250') if average daily traffic on the road is between two
hundred fifty (250) and four hundred ninety nine (499) vehicles per day.
(3) One thousand feet (1,000') if average daily traffic on the road is two hundred forty nine (249) or
fewer vehicles per day. ·
Average daily traffic is to be determined by the most recent Illinois department of transportation
map for the county.
d. Existing farmhouses with existing access driveways shall be exempt from the driveway standa, _
above.
e. A zoning certificate will be required for residential lots with peninsular extensions to the required
public road.
f. Shared access driveways on peninsular extensions shall be allowed; provided, that shared
driveway access shall be to no more than three (3) residential lots. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
9A-30
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of 1
r "-2-3-12: RESIDENTIAL STORAGE OF TRAILERS AND BOATS:
\
(
The following provisions shall apply to the temporary storage of trailers and boats on residential parcels:
A. Trailers: Camping trailers, travel trailers, and other trailers (not including mobile homes) shall only be
permitted:
1. In a lawfully established camping area; or
2. On a lot lawfully used for the sale, rental, repair, storage, or manufacture of such trailers, and then
only when not used for dwelling or camping purposes; or
3. On a lot containing a single-family detached dwelling; provided that only one such trailer is permitted
on each such lot. Furthermore, that such trailer, be stored or parked in the rear yard at any time or in
the front yard from May 1 through November 1.
4. Temporary residential use during construction of a permanent residential unit for a period not to
exceed twenty four (24) months.
8. Boats: One boat owned by the occupant of the dwelling may be stored or parked at any time in the rear
yard of a lot containing a single-family detached dwelling, or in the front or side yard from April 1 to
November 1 provided no major repair, disassembly, or rebuilding operations are conducted thereon.
(Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
9A-31
l__,__,_ 11 - _, 1" 1 1 I I ' ,
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of 1
8-2-3-13: RESIDENTIAL STORAGE (INDOOR) AND UTILITY SHEDS:
One or more storage buildings are permitted on a residential lot provided that the following standards ;:
met:
A. Design: The storage building shall be a permanent structure that is designed for storage use. Converted
semitrailers, manufactured homes, modular shipping containers, refuse containers, or similar structures
or equipment shall not be used for storage.
B. Occupancy: Storage and utility buildings shall not be used for human habitation.
C. Location: Storage and utility sheds shall be erected in accordance with the provisions of section 8-2-
3-2, "Table 8-2-3-2, Permitted Locations Of Accessory Uses", of this chapter.
D. Height: The structure shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') in height. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
9A-32
htto://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9113/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of2
r !'1~2-3-14: SMALL SCALE WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS: .
I
A. Accessory Use: Small scale wind energy conversion systems (S-SWECS) are allowed as an accessory
use and structure in all zoning districts, subject to the following requirements:
1. Height: The total height of a S-SWECS tower with blade or a meteorological tower used in
conjunction with the S-SWECS shall not exceed one hundred feet (100') unless specifically allowed
by the county board.
2. Setbacks: The setback of the towers shall not be less than the following:
a. Lot lines: 1.1 times the total height of the structure.
b. Pipelines and public rights of way: 1.1 times the total height of the structure.
c. Public roads: 1.1 times the total. height of the structure.
d. Power or communication transmission line above or below ground: 1.1 times the total height of the
structure.
e. Highways: 1.1 times the total height of the structure.
( f. Inhabited structures on adjacent lands: 1.1 times the total height of the structure.
(
3. Color, Finish, And Appearance: The tower and the blades of the S-SWECS shall be nonreflective
and unobtrusive color that will aid in blending the system to the environment. The finish of the tower
and the blades shall be matte and nonreflective. No lettering, company insignia, advertising or
graphics shall be on any part of the tower, hub, or blades.
4. Blade Clearance: The vertical distance from the grade to the tip of the wind turbine blade when the
blade is at its lowest point must be at least twenty five feet (25').
5. Lighting: No glare shall extend beyond the boundaries of the S-SWECS. The applicant shall utilize
the least intrusive lighting possible.
6. Landscaping: Applicant shall minimize the disruption of natural environment, retain existing
vegetation and native plant species to the maximum extent feasible, and replant with native
vegetation if existing vegetation is disturbed during construction. Landscaping shall be used as part
of screening from adjacent properties or public view.
7. Federal And State Requirement Compliance: The S-SWECS shall meet or exceed any standards
and regulations of the FAA and any other agency of the state or federal government with the
authority to regulate S-SWECS.
8. Power Lines: All electrical control wiring and power lines shall be wireless or not aboveground.
9. Sound Pressure Level: The sound pressure level generated by a S-SWECS shall comply with all
Illinois pollution control board (hereafter referred to as IPCB) noise regulations and in no event shall
a S-SWECS exceed fifty five (55) dB at any point on adjacent properties. The applicant must
9A-33
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 2 of2
immediately cease any violation of the IPCB regulations unless said violation is excused and waived
by the affected landowners and occupants.
10. Safety/Climb Prevention: All S-SWECS shall be designed to prevent unauthorized access to
electrical and mechanical components or access to the towers on the site. All towers shall not be
climbable from the ground to fifteen feet (15') aboveground, and all access doors to towers and
equipment shall be lockable.
11. Waste Disposal: All solid waste generated from supplies, equipment, parts, packaging, or operation
of the facility shall be removed from the site immediately and disposed of in an appropriate manner.
Any hazardous waste that is generated by the facility, including, but not limited to, lubricating
materials, shall be removed consistent with all local, state, and federal rules and regulations.
12. Conformance To Industry And Code Standards/Engineer Certification: The S-SWECS shall comply
with all applicable local and county codes for the electrical, mechanical, and structural components
of the facility. All documents provided for review shall be stamped and signed by a professional
engineer.
13. Electronic Interference: The S-SWECS shall not cause microwave, television, radio or navigation
interference contrary to federal communication commission (FCC) rules and regulations or any other
laws pertaining to electronic interference issues.
14. Braking Systems: The owner of the S-SWECS shall have the ability to immediately cease operation
of the system during an emergency. The system itself shall be equipped with an emergency braking
system.
15. Signage: No signs, .banners or flags shall be placed on the S-SWECS with the exception of the
required identifications provided by the manufacturer and any warnings thereto.
B. Administration And Review: A site plan shall be provided to the land use department. that indicates the
following:
1. Location, setbacks, exterior dimensions and square footage of all structures on the owner's property.
2. Location of any existing waterways, wetlands, and 100-year floodplains, sanitary sewers, storm
sewer systems, and water distribution systems.
3. Location of any overhead power lines.
4. The locations and the expected duration of shadow flicker caused by the S-SWECS system. (Ord.
10-001, 1-12-2010)
9A-34
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of 1
, ( 1-2-3-15: VEHICLE SALES:
{
\
A. General: Except as specified below, it is unlawful to display any vehicles, including automobiles, boats,
lawn equipment, all-terrain vehicles, or other similar items, for sale or lease, unless the sale of such
items is permitted within the district and the current certificate of occupancy for the location has been
obtained from the county.
B. Exceptions:
1. The vehicle must be a private vehicle, owned by the occupant.
2. Such private vehicle, boat, trailer, or recreational vehicle is in operating condition.
3. No portion of the vehicle shall be placed on the public right of way.
4. No more than one vehicle at any time shall be offered for sale. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-201 O)
8-2-3-16: VISION CLEARANCE FOR CORNER LOTS:
To avoid obstructing the sight lines of traffic approaching an intersection, the following provisions shall
apply to corner lots within any part of a yard located within a radius of twenty five feet (25') from the
intersection of two (2) street right of way lines forming the lot corner:
A. Ground Plantings: No structures, objects, or shrubbery shall be erected or placed having a height more
than thirty inches (30") above the ground grade within this area.
B. Maintenance Of Trees And Branches: Any trees planted in such areas shall be maintained in a manner
that they shall not have branches lower than eight feet (8') above .the ground grade elevation of the
area. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
9A-35
BLANK PAGE
9A-36
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of 1
(~-2-4-1: BOARDING/RIDING STABLES:
(
Boarding/riding stables may be permitted in the agricultural (A), agricultural residential (AR), planned
residential (PR), and residential (R) districts, subject to administrative review that demonstrates that the
following provisions are met:
A. The maximum number of horses allowed shall be based on the subject property's lot size and shall be
determined as follows:
1. One horse for the first two (2) acres.
2. One horse for each additional one-half (1'2) acre above two (2) acres.
B. The stables must be located at least one hundred feet (100') from all property lines.
C. Rental of stable space is permitted; however, no group riding lessons or public events shall be allowed.
(Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
9A-37
(\/1 '] /")f\1 ']
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of I
8-2-4-2: AIRPORTS:
Airports shall be permitted in the agricultural (A) and industrial (I) districts, subject to administrative re\._ ..
that demonstrates that the following provisions are met:
A Minimum Site Area: The minimum site area for this use shall be three hundred (300) acres.
B. Noise Impact: All airport development shall be submitted with a noise impact assessment. The
assessment shall identify the initial and twenty (20) year projected day-night level (DNL) noise contour
lines beginning with 50 DNL and proceeding to 75 DNL. The following standards shall be met:
1. Airport Boundary: The twenty (20) year, 65 DNL line shall lie completely within airport property or
land that has been granted a noise easement.
2. 55 DNL Limited Development Area:
a. No new residential development shall be permitted within the 55 DNL line. If for some reason a
new residential use must be permitted, the building shall have insulation and windows that limit
aircraft noise within the building to 50 DNL. The applicant shall demonstrate that there is no
residentially zoned land in the 55 DNL area or that noise easements have been granted to the
airport.
b. Existing residential uses shall have five (5) years to remodel to provide insulation meeting the
standards in subsection B2a of this section.
c. If the 55 DNL area expands, a zoning and land use plan for all land within the 55 DNL noise
contour shall be submitted. This plan shall indicate the feasibility of restricting such land to
nonresidential uses. Airport approval shall be based on the ability to minimize noise intrusion into
existing residential areas and to prohibit new residential development that would hinder future
airport expansion.
d. Once established, the county shall require all rezonings or development approvals that would
permit residential use within the 55 DNL noise contour to record the noise contours on the
property. In addition, all developments and all individual lot surveys shall show the noise contours,
with an accompanying warning indicating the county will not restrain future airport growth because
of residential development inside the 55 DNL noise contour. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
9A-38
httn://www.~terlini>cmlifiers.corn/corlehook/nrintnow.nhn 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1of1
q-2-4-3: BED AND BREAKFAST:
A bed and breakfast shall be permitted in the agricultural (A), agricultural residential (AR), planned
residential (PR), residential (R), and commercial general (CG) districts subject to administrative review that
demonstrates that the following provisions are met:
A. Number Of Units: No more than five (5) rooms shall be available for clientele occupancy.
B. Building: The bed and breakfast is a reuse of an existing single-family building having a minimum floor
area of two thousand (2,000) square feet. Additions shall amount to no more than sixty percent (60%)
of the total floor area, subject to the provisions of chapter 3, "District Intensity And Bulk Standards", of
this title.
C. Signs: Signs must be constructed of wood or other durable, nonplastic material and shall be affixed flat
against the principal structure or constructed as a monument sign that is no more than four feet (4') in
total height. The maximum sign area is as follows:
1. In the agricultural (A) district: Sixteen (16) square feet.
2. Other districts where permitted as a special use: Five (5) square feet.
D. Parking: Bed and breakfast uses must provide for all parking off street, which shall be fully screened
from adjoining land uses by hedges and canopy trees. The director may permit on street parking to be
substituted for off street parking upon c;!etermining that the street can accommodate the required
parking and that off street parking would be detrimental to the character of the area. (Ord. 10-001,
1-12-2010)
9A-39
f"'l/1 'l /'"'lf\1 '1
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page I of I
8-2-4-4: BORROW PITS:
Borrow pits for interchange and highway projects may be permitted in the agricultural (A) and the
agricultural residential (AR) zoning districts. The construction of the borrow pits shall be subject to an
administrative review by the development review committee and demonstrate compliance with the
following provisions:
A. Borrow pits shall comply with the requirements of the Grundy County stormwater ordinance.
B. The borrow pit shall be located such that any point along the bank of the pit is not closer than seventy
five feet (75') from any part of an underground and/or aboveground septic tank or well system.
C. A setback of twenty five feet (25') shall be established between the right of way, easement access point
and property lines of the parcel shall be established.
D. The maximum size of a borrow pit shall not exceed one-third (1/3) of the parcel and shall be constructed
on a lot that has a minimum size of one acre. For parcels that are ten (10) acres or greater in size tr·
borrow pit shall not be larger than twenty five percent (25%) of the parcel in which it is intended to L
located.
E. Prior to the excavation of the borrow pit, the excavator shall install a fence to surround the pit that is six
feet (6') in height, lockable and equipped with a knox box that is accessible by the jurisdictional fire
district. Once the borrow pit has been completed and excavation has ceased, the fence shall be
removed. (Ord. 2012-010, 4-10-2012)
9A-40
httn · //www .. ,tP.rl in P-cnrl i fi ers. en rn/ encl ehnn k/nri n tnow. n hn 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc . Page 1 of 1
. ( 8-2-4-5: CARGO CONTAINER STORAGE UNIT:
1(
(
Gargo containers are permitted as an administrative use in A agricultural zoning districts. All cargo
containers used in A agricultural zoning districts need to comply with the following requirements:
A. Location:
1. Shall be placed in the rear yard of the property.
2. Placed five hundred feet (500'0") from lot lines.
3. Cargo container(s) shall be placed a minimum of ten feet (1 O'O") from any residential or accessory
structures on the property.
4. Cargo containers shall not be placed within the limits of the floodplain in accordance with the
floodplain administrator.
B. Lot Size And Limit Of Number Of Containers: The ratio of amount of cargo containers allowed per acre
is one cargo container per fifty (50) acres. No more than four (4) cargo containers maximum is allowed.
C. Limitations In Use:
1. The cargo container(s) shall be limited to agricultural uses only and shall conform to all requirements
set forth by the state and federal requirements.
2. Stacking cargo containers is prohibited.
3. Cargo container(s) shall be placed such that the container(s) is not in view of adjacent properties.
4. Cargo container(s) shall be supported to prevent shifting of the structure.
5. Cargo container(s) shall be a single neutral color.
D. Housing Of Livestock: Cargo containers used as shelter of livestock for agricultural purposes shall have
the proper ventilation, and sanitation for the animals housed. The cargo containers shall comply with all
state, federal and Grundy County codes for the storage of these animals. (Ord. 2011-012, 7-12-2011;
amd. Ord. 2012-010, 4-10-2012)
9A-41
0/11/')f)11
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of 1
8-2-4-6: GROUP HOMES:
Group homes are permitted in the agricultural (A), agricultural residential (AR), planned residential (PhJ,
and residential (R) districts, subject to administrative review that determines that the following
requirements are met:
A. The use is situated in a single-family building.
B. The building existed on the effective date of this UDO. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-201 O; amd. Ord. 2011-012,
7-12-2011; Ord. 2012-010, 4°10-2012)
8-2-4-8: PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY:
Public service facilities shall be permitted in the agricultural (A), agricultural residential (AR), planned
residential (PR), residential (R), and industrial (I) districts, subject to administrative review that
demonstrates that the following provisions are met:
A. Building Character: The building accommodating the public service use has a physical character that
resembles other uses that are commonly found in the district in which it is located.
B. Buffer: If the public service use is a structure that is not a building, then it is buffered on all sides with a
landscape buffer pursuant to the requirements of section 8-9-3, "Landscaping And Buffer Areas", of
this title. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010; amd. Ord. 2011-012, 7-12-2011; Ord. 2012-010, 4-10-2012; Ord.
2012-011, 4-10-2012)
9A-42
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of 1
( <l.-2-4-9: RESTAURANT:
Restaurants shall be allowed in the agricultural (A) and industrial (I) districts subject to the following
administrative review provisions:
A Maximum Floor Area: The restaurant has a floor area of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
B. Location: It shall be located on a farmstead.
C. Capacity: Customer seating capacity shall be limited to forty (40) persons.
D. Building Design: The restaurant building shall have the architecture and character of the existing rural
setting. (Ord.10-001, 1-12-2010; amd. Ord. 2011-012, 7-12-2011; Ord. 2012-010, 4-10-2012; Ord.
2012-011, 4-10-2012)
9A-43
('\,, ") ,,, "1 ")
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of2
8-2-4-1 O: SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLINGS:
Single-family detached dwellings shall be permitted in the agricultural (A) district subject to review tha
determines that the following requirements are met:
A. Vesting: Development shall only be permitted on a lot of record as of July 8, 1980.
B. Maximum Number Of Dwellings: No more than five (5) dwellings shall be permitted.
C. Density:
1. Each lot split requires that twenty (20) acres of land is reserved for agricultural or preservation
purposes.
2. Therefore, there shall be only one lot of a minimum of 1 ,5 acres for one division and all other
divisions shall be a minimum of five (5) acres in size. Each lot of division shall have twenty (20) acres
of agricultural land reserved in perpetuity for agricultural uses.
3. The overall acreage for an agricultural tract of land shall not be considered to be reduced by the
director for determining the number of permitted dwellings due to the transfer of a portion of said
tract or land for purposes of pipeline or state, county, or township road rights of way.
D. Lot Configuration:
1. The minimum lot size shall be 1.5 acres.
2. The minimum lot width shall be one hundred seventy feet (170').
3. The newly created lots shall be contiguous with each other and shall share a joint entrance to an
existing township or county road or to a state highway.
E. Subdivision Required: The following provisions are required for lots that are less than five (5) acres or
any lot that does not have frontage on a public road:
1. Prior to establishment of a new residential lot, a legal description and plat of survey by a registered
land surveyor of the proposed residential lot(s) shall be provided showing the lot lines of such lot(s).
2. The plat shall be approved in accordance with section 8-6-2, "Application Submittal Requirements",
of this title. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010; amd. Ord. 2011-012, 7-12-2011; Ord. 2012-010, 4-10-201?·
Ord. 2012-011, 4-10-2012)
9A-44
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of3
( 8-2-4-11: SOLAR COLLECTOR SYSTEMS:
A Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide regulations for the permitting of individual solar
collector systems as an administrative use for all zoning districts. This section includes regulations for
the construction of roof mounted, building integrated photovoltaic, pole mounted, and ground mounted
solar collector units in regard to total height, setback provisions, and reflection. This section makes the
distinction that individual solar collector systems shall be classified as accessory structures.
B. Definitions:
INDIVIDUAL SOLAR COLLECTION SYSTEMS: A panel or other solar device that is capable of
collecting, storing, or transmitting at least twenty five thousand (25,000) btus. A solar collector may
be a photovoltaic, plate type designed to convert solar energy into electric energy, or a structural
element that is designed to collect solar energy and transmit it to internal spaces for heating. The
following are definitions of the type of systems that this section will regulate:
Building Integrated Photovoltaic Unit: A system that is integrated into the structure of that building.
Some examples of this are roofing tiles, carports, awnings, and curtain walls.
Ground Mount: A solar collector system in which an array is mounted onto the ground such as a
wedge structure constructed from steel supports that are anchored into concrete footings. The
structure itself is built from aluminum or galvanized steel.
Pole Mount: A solar collector system that consists of an array that is mounted on top of a single
steel pole which is affixed to the ground. Pole mounted units have the capability of being pitched
such that the angle of the array may be altered during the year to optimize the amount of solar
energy collected.
Roof Mount: A solar collector system with an array of solar panels that are located on the roof of a
structure. The solar collector system shall be installed such that it is attached directly to and
supported by a structural member of the building.
SOLAR ENERGY: Radiant energy that is received through direct, diffuse, or reflected means from
the sun.
SOLAR RIGHT: A property owner has the right to have an unobstructed line of sight path from a
solar collector to the sun which permits radiation from the sun to be collected. The extent of the solar
right is the amount of illumination provided by the path of the sun on a winter solstice day.
WINTER SOLSTICE DAY: On December 21 which marks the beginning of winter in the northern
hemisphere when the sun reaches its most southern point.
9A-45
L ... _.. __ f/ _______ ,. _ _ 1• __
··~
' , .
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 2 of3
C. Solar Panel Requirements: Certification of the solar collection system in accordance with the Solar
Collector And Certification Corporation (SRCC) and all manufacturers' installation instructions shall bE)_
provided to the Grundy County building and zoning officer. All solar collection systems shall be limit
to one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the electrical and/or thermal energy requirements of the
structure as determined by a contractor licensed to install such systems. Solar collection systems
connected to the electrical utility grid system may be installed once an interconnected customer-owner
agreement is reached. This agreement shall be provided to the building and zoning officer at the time
of building permit application submittal.
In the event of a power failure, solar collection systems that are interconnected to the grid system shall
shut down until full power is restored by the electrical utility company. The solar collector electrical
components need to be marked as such for emergency responders with an appropriate warning and
guidance. Marking material shall be weather resistant in accordance with UL 969. An emergency
shutoff mechanism shall be installed and notice of its location shall be provided for emergency
responders. All solar collectors shall be certified by a third party and comply with all Grundy County
building code requirements and manufacturer's installation instructions.
Owners of solar collector systems shall have solar rights to collecting solar energy from their property
for their energy consumption.
Solar collector systems shall not be placed in the vicinity of any airport in a manner that would interfere
with airport flight patterns.
The following requirements shall be applied to all installations of individual solar collection systems:
1. Ground Mounted And Pole Mounted Solar Collection Systems:
a. The parcel in which the ground mounted or pole mounted solar collection systems are to be
installed shall be a minimum of one acre in size and shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the
lot area.
b. Setbacks for the installation of the solar collection system shall meet with the n~quirements of the
zoning district in which it is located.
c. Solar collectors shall be considered to be accessory to the main structure of the parcel.
d. All pole mounted solar collection system installations shall be within the side and rear yard of the
property and shall be limited in height to twenty feet (20').
e. All exterior electrical or plumbing lines serving the solar collector system shall be buried below the
surface of the ground in accordance with the requirements of the Grundy County building code.
f. Ground mounted solar collectors (including framework) shall not exceed a height of six feet (6')
above grade.
g. Reflection angles from the solar collector systems' surfaces shall be oriented away from adjacent
structures that are constructed on adjacent properties or roadways.
h. All mechanical equipment of the solar collection system such as storage cells or batteries sha.
enclosed with a minimum six foot (6') fence that is self-locking.
9A-46
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9/1V2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 3 of3
(
(
2. Roof Mounted And Building Integrated Photovoltaic Solar Collection Systems:
a. All exterior electrical and plumbing lines and components that serve these systems shall be buried
below the surface of the ground and comply with the requirements of the Grundy County building
code.
b. Conduit lines that run below the roof sheathing shall be installed such that they are below the roof
deck by a depth of ten inches (1 O") and are not installed such that they are perpendicular to roof
rafters.
c. Reflection angles from collector surfaces shall be oriented away from adjacent structures
constructed on adjacent properties.
d. Roof mounted units or building integrated photovoltaic solar collection systems (tiles) shall be
installed such that they do not exceed the height restrictions of the zoning district in which they are
located. A path of three feet (3') shall be provided from any peak, eave or valley of the roof for
emergency accessibility and ventilation opportunities for emergency responders.
D. Application To The Building And Zoning Officer: All submittals to the building and zoning officer shall
contain the following information in addition to that included on the application form:
1. Standard drawings of the solar collector system, including design and dimensions of panels, base,
mounting poles, footings, and anchors. Overall height from natural grade to tip of the uppermost
panel, and the square footage of the entire system structures shall be provided in the submittal.
2. Projected amount of energy created or offset of the solar collector shall be provided.
3. All manufacturer's installation and specification sheets shall be provided including all certifications.
The installation instructions shall contain such items as the make, model, listing, size, weight, snow
and wind load abilities of the solar collector system.
E. Site Plan: The following items shall be provided on the site plan submitted at the time of building permit
application:
1. A scaled layout of the solar collector systems as proposed on the property or building. Site plans for
the ground or pole mounted systems should include building envelope, base flood elevations (if
necessary), location and footprint of the structures, adjacent roads and property lines.
2. The location of the panel installations, the main service location, and the locations of all equipment
and disconnect.
3. Depiction and explanation of the main use of the property and the location of the adjacent buildings,
trees, parking lot (if applicable) and landscaping. (Ord. 2012-016, 4-10-2012)
9A-47
1 " II
_,,_, __ , _
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of 1
8-2-4-13: UTILITIES, NEIGHBORHOOD:
Neighborhood utilities shall be permitted in the agricultural (A), agricultural residential (AR), planned
residential (PR), residential (R), commercial general (CG), and commercial interchange (Cl) districts,
subject to administrative review that demonstrates that the following provisions are met:
A. Utility Substations: Electrical, gas, or other utility substations shall be screened from view from public
rights of way and abutting properties by:
1. Enclosure in structures that are designed to appear to be buildings; or
2. Landscape buffer pursuant to section 8-9-3, "Landscaping And Buffer Areas", of this title, which may
include a fence if necessary for safety or security reasons.
B. Other Facilities: Lift stations, telephone switches, ground mounted transformers, and similar facilities
shall be screened from view from public rights of way and abutting properties by:
1. Enclosure within a building; or
2. Enclosure by a hedge composed of shrubs planted thirty six inches (36") on center and maintained
at a height that is at least equal to the utility facility. A fence may be located behind the hedge if
necessary for safety or security reasons. An opening on one side of the facility of a size that is
sufficient to provide access is permitted, provided that it does not face a public right of way, unless
otherwise required by the county engineer in the case of public facilities which require such access.
C. Buildings: Any building associated with a neighborhood utility facility shall be designed to be compatible
with other buildings in the neighborhood. Design elements include facade and roofing materials, roof
pitch, height and scale, and orientation of blank walls. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-201 O; amd. Ord. 2011-012,
7-12-2011; Ord. 2012-010, 4-10-2012; Ord. 2012-011, 4-10-2012; Ord. 2012-016, 4-10-2012)
9A-48
httn·//www.8terlin<Tr.nrlifier8.com/cociehook/nrintnow.nhn 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of 1
( "'-2-5-2: AG RIG UL TURAL SUPPORT AND OTHER RURAL SERVICES:
(
Agricultural supplies, storage, and related uses may be permitted as a special use in the agricultural (A)
district, subject to the requirements of this section.
A. Minimum Lot Size: Five (5) acres.
B. Minimum Setback Requirements:
1. Buildings: Thirty five feet (35'), all yards.
2. Bulk petroleum, LP/propane gas, and ammonia storage tanks: One hundred feet (100'), all yards.
C. Access: The site shall have frontage on and access to a collector or higher classification street,
provided the county board may approve alternative access, based on the recommendations of the
township road commissioners for township roads and by the county highway engineer for any county
roads.
D. Screening: Trucks, tractors, portable storage tanks, and trailer or motorized agricultural implements
shall be screened from view of any agricultural residential (AR), planned residential (PR), or residential
(R) district boundary located within a five hundred foot (500') radius of the property.
E. Intended Purpose: Sales shall be primarily to serve the agricultural community. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-
2010)
9A-49
.Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1of1
8-2-5-3: CAMPGROUNDS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS:
Campgrounds and RV parks may be allowed as a special use in the agricultural (A) district, subject to ... _,
following provisions:
A. Residential Use Prohibited: No recreational vehicle or tent shall be used as a permanent place of
residence .
. B. Access: Site access shall be from an arterial or collector road.
C. Design And Operations: All facilities shall conform to the design and operations provisions contained in
chapter 11, "Recreational Vehicle Parks And Campgrounds", of this title. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
9A-50
h tin' //www. ste,rl in P"c.rni.i ti <'rs. c.n mi c.nrl e honk /nri ntn nw. nhn
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page I of I
1 ll-2-5-5: COLLEGE/UNIVERSITY:
\
(
A college or university may be permitted as a special use in the agricultural (A), commercial general (CG),
and commercial interchange (Cl) districts, subject to the following provisions:
A Campus Plan Required: The college or university shall submit a long range campus plan for approval
that indicates the planned build out of the site.
B. Traffic Impact Study: This plan shall include a traffic impact study. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
9A-51
(\/1 '} /0f\1 ')
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of 1
8-2-5-8: DAYCARE FACILITY:
Daycare facilities may be allowed as a special use in the agricultural (A), planned residential (PR), ant
residential (R) districts subject to the following restrictions:
A. Compliance With Illinois Regulations: Daycare facilities shall either be exempt from Illinois licensing
requirements (3 or fewer unrelated children) or meet the state licensing requirements for a daycare
center, daycare home, or group daycare home.
B. Principal Use As Residential: The operator of the facility must live in the building.
C. Number Of Children: No more than eight (8) children, excluding children of the family providing
daycare, shall be accommodated by a facility.
D. Location: Exempt and nonexempt facilities shall comply with the following exterior play area and other
requirements:
1. Play Areas:
a. Uses shall provide an on site, fenced, outdoor play area, which shall have a fence beginning at
ground level and extending to a minimum height of forty two inches (42"), so as to prevent children
from crawling under or through the fence or otherwise becoming entrapped.
b. If the fenced outdoor play area is located within ten feet (1 O') of any property line, it shall be fully
screened by shrubs or other vegetation with a minimum height equal to the fence height.
2. Pick Up/Drop Off: An off street pick up/drop off area shall be provided, which may be a driveway
provided it is kept free of parked vehicles and other obstructions for such use.
3. Parking: One off street parking space per four (4) children shall be reserved for on site parking
during the normal hours of operation. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
9A-52
httn://www.sterlin!lcodifiers.com/codehook/nrintnow.nhn 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of 1
( 1-2-5-11: GARDEN CENTER:
(
A garden center may be allowed as a special use in the agricultural (A) district, subject to the following
provisions:
A. Separation: The site must be located at least three hundred feet (300') from the nearest residential
district boundary.
B. Access: The premises shall abut and draw access from an arterial or collector street.
C. Site Development Plan Review: Site development plan approval, as specified in section 8-14-4, "Site
Development Permit", of this title, is required for approval or expansion.
D. Traffic Impact Study May Be Required: A traffic impact study, prepared by individuals or firms that
perform traffic engineering and sealed by a professional engineer, may be required by the land use
department. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
8-2-5-13: INSTITUTIONAL RESIDENTIAL:
Institutional residential use may be allowed as a special use in the agricultural (A), agricultural residential
(AR), planned residential (PR), residential (R), and commercial general (CG) districts subject to the
following requirements:
A. Access: Access to the use is provided by a street that is classified as collector or greater in capacity.
B. Building Character: In the planned residential (PR) district, the buildings are residential in character.
( . Fence: An opaque fence that is six feet (6') high is constructed between the institutional residential use ·
and abutting lot that is occupied by or zoned to permit single-family dwellings. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
9A-53
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page I of 1
8-2-5-14: KENNELS:
Kennels may be allowed as a special use in the agricultural (A}, commercial general (CG}, and industr... ..
(I) districts, subject to the following requirements:
A. All districts:
1. Individual pens shall be limited in size to a maximum of fifteen feet (15') wide and twenty feet (20')
long.
2. Enclosing fences shall not be higher than six feet (6').
3. If there is a roof enclosure, it must be of an open mesh type material.
B. Agricultural (A) district: The use is permitted as a special use on a farmstead. It may also be permitted
on lots of five (5) acres or larger. Dog runs shall be a minimum of one hundred feet (100') from
residentially zoned or residentially occupied property.
C. Commercial general (CG) and industrial (I) districts: No outdoor dog runs shall be permitted on less
than one acre. Dog runs shall be used only during daylight hours and shall be a minimum of one
hundred feet (100') from residentially zoned or residentially occupied property. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-
2010)
9A-54
httn · //www. stP.rl in Pc.ocli fi P.rn. <:om/ c.ocl P.hoo k /nri ntn ow. nh n 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page I of2
(
~-2-5-15: LANDSCAPE WASTE COMPOSTING AND ORGANIC COMPOSTING
AGILITY:
(
(
Landscape waste composting and organic composting facilities that accept off site materials may be
permitted as a special use in the agricultural (A) and industrial (I) districts subject to the following
requirements:
A. Compliance With Illinois Regulations: Composting operations and provisions for site design shall be
governed by applicable Illinois environmental protection agency (bureau of land) regulations: Title 35:
environmental protection, subtitle G: waste disposal, chapter I: pollution control board, subchapter i:
solid waste and special waste hauling, part 830 standards for compost facilities.
B. Water Supply Protection Zone: Composting uses prohibited within two hundred feet (200') of the
nearest potable water supply.
C. Floodplain: The composting area of the facility must be located outside the boundary of the 100-year
floodplain or the site shall be f/oodproofed. The composting area of the facility must be designed to
prevent any compost material from being placed within five feet (5') of the water table, to adequately
control runoff from the site, and to collect and manage any landscape waste leachate that is generated
on the site.
D. Setbacks And Spacing:
1. The composting area of the facility must be located so as to minimize incompatibility with the
character of the surrounding area, including at least a six hundred sixty foot (660') setback from any
residential or educational occupancy. ·
2. Composting areas shall be spaced from other districts as follows:
a. From agricultural residential (AR), planned residential (PR), commercial general (CG) or
residential (R) districts: Nine hundred feet (900').
b. From commercial interchange (Cl) district: Three hundred feet (300').
3. The buffer must be at least one hundred feet (100') inside the property boundary and used for an
agricultural use or forested.
4. The facility shall be located on a site that is a minimum of five (5) acres in size.
9A-55
n/1 "I /'"IA1 "I
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 2 of2
E. Operating Conditions And Odors: The operator shall take specific measures to control odors and other
sources of nuisance:
1. Landscape waste must be processed within five (5) days after receipt into windrows or other pile~
which promote proper conditions for composting.
2. The operator shall have a plan for minimizing odors and responding to odor complaints.
3. A litter control plan shall be submitted to show that the operation will prevent the blowing of any
waste materials, trash, or dust particulate matter onto adjoining property or roadways.
4. The composting material shall not contain any domestic sewage, sewage sludge, or septage.
5. The operator shall have available for inspection a plan for the intended purposes of end product
compost and a contingency plan for handling end product compost and composting material that
does not meet the general use compost standards.
F. Site Plans And Siting Review: Any pollution control facility if located in unincorporated Grundy County
needs to go through the local siting process. This public review is performed at the county level before
an Illinois environmental protection agency permit can be approved. The county may impose fees for
this review, which are listed by the land use department. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
9A-56
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codcbook/printnow.php 9/13/2013
(
(
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page I of 19
Q-2-5-17: MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION:
A manufactured home park or subdivision may be a special use in the agricultural (A) district, subject to
the following requirements:
A. Exceptions:
1. Farm Exception: A farm owner may apply for a special agricultural exemption permit to allow
manufactured homes to be used by seasonal farm help on that site. To qualify for the mobile home
exemption, the farm must contain forty (40) acres for each mobile home; however, no more than two
(2) mobile homes shall be permitted on any one tract.
2. Construction: A landowner may apply for a temporary permit to allow a manufactured home to be a
temporary office or storage unit on the site during the construction of a permanent residential
dwelling unit. This period of manufactured home use is not to exceed twenty four (24) months.
B. Manufactured Home Park Bulk And Yard Standards: Every manufactured home park shall comply with
the following requirements, in addition to all other applicable Grundy County codes and ordinances:
1. Lot Area: Manufactured home parks shall be a minimum of ten (10) acres and a maximum of twenty
(20) acres in lot area.
2. Lot Width: Manufactured home parks shall have a minimum lot width of six hundred sixty feet (660'),
and shall maintain a minimum lot width of six hundred sixty feet (660') throughout the entire depth of
the park. All manufactured home parks shall front on a county road, state or federal highway.
3. Yards: Figure 8-2-5-17, "Manufactured Home Park Yards", of this section, illustrates the different
configurations for required manufactured home park yards. Manufactured home park yard
requirements are as follows:
a. Front yard: Eighty feet (80').
b. Side yard adjoining a street: Eighty feet (80').
c. Interior side yard: Forty feet (40').
d. Rear yard: Forty feet (40').
FIGURE 8-2-5-17
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK YARDS
9A-57
1 " II
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 2of19
. I
Ma~a1.t.u~d rti !'l'Wl F1lrk P~Jly U"l!l
....... -_.. ....._ ... . _·-_,,. ,... _·, ,, _.. _-_?" ':· ·-_-_-:_-_.. . -___..,_.. _. -_~~-~-.~--------_.. _ .. .._ · 1
_,," .. ,, '4cr Mn} \ . ·~ t
\,___,. Raar Yard' 1
~
Manufactured Home Park Yard Standards
rPf p1;11f{!il ~ 2 !llide- )'<lflhHil~joiriq ~ 'ilf rffi
9A-58
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php
J I
i
,,II
. l
I
9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 3of19
(
{
(
\_ ~11t Yai'd
I
f . t+•M I !
I l
A41
: Pi-;l1
j 'i,
I \.._ ........ J
l I
'
j~~~~-->1t--~~+.-~-l~~j
L .......... ~-""':"' ""!' ......... -. - .................... .,.~ ~t·' ,.. ......,._ "'"' ......----· .,.,.,. .,· .. - .. ,.,. ... L.. "" " .
Cl.l!Jl1t'/ Rf.\ !5b\4' OI f~r11J ~y
~1anufactured Homa Park Yard Standards
For !'!'!trio. wlh 1 •ki• y1rd r,idjllining "!ltmi!t & 1 W~ior side yard
9A-59
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 4of19
4. Yard Landscaping: All required yards must be landscaped in accordance with section 8-9-1,
"General Requirements'', of this title. No encroachments are permitted in any manufactured home
park yard, and no part of any manufactured home site may be located within required yards.
5. Open Space: A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of a manufactured home park's total area shall be
maintained as community open space and recreational areas for park residents.
a. Permitted types of community open space and recreational areas include, but are not limited to:
(1) Swimming pools.
(2) Tennis courts.
(3) Recreational open space accessory buildings.
(4) Jogging trails and fitness courses.
(5) Playgrounds.
(6) Natural water features, wetlands and conservation areas.
(7) Detention areas which are accessible to occupants or the public via nature trails, boardwalks,
and/or perimeter walkways, but only if they are designed as wetlands or natural water features
and are landscaped with native vegetation. '
b. The following are not considered part of community open space and cannot be used to fulfill the
twenty percent (20%) requirement:
(1) Required manufactured home park yards and manufactured home site yards.
(2) Interior streets, sidewalks or other public rights of way.
(3) Driveways, parking lots, and loading and storage areas.
6. Number Of Manufactured Home Sites: Each manufactured home park shall be limited to a maximum
of one hundred (100) manufactured home sites.
7. Separation Requirement: No manufactured home park shall be located within ten (10) miles of
another manufactured home park. The distance between any two (2) manufactured home parks shall
be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the property lines of
each manufactured home park.
9A-60
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 5of19
{
(
. Manufactured Home Site Bulk And Yard Standards: Every manufactured home site within a
manufactured home park shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Site Area: Each manufactured home site shall comply with the site area requirements shown in table
8-2-5-17, "Site Area And Site Width Dimensions For Manufactured Home Sites", of this section.
2. Site Width: Each manufactured home site shall comply with the site width requirements shown in
table 8-2-5-17, "Site Area And Site Width Dimensions For Manufactured Home Sites'', of this section.
TABLE 8-2-5-17
SITE AREA AND SITE WIDTH DIMENSIONS
FOR MANUFACTURED HOME SITES
Minimum Site Area
(Square Feet)
I Single manufactured home site II 7,200
I Doublewide manufactured home site II 10,800
I Triplewide manufactured home site II 12,240
3. Height And Roof Form:
Minimum Site
Width (Feet)
50 I
75 I
85 I
a. No manufactured home unit shall exceed a height of twenty feet (20'), as measured to the peak of
the roof. No other principal structures within a manufactured home park shall exceed twenty five
feet (25') in height, as measured to the peak of the roof. Structures accessory to individual
manufactured home units, shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height, as measyred to the peak of
the roof. '
b. Each manufactured home unit shall utilize roofing materials consisting of asphalt shingles (or an
equivalent material of comparable quality), similar in color, material and appearance to the roofing
used on other single-family dwellings in the vicinity. The roof design of all manufactured home
units shall utilize a full height roof element with a minimum pitch of three to twelve (3: 12)
(commonly referred to as a 3/12 pitched roof).
4. Yards: All manufactured home sites shall have the following minimum front, side and rear yards:
a. Front yard: Twenty feet (20').
b. Side yard adjoining a street: Seven and one-half feet (i/2').
c. Interior side yard: Seven and one-half feet (i'2').
d. Rear yard: Twenty feet (20').
FIGURE 8-2-5-17B
9A-61
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 6of19
MANUFACTURED HOME SITE YARDS
~-----........ _, __ ,,, ____________ ---------·· "······-····-···
1ntertor .street
i
I
I
I
t
I
I I
'' I
--~ ;'!1i:L;~·~ ~:-;:. :~;::~~~~:;;~f' .: :,: i
... ""' ....... ·--i·· ~{',, . ..,,.,> ~1 ... ' i
~::~::f~ :;t ~ :~::'.f::~r;·J~ ~: ::~:::f: 1l:
-~~~;·~ilfw!~!~~~·j·~*~~'~·;J~~:::~; §I :\".; ;a.,",,·.~~.··;.~,.~')~~·: .... , y~.~ ... ': ..
~:-;:;~"f::!.~::s)~u<~~:.:; ii
,;,<.:_~ ~J,:.!.J,i:i~:~'.:,'i::_r;:~c~~-~; ~
,..
. t L..:......·--·---":~~~-~u :r-r~~-~~-_ _:j"
L Manufactured Home Site Yards
5. Location: All manufactured home sites shall front on a street, interior to the manufactured home
park, improved to the standards set forth in subsection 11, "Interior Streets", of this section.
6. Use Of Sites: No more than one manufactured home unit shall occupy any designated and staked
manufactured home site. Mobile homes are not permitted to occupy any manufactured home site.
except that existing mobile homes found in preexisting manufactured home parks, are permitted L
legal nonconforming uses.
9A-62
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 7of19
{
(
(
7. Designation Of Manufactured Home Sites: The corners of each manufactured home site shall be
clearly marked on the ground by permanent flush stakes, markers or similar means approved by the
zoning officer or designee.
D. Manufactured Home Site Installation Standards:
1. Pads: Each manufactured home site shall have two (2) concrete pads for a manufactured home unit
to be set upon. Each pad shall be at least two feet (2') in width. The distance between the centerlines
of each pad shall be at least four and one-half feet (41
/2').
2. Skirting: All manufactured home units shall be skirted with a rigid material. Such skirting must be in
place within thirty (30) days after the manufactured home unit is installed on the manufactured home
site. Skirting shall be ventilated in order to ensure proper airflow under the home. Skirting material
shall be weatherproof and fire resistant. Skirting shall be provided with doors to permit access to
sewer, water and gas connections.
3. Walkways: A concrete walkway shall be provided from the doorway of each manufactured home unit
to the required driveway and shall be at least four feet (4') in width.
4. Electricity: Electrical service delivering one hundred (100) ampere service of not less than one
hundred ten (110) volts shall be required for each individual manufactured home site. The installation
shall comply with all state and local electrical codes and ordinances.
E. Accessory Buildings, Structures, And Uses:
1. Accessory structures are prohibited within the required front or side yards of any manufactured.
home site.
;
2. Accessory buildings, such as storage sheds, shall not exceed a total of one hundred fifty (150)
square feet. Accessory buildings are permitted to encroach into the required rear yard, provided they
are located no closer than ten feet (1 O') from any manufactured home site boundary line within the
rear yard.
3. Detached garages shall not exceed a total of four hundred eighty four (484) square feet. Garages
are permitted to encroach into the required rear yard, provided they are located no closer than ten
feet (10') from any manufactured home site boundary line within the rear yard.
4. Carports shall be used only for parking no more than two (2) vehicles and not for any other purpose,
including storage. Carports shall have a minimum height of seven feet (7') and a maximum width of
twenty feet (20').
5. Porches and decks may encroach into the required rear yard, provided they are located no closer
than ten feet (10') from any manufactured home site boundary line within the rear yard.
6. Accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height, as measured to the
peak of the roof. However, in no case shall a carport be higher than the lowest part of the roof of the
manufactured home unit, as installed, to which the carport is accessory.
9A-63
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 8of19
7. Any home occupations conducted within accessory buildings and structures, or within the
manufactured home, shall comply with the regulations of section 8-2-3-5, "Home Occupation", of this
chapter.
F. Landscaping Requirements:
1. Landscaping The Required Yards Of Manufactured Home Parks: Landscaping of the required yards
of manufactured home parks, as illustrated in figure 8-2-5-17C, "Manufactured Home Park Required
Yard Landscaping", of this section, shall meet the following standards:
a. In every required yard, there shall be a minimum of one tree for every three hundred (300) square
feet. One-third (1 /3) of all trees shall be evergreens a minimum of six feet (6') in height at planting,
one-third (113) of all trees shall be shade trees a minimum of two inches (2") in caliper at planting,
and one-third (1
/3) of all trees shall be ornamental trees a minimum of two inches (2") in caliper at·
planting.
b. Shrubs shall be planted at a rate of one shrub for every three (3) linear feet.
c. To achieve effective screening, landscape materials shall be planted in a naturalistic and
staggered fashion.
d. Areas not planted with trees shall be maintained as turf or other ground cover.
e. A berm, with a maximum slope of four feet (4') in length to each one foot (1 ') in height (also
referred to as 4:1 proportion), shall be provided in the required yards and shall be fully landscaped
in accordance with subsections F1a through F1d of this section. Berms shall have a rounded top
surface that is a minimum of five feet (5') in width.
(1) Required front and corner side yards: Eight foot (8') berm.
(2) Required rear and interior side yards: Three foot (3') berm. Required bermirig is illustrated in
figure 8-2-5-17D, "Required Berming", of this section.
f. In rear and interior side yards, a six foot (6') solid fence is required. Such fence shall be located a
minimum of five feet (5') from the property line.
FIGURE 8-2-5-17C
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK REQUIRED YARD LANDSCAPING
9A-64
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9/13/2013
i
Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
{
\
(
.
(
FIGURE 8-2-5-170
REQUIRED BERMING
Page 9of19
I La nds·caplng Requ.irements
Fer fl":lk~~lti i ~ )'3rdtHJioiri"9 a-lit--"i~ ~ f ln~r!;tt$l::1t ~
9A-65
Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
" <
.
l \ ili 'f
:y -"'"""
Page 10 of 19
' "· ' • «• ... , '
Front Yard & Side Yard Adjoining a Street Benns
9A-66
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9113/2013
(
Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
' \
l
Page 11 of 19
',,"",..,..,....", 4:1 $i¢p~ MAX. •Nifu
!5' ~V3tHt Roort,ded i c:ip
Rear Yard & Interior Side Yard Berms
2. Landscape Plan: A landscape plan shall be submitted as part of a manufactured home park
development application, as required in subsection J, "Manufactured Home Park Development
Application", of this section.
3. Maintenance Of Landscaping: Any diseased, dead or damaged plants within the required
manufactured home park yards or common open space areas must be removed and replaced as
indicated in section 8-9-10, "Installation, Maintenance, And Replacement", of this title.
G. Off Street Parking And Driveways:
9A-67
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 12of19
1. Required Parking: Each manufactured home site shall provide two (2) off street parking spaces
within the site.
2. Visitor Parking Lots:
a. A visitor parking lot shall be located within no more than three hundred feet (300') of each
manufactured home site within the manufactured home park.
b. The total number of visitor parking spaces provided within the park shall be equal to three-tenths
(3110) parking space per manufactured home site.
c. The perimeter of visitor parking lots shall be screened with compact hedging or decorative
masonry, or a combination of these, to a maximum height of two and one-half feet (2 1'2').
3. Driveways: Driveways shall not be considered interior streets, as described in subsection 11, "Interior
Streets", of this section, and as illustrated in figure 8-2-5-1 ?E, "Driveways And Interior Streets", of
this section. Manufactured home site driveways shall comply with the following:
a. The maximum width of manufactured home site driveways shall be twenty feet (20').
b. Driveways shall not be located within the required sidiq yards. Driveways shall be separated a
minimum of three feet (3') from the manufactured home unit, as measured from the edge of the
driveway.
c. All driveways and off street parking areas shall be paved, and graded to drain rapidly and be fre~ ..
of standing water. · ·
FIGURE 8-2-5-17E
DRIVEWAYS AND INTERIOR STREETS
9A-68
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 13of19
(
lrttertor street --- r -----,.---<1,...,,.~hh"'""",,... .,., .,.. ---,----- - ---
I
I
j
l l j
I
I ~
! I I
' I I
j
~
J
I
~
1 l Jt.~._·7·~rs· t.JJtn.
( ....,..,... .. ~,..,...,,._,,....,,.......,....,..,,,,,........,.,.J t
I
-~-_~--- -~L-~eaf va:_d ' " j ----
H. Signs:
1 i I f
r
f
I
• I l
l
f
1 • I f
l i r
I
t:
__ __...,, __ .tr' ....... >''1"11
1. Manufactured Home Park Sign: Manufactured home parks shall be limited to one freestanding
monument identification sign. Such sign shall not exceed four feet (4') in height and thirty two (32)
square feet in sign area, and shall be located at least twenty feet (20') from any manufactured home
site. Only uplighting, where light is directed from the ground onto the sign face, is permitted to
illuminate the sign.
9A-69
tl/1,.,/0f\1'1
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 14of19
2. Site Identification Numbers: A manufactured home park shall maintain signs on each manufactured
home site that identify the site number. Site numbers shall be four inches (4") in height and shall
remain readily identifiable while the site is in use. No site identification sign may exceed five inch
(5") in height and ten inches (1 O") in width.
I. Public Improvements:
1. Interior Streets:
a. Interior streets within a manufactured home park shall be designed in accordance with chapter 6,
"Subdivisions And Land Development", and section 8-6-3-4, "Streets, Roadways, And Paths", of
this title, in addition to all other applicable Grundy County codes and ordinances. The interior
streets of the manufactured home park shall be considered (general) high intensity "residential
subcollectors" for the purposes of said section 8-6-3-4, "Streets, Roadways, And Paths", of this
title. Curbing is required on all interior streets. Shoulders and drainage swales are not permitted.
b. All interior streets shall be properly lit, in accordance with the requirements of subsection 8-6-3-
1.P, "Street Lighting", of this title, except that the maximum height of light poles, as measured from
grade at the base to the bottom of the luminaire, shall not exceed twenty feet (20').
c. Interior streets shall be serviced and maintained by the owners of the manufactured home park.
No officer, agent or employee of the county shall, at any time, service or maintain, or offer or agree
to service or maintain, any interior road or any part thereof.
d. In section 8-17-1-2 of this title, the residential subcollector category, contains subcategories for
roads with one sided, two (2) sided and off street parking. There are also standards for an
unnamed, i.e., general - high intensity residential subcollector. This "general" category applies to
the interior streets of manufactured home.parks.
2. Stormwater Management: Stormwater drainage and detention system shall be provided in
accordance with section 8-4-5, "Stormwater Drainage And Detention", of this title,: in addition to all
other applicable Grundy County codes and ordinances.
3. Sewer System: Sewage disposal shall be provided in accordance with section 8-6-3-6, "Sewage
Collection And Disposal", of the this title, in addition to all other applicable Grundy County codes and
ordinances. Septic tanks and oxidation lagoons shall not be permitted within manufactured home
parks. In addition, each sewer connection to a manufactured home site that is unoccupied shall be
closed until the site is occupied.
4. Water Supply: A water supply system shall be provided in accordance with section 8-6-3-7, "Water
Systems", of this title, in addition to all other applicable Grundy County codes and ordinances.
5. Public Utilities: Public utilities shall be provided in accordance with sections 8-6-3-8, "Public Utilities",
and 8-6-3-9, "Easements", of this title, in addition to all other applicable Grundy County codes and
ordinances.
J. Manufactured Home Park Development Application:
9A-70
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 15of19
(
(
1. Required: Prior to the construction, expansion and/or alteration of any new or existing manufactured
home park, the manufactured home park developer shall make application to, and receive approval
from, the Grundy County board in accordance with the requirements and procedures of this
subsection.
2. Procedure:
a. Preapplication Conference: Prior to submittal of an application to develop a manufactured home
park, the developer shall meet with the regional planning commission to discuss the scope and
nature of the proposed development. At the preapplication conference, the applicant shall provide
information as to the location of the proposed manufactured home park development, the
proposed public improvements, a list of any anticipated exceptions to county ordinances, and any
other information necessary to clearly explain the manufactured home park development. The
purpose of such preapplication conference is to make advice and assistance available to the
applicant before preparation of the application.
b. Application Submittal: Following the preapplication conference, the application to develop a
manufactured home park shall be submitted to the zoning officer. The application shall be in
accordance with the requirements of subsection J3, "Application Requirements", of this section.
The zoning officer shall forward copies of the application to the regional planning commission for
their report and recommendation, as well as other applicable administrative officials.
c. Regional Planning Commission Recommendation: In making its recommendation, the regional
planning commission shall be guided by, and give consideration to, the following:
(1) The proposed development is in conformance with the Grundy County comprehensive plan,
this title and the requirements of the MHP district.
(2) The proposed development will have a character of sustained desirability and stability.
(3) The proposed development will be in harmony with its surroundings.
(4) The proposed development will not cause undue congestion on local streets or thoroughfares.
The regional planning commission may recommend approval or denial of the application,
including any special uses. If the regional planning commission shall fail to act within sixty (60)
working days after receipt of the application, the application shall be deemed to be
recommended for approval.
d. Zoning Board Of Appeals Recommendation: The zoning board of appeals may recommend to the
county board approval, approval with conditions or denial of any special uses that are part of the
application including, but not limited to, approval of accessory structures and uses, and community
sewer and water systems, as set forth in chapter 15, "Enforcement, Interpretation, And
Severability", of this title.
e. Approval By County Board: Upon receipt of a recommendation from the regional planning
commission and zoning board of appeals, the Grundy County board may approve, approve with
conditions or deny approval of the development, including any special use permits.
3. Application Requirements: In order to develop a manufactured home park, the applicant shall file
with the land use department an application that includes the following:
9A-71
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 16of19
a. The full name and address of the applicant or applicants, or the names and addresses of the
partners if the applicant is a partnership or the names and addresses of the officers if the applicant
is a corporation.
b. The address, location and legal description of the tract of land upon which it is proposed to
construct a manufactured home park.
c. The name of the proposed manufactured home park.
d. The proposed number of manufactured home sites.
e. A site plan of the proposed manufactured home park, which must include the following:
(1) All manufactured home sites shall be clearly delineated, and each shall include site dimensions
and square footage, and building envelope information. Building elevations for existing and
proposed buildings and facilities, or any alterations to existing buildings and facilities, must be
shown.
(2) The. location of all required visitor parking lots.
(3) All streets, sidewalks and driveways.
(4) All signage for the manufactured home park, including manufactured home site numbering,
street signs and directional signage.
(5) All public improvements and amenities, including community facilities and required open SP"''
(6) North arrow, drawing scale, signature and seal of an Illinois registered engineer or architect,
and date of preparation.
f. A landscape plan shall be submitted with each application, and is subject to approval by the land
use department. A landscape plan must include the following:
(1) The location, quantity, size and name, both botanical and common, of all existing plant material
on the lot, and indicating which plant material will be retained and which will be removed. The
landscape plan should include provisions to preserve existing trees in accordance with section
8-9-11, "Preservation Of Trees And Other Vegetation", of this title.
(2) The location, quantity, size and name, both botanical and common, of all proposed plant
material including, but not limited to, shade and evergreen trees, shrubs, ground cover and turf,
drawn at a size equal to three-fourths (3/4) maturity.
(3) The existing and proposed grading of the site indicating contours at one foot (1 ') intervals.
Proposed berming shall be indicated using one foot (1 ') contour intervals.
(4) Elevation drawings indicating the materials used for all proposed fences.
(5) Installation and maintenance specifications as required by the land use department.
(6) North arrow, drawing scale, signature and seal of an Illinois registered landscape architect,
date of preparation.
9A-72
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. PageJ7of19
(
(
(7) In the event that it can be demonstrated that existing vegetation meets the intent of the
landscaping requirements of this section, it may be credited toward the required landscape
materials, as determined by the land use department.
g. A traffic impact analysis is required if the proposed manufactured home park has fifty (50) or more
manufactured home sites or, if additional sites are proposed to be added to an existing park, when
the total number of manufactured home sites meets or exceeds fifty (50) sites. Such traffic impact
analysis shall be conducted by an Illinois registered engineer and shall include the following:
(1) A description of the development site, proposed land use and intensity, and the area of
influence of site traffic.
(2) Existing conditions of perimeter streets and intersections, including traffic counts and capacity
and level of service analysis.
(3) Analysis of future conditions in trip generation at peak periods and for twenty four (24) hours.
(4) Proposed driveway locations, geometries, sight distances and turn restrictions.
(5) Impact on adjoining street network.
4. Alterations: Any alterations to existing manufactured home parks, excluding normal maintenance,
shall require a new application.
5. Appeal: Any person denied approval of his/her manufactured home park development shall have the
right to appeal such decision before the circuit court of the 13th judicial court, Grundy County, Illinois.
6. Records: When an application for a manufactured home park development has been approved, land
use department shall retain the original and keep a file thereof. One copy shall be returned to the
applicant, or his/her agent, and one copy shall be delivered to county clerk.
K. Manufactured Home Park License Requirements:
(
1. General Requirements:
a. No person, firm or corporation shall establish, maintain, conduct or operate a manufactured home
park without first obtaining a license from the land use department.
b. A license to operate a manufactured home park shall be issued for one year and shall expire at
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on April 30 of each year. The license may be renewed from year to
year upon payment of an annual license fee in accordance with subsection K1 c of this section.
Licenses issued hereunder apply only to the premises described in the application and in the
license. Only one location may be described in the license. A license which has been issued for a
particular premises may not be moved to any other premises.
c. In addition to the application fees, the licensee shall pay to the land use department, on or before
April 30 of each year, a nonrefundable annual license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) plus three dollars
($3.00) for each manufactured home site in the park. The land use department shall deposit all
funds received with the county treasurer.
9A-73
Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
d. All licenses to operate a manufactured home park shall be prominently displayed in the
manufactured home park office.
Page 18of19
2. Revocation Of License: Any license granted hereunder shall be subject to revocation or suspens. _
by the land use department. The zoning officer shall first serve, or cause to be served, upon the
licensee, a written notice which shall specify the way or ways in which such licensee has failed to
comply with this title. Said notice shall require the licensee to remove or abate such nuisance,
unsanitary or objectionable condition, specified in such notice, within five (5) days, unless a longer
period of time is allowed by the zoning officer. If the licensee fails to comply with the terms and
conditions of said notice, the land use department may revoke or suspend such license.
3. Records: When a license to operate and maintain a manufactured home park has been approved,
the land use department shall retain the original and keep a file thereof. One copy shall be returned
to the applicant, or his/her agent, and one copy shall be delivered to county clerk.
4. Management Responsibilities: The following manufactured home park management provisions are
applicable to all manufactured home parks licensed within Grundy County:
a. Every park shall be managed by a responsible party on duty twenty four (24) hours per day and
seven (7) days per week whose name, address and telephone number shall be on file at all times
with the land use department and Grundy County sheriff. The duties of this responsible party shall
be to maintain the park, and its facilities and equipment, in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition,
and shall be responsible, in addition to the licensee, for any violation of this title.
b. Each manufactured home park shall have a manager's office where each manufactured home
shall be assigned its manufactured home site, issued a copy of the manufactured home park's
rules and registered. A register shall be maintained by the manager and shall include:
(1) The name and address of the owner of each manufactured home unit.
(2) The name and address of each occupant of such unit.
(3) The license number and state of issuance, for such unit.
(4) The date of entry of such unit into the park. The register shall be signed by the owner or
occupant of the manufactured home.
c. Any person furnishing misinformation for purposes of registration shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. Registration records shall be kept for seven (7) years after the manufactured home
unit has left the manufactured home park. The register shall be available for inspection upon
request by all law enforcement officers.
d. The land use department shall keep a record of all manufactured home parks. These records shall
show the names and addresses of all manufactured home parks, names and addresses of the
manufactured home park licensees, number of manufactured home sites in each park, source of
water supply, system of sewage and garbage disposal, and any other information desired by the
land use department.
5. Required School District Registration: The following provisions are applicable to all manufacturec'
home parks licensed within Grundy County:
9A-74
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 19of19
/
.\
(
a. It shall be the duty of each licensee to file with the school board(s) of the school district(s) where
the manufactured home park is located, within the first five (5) business days of February and of
September of each year, a report that contains the names and ages of all school age children who
reside in the manufactured home park.
b. The governing body of the school district in which such manufactured home park is located, by
and through its officers, attendance officers and proper employees, may visit and inspect a
manufactured home park for the purpose of enforcing the attendance of school children who
reside in the park. When a manufactured home park is located in more than one school district, the
school boards of the school districts, acting jointly, are authorized to visit and inspect a
manufactured home park for the purpose of enforcing the attendance of school children who
reside in the park.
L. Nonconforming Manufactured Home Parks:
1. Manufactured home parks established prior to the effective date of the MHP district shall be
considered legal nonconforming manufactured home parks and shall continue to be governed by all
standards in effect at the time they were approved.
2. The replacement of manufactured homes in legal nonconforming manufactured home parks shall be
governed by the standards in effect when the manufactured home parks were approved. However,
no manufactured home or mobile home shall be replaced by a "mobile home'', as defined in this title.
3. Expansion of a legal nonconforming manufactured home park shall only be allowed when such
expansion also includes substantial improvements in the existing manufactured home park to such a
degree that the existing park, including the expanded area, complies with the provisions of the MHP
district. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
9A-75
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of I
8-2-5-22: PLACES OF PUBLIC ASS EMBLY:
The standards of this section are intended to ensure land use compatibility, protect the integrity of
neighborhoods, and preserve community character, while allowing uses that serve the community to
locate near and among residential uses. Places of public assembly may be allowed as a special use in the
agricultural (A), agricultural residential (AR), planned residential (PR), and residential (R) districts subject
to the following requirements:
A. Location: The place of public assembly complies with the provisions of section 8-3-4-2, "Nonresidential
Scale And Design Regulations", of this title, and is located on the classification of roadway that is
required for the scale of the use.
B. Minimum Lot Size: Places of public assembly shall have a minimum site area:
1. For places of public assembly in the planned residential (PR) or residential (R) districts, four (4)
times the minimum lot size is required for that district.
2. For the agricultural (A) and agricultural residential (AR) districts, the following minimum site areas:
a. School: Five (5) acres.
b. Places of worship, libraries, museums: Three (3) acres.
c. Childcare centers: One acre.
C. Additional Requirements: Based on the recommendations of the zoning board of appeals, planning
commission, and planning and zoning committee, the county board may impose additional standards
on places of public assembly that:
1. Ensure appropriateness of scale,
2. Maintain consistency in the community character in which the use is situated, or
3. Mitigate impacts on the transportation system and public service requirements. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-
2010)
9A-76
httn ://www.sterl in g:codi tiers.com/codehook/nri ntnow .nhn 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of 1
( 1-2-5-24: PRIVATE CLUB:
(
Private clubs may be allowed as a special use in the agricultural (A), agricultural residential (AR), planned
residential (PR), and residential (R) districts subject to the following requirements:
A. Building Character: The building in which the use is located:
1. Has the character of a residential building, and
2. Has a floor area that is not greater than 1.5 times the floor area of the largest dwelling that is located
on the same street face.
B. Street Access: The use shall be accessed by a public street that is classified as a collector or greater
capacity, or within three hundred feet (300') of an intersection with a road that is classified as a
collector or greater capacity. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
8-2-5-23: PRIVATE AIRSTRIP:
Private airstrips may be allowed as a special use in the agricultural (A) district subject to the following
provisions:
A. Safety Aviation Rules: The safety restrictions on the airstrip are in accordance with the state of Illinois.
B. Ownership: A special use approval shall run with the ownership of the parcel, and it shall be recorded
as such.
C. Fly-Ins: The owner is limited to two (2) events per year. Each fly-in is limited to fifteen (15) planes per
event.
.J. Natural Conditions: Natural conditions are to be preserved, which permits only grass strips. No towers
are permitted. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
9A-77
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of2
8-2-5-25: PRIVATE PIPELINES:
Natural gas and petroleum pipelines located on agricultural properties or properties with sensitive arec.~
including, but not limited to, wetlands, steep slopes, woodlands, or floodplains may be subject to the
following special use standards in order to minimize construction impacts:
A. Entrance And Exit To Property: Prior to the pipeline's installation, the applicant and landowners/tenants
shall reach an acceptable agreement on the route that will be used for entering and exiting the right of
way and other construction areas. The affected property owners/tenants shall be notified of the project
intent and approximate scheduling of the construction.
B. Location: All pipelines greater than ten inches (1 O") in diameter that transport flammable or hazardous
material shall be located a minimum of five hundred feet (500') from any occupied principal structure.
C. Land Cover: Except for aboveground piping facilities, the pipeline shall be buried with:
1. A minimum of five feet (5') of top cover where it crosses agricultural land that has been determined
as having prime soils.
2. A minimum of three feet (3') of top cover where it crosses agricultural land that has been determ.
as having nonprime soils.
3. A minimum of three feet (3') of top cover where it crosses properties having the protected resource
categories listed in section 8-4-2-1, "Protected Resources", of this title.
4. Substantially the same top cover as an existing parallel pipeline, but not less than three feet (3'),
where an existing pipeline is within one hundred feet (100') perpendicular to the new pipeline.
D. Replacement Of Topsoil:
1. Existing topsoil depths shall be restored.
2. Replacement shall be undertaken in a manner as to minimize settling and the mixing of topsoil with
subsoil materials. In no instance shall the topsoil materials be used for any other purpose.
3. As the topsoil is replaced, all rocks greater than three inches (3") in dimension shall be removed.
E. Restoration Of Ground Cover And Field Tiles:
9A-78
htto://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/orintnow.oho 9/13/2013
(
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 2 of2
1. All conservation practices such as terraces or grassed waterways that are damaged by the pipeline's
construction shall be restored to their preconstruction condition. Vegetation in sensitive areas shall
be restored to their preconstruction state.
2. All existing field tiles shall be identified before construction and repaired or replaced at the
conclusion of construction. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
8-2-5-26: RECREATION, INDOOR:
Indoor recreation may be allowed as a special use in the agricultural (A) and residential (R) districts,
subject to the following provisions:
A Limited Access Or Membership: In the agricultural (A) district, access to the use is limited to residents
of the development or neighborhood in which it is located and their invitees.
2. Constructed of sound resistant materials; or
3. Limited in operation such that it is closed between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00)
AM. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
8-2-5-27: RECREATION, OUTDOOR:
Outdoor recreation may be allowed as a special use in the agricultural (A), planned residential (PR), and
residential (R) districts, subject to the following provisions:
A The premises shall be closed between nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) AM.; or
( '. Portions of the use, such as an athletic field, that are open later than nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. shall be
located at least three hundred feet (300') from any property that is used for residential purposes. (Ord.
10-001, 1-12-2010)
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page I of7
8-2-5-30: SOLAR FARMS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide regulations for the permitting of solar farms as a
special use for A agricultural and I industrial zoning districts. This section provides for the preservation,
protection of natural resources such as forests, tributaries, and habitat while also providing restrictions
for the development to aid in the quality of life for the adjacent property owners and general aesthetic
qualities for the county while preventing detriment to the public health, safety and welfare of the county
as a whole.
B. Definitions:
LARGE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: Energy generated from multiple solar panels over a large parcel
in which this would be the primary land use. Poles and racks of multiple solar panels would be used
that would generate direct current (DC) rated capacity greater than one hundred (100) kilowatts.
SOLAR ARRAY: A number of photovoltaic modules or panels connected together to provide a single
electrical output.
SOLAR COLLECTOR TOTAL HEIGHT: The height of the solar collector system from grade to the
highest point of the system that may be achieved when in operation.
TRACKING SOLAR ARRAY: A solar array that follows the path of the sun to optimize the amount 01
solar radiation received by the device.
C. Filing Requirements For A Special Use Of A Solar Farm: Submittal packets for a spycial use for the
construction of a solar farm shall contain the following:
1. Application: The applicant for a solar farm special use shall file twenty five (25) copies of application,
including ten (10) full size copies of exhibits and fifteen (15) reduced copies of all exhibits, with the
land use department of the county, together with the appropriate site review application fee. The
applicant is to provide up to ten (10) additional copies of the application to the county upon request.
2. Land Use Department: The land use department of the county, upon receiving said application, shall
do the following:
a. Accept for filing, and date stamp as filing, any application that is filed. The date stamp of the land
use department should be considered the official filing date for all time limit purposes. Receipt and
acceptance of an application by the department is proforma, and does not constitute an
acknowledgment that the applicant has complied with the county ordinances.
b. The land use department shall make available a copy of the application and public record
concerning the application for public inspection during the normal business hours of the
department. Additionally, the department shall provide to any person so requesting, copies of tht::
9A-80
htto://www.sterlingcoclifiers.com/coclebook/orintnow.oho 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 2 of7
' \
application or the public record, upon payment by such persons for the actual cost of reproduction
in accordance with the county FOIA requirements.
3. Form Of Applications:
a. All applications shall be in writing on paper of eight and one-half inches by eleven inches
(8 1'2'' x 11"), eight and one-half inches by fourteen inches (8 1'2" x 14"), or eleven inches by
seventeen inches (11" x 17").
b. The pages of the application shall be consecutively numbered, and all exhibits clearly marked and
identified.
c. The text portion of the application (not including exhibits or graphic presentations) shall be
furnished in an electronic format. The exhibits or graphic representations may also be furnished in
electronic format.
D. Content Of The Solar Farm Application: Every solar farm application shall include the following
information and documentation:
1. Host Agreement: An executed host agreement must be appended to, and included as part of, any
solar farm special use application filed with the county.
2. Applicant Information: The applicant shall describe itself, its legal standing as to whether it is a
corporation, limited liability company, individual, or other legal entity and shall identify its officers and
directors, shareholders, and members. It shall also identify its parent and subsidiary companies. The
same information shall be provided for all owners and operators of the solar farm system. In addition,
the applicant shall identify the property owners that have entered into leases or agreements with the
applicant and proof must be included that the applicant has the legal authority to bring this
application in the name of such property owners.
.I
3. Project Description: The applicant shall provide a general description of the project, including its total
generating capacity; the equipment manufacturer, the type and model of solar collectors proposed,
the number of solar collectors, the nameplate generating capacity of each solar collector, the
proposed height of each solar collector and overall dimensions thereof.
4. Site Plan:
a. All proposed setback dimensions.
b. All proposed structures on the property, including, but not limited to, solar collectors, substations,
and service roads.
c. Topographic site information for the subject property and the adjacent properties within a quarter
mile of the property line of the subject property indicating contours in five foot (5') intervals.
( d. Existing structures on subject property and properties within a quarter mile of the property.
e. All existing and proposed underground and aboveground utilities.
9A-81
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 3 of7
f. All rights of way, wetlands, wooded areas, and public conservation lands.
g. Ingress and egress from the site as proposed during construction and thereafter, which indicat
(1) Proposed road surface and cover.
(2) Dust control.
(3) Width and length of access route and location of ingress.
(4) Road maintenance progress or schedule for proposed use of land.
h. Certified easements, contracts, waivers, and option agreements for proposed use of the land.
i. Utility interconnection details and a copy of written notification to the utility company requesting the
proposed interconnection.
j. Fire protection plan for the construction and the operation of the facility, and emergency access to
the site.
k. Revegetation or reclamation plan of the areas that will be disturbed.
I. Drainage plan and erosion control plan.
m. Description of hours of operation for construction and maintenance of the facility, numbers of
employees and type of traffic expected to be generated from the site.
n. Public road routes.
E. Design And Installation Requirements:
I
1. Height: The total height of the solar collectors shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in height when
oriented at a maximum tilt position unless specifically allowed by the Grundy County board.
2. Setbacks:
a. Yard Setback Requirements: The setback for the rear, front and side of the solar array and
components of the solar collector system shall conform to the requirements of a structure for the
zoning district in which the solar farm is located.
b. Public And Private Roads: Components of the solar collector system shall be located such that
they are one hundred fifty feet (150') from public and private roads.
c. High Water Mark: High water mark of navigable waterways/public parks/public conservation lands:
One hundred fifty feet (150').
d. Waiver: Any waiver of any setback requirement shall only be considered an effective compliance
with this subsection if said waiver runs with the land and is recorded as part of the chain of title
and the deed of the subject property.
9A-82
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9/13/2011
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 4 of7
(
\
3. Electrical Components: All electrical components of a solar farm shall conform to all applicable local
utility standards and national electric codes. All electrical wires and lines that are used in conjunction
with the solar farm shall be installed underground.
4. Environmental Impact: The applicant shall have a third party, qualified professional conduct an
analysis to identify and assess any potential impacts on the natural environment including wetlands
and other fragile ecosystems, historical or cultural sites and antiquities, and adjacent agricultural
uses such as rotating crops. The applicant shall take appropriate measures to minimize, eliminate or
mitigate adverse impacts identified in the analysis. The applicant shall identify and evaluate the
significance of any effects or concerns that will remain after mitigation efforts. In addition a water
usage or impact study shall be completed that will indicate any impact that the solar farm will have
on county water resources.
5. Avian And Wildlife Impact: The applicant shall have a third party, qualified professional conduct an
analysis to identify and assess any potential impacts on wildlife and endangered species. The
applicant shall take the appropriate measures to minimize, eliminate or mitigate adverse impacts
identified in the analysis. The applicant shall identify and evaluate the significance of any net effects
or concerns that will remain after mitigation efforts.
6. Warning Signage: Signs warning of the high voltage associated with the solar farm shall be posted
at every entrance to the facility, at the base of all pad mounted transformers and substations. A sign
that provides emergency contact information, such as phone number, shall be posted near the tower
and the operations and maintenance building.
1( 7. Landscaping: Applicant shall minimize the disruption of natural environment, retain existing
(
vegetation and native plant species to the maximum extent feasible and replant with native
vegetation if existing vegetation is disturbed during construction. Landscaping shall be used as part
of screening from adjacent properties or public view. All landscape shall comply with the
requirements set forth in chapter 9 of this title.
8. Federal And State Requirement Compliance: The solar collecting system shall meet or exceed any
standards and regulations of any agency of the state or federal government with the authority to
regulate solar farms.
9. Power Lines: All electrical control wiring and power lines shall be wireless or not aboveground
except where wind farm collector wiring is brought together for connection to the transmission or
distribution network, adjacent to that network.
10. Access Roads: The applicant shall minimize the number and width of access roads, minimize cut
and fill on sloping terrain and use natural terrain where feasible for these access points.
11. Roads: All routes on either county or township roads that will be used for the construction and
maintenance purposes shall be identified on the site plan. All routes for either egress or ingress need
to be shown. The routing shall be approved subject to the approval of the Grundy County highway
engineer in coordination with the township road commissioners. The developer shall provide and
complete a preconstruction baseline survey to determine existing road conditions for assessing
potential future damage due to development related traffic. The developer applicant shall provide a
road repair plan to ameliorate any and all damage, installation or replacement of roads that might be
required by the developer. The developer applicant shall provide a letter of credit or a surety bond in
an amount and form approved by the highway/roadway official(s).
9A-83
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 5 of7
12. Property Value Protection Plan: The developer shall provide within the application a plan to protect
the property values of any nonparticipating real property owner within two (2) miles of the boundaries
of the solar farm.
13. Complaint Resolution: The applicant shall develop a process to resolve any complaints that may
arise from neighboring property owners during the construction and operation of the solar farm. The
process may use an independent mediator or arbitrator and shall include a time limit for acting on a
complaint that is received. The process shall not preclude the local government from acting on a
complaint. The applicant shall provide to the nearby residents a phone number of the project
manager during the construction of the facility if a problem should arise.
14. Waste Disposal: All solid waste generated from supplies, equipment, parts, packaging or operation
of the facility shall be removed from the site immediately and disposed of in an appropriate manner.
Any hazardous waste that is generated by the facility, including, but not limited to, lubricating
materials, shall be removed consistent with all local, state and federal rules and regulations.
15. Drainage: The plan shall state that any damage to waterways, drainage ditches, field tiles or any
other infrastructures caused by the construction or maintenance of the solar farm shall be completely
repaired to near original condition and so as not to impede the natural flow of water. All repairs shall
be completed within a reasonable amount of time. The solar farm owner is to notify the county
engineer that the construction of any part of the project e,ncounters any underground field drainage
tiles. A plan sufficient to provide remediation shall be submitted, reviewed and subject to the
approval of the county engineer. All existing drainage tiles that will be crossed by private access
roads shall be removed and replaced with load resistant tiles as specified by the county engineer.
This shall be done before the private access roads are used for construction purposes. The load
resistant tiles shall extend a minimum of thirty feet (30') across the private access roads and shal
of the same diameter of the existing tiles. To ensure that all drainage tiles are located, reasonable
measures shall be made to locate all existing tiles in the vicinity of the private access roads by
exploratory trench or other appropriate methods. All drainage tiles that are encountered during
construction shall be noted on the site plan. Financial assurances in the form of cash or an escrow
account, surety bond or a letter of credit in a form and amount acceptable to the county engineer
shall be posted to assure compliance with this section. /
16. Conformance To Industry And Code Standards/Engineer Certification: The solar farm shall comply
with all applicable local and county codes for the electrical, mechanical and structural components of
the facility. All documents provided for review shall be stamped and signed by a professional
engineer. All solar collection system panels shall be certified by the Solar Collector And Certification
Corporation (SRCC).
17. Operation And Maintenance: Each applicant or successor in interest shall have the facility
inspected annually by third party qualified wind power professionals at their own expense. The third
party qualified wind power professional shall be subject to the approval of the Grundy County land
use department. Within fifteen (15) days of the inspection a copy of all reports shall be provided to
the Grundy County land use department. The solar farm shall not operate unless a certificate is
provided to the Grundy County land use department indicating that the annual maintenance has
been completed and the facility is in good working condition. Failure to provide this annual
certification may cause the revocation of the special use as issued by Grundy County.
9A-84
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 6 of7
(
(
18. Fencing: Perimeter fencing having a maximum height of eight feet (8') shall be installed around the
boundary of the solar farm. The fence shall contain appropriate warning signage that is posted such
that it is clearly visible on the site.
19. Reflective Coating: Solar energy system components shall be designed with an antireflective
coating. Verification shall be provided that verifies that the components of the solar energy system
have this quality.
20. Lot Area: Solar farms and components thereof shall be located on a parcel that is a minimum of
forty (40) acres in size. The lot or parcel shall have a minimum width of six hundred feet (600').
21. Vegetation Control: A vegetation and weed control plan shall be provided that protects against the
creation of a prey habitat and/or aesthetic impacts to the surrounding area.
22. Antiperching Protection: Antiperching protection devices shall be used to prevent negative
environmental impacts.
23. Airport And Airport Control Zones: Solar farms shall not be located adjacent to or within a control
zone of any airport.
24. Cleaning Supplies And Solvents: Cleaning chemicals and solvents used during the operation or
maintenance of the solar farm facility shall consist of biodegradable products and shall be low in
volatile organic compounds.
25. Reflection Angles: Reflection angles for solar collectors shall be oriented such that they do not
direct glare toward residential users on adjacent properties.
F. Decommissioning Or Abandonment Of The Solar Farm: Prior to receiving a special use of the solar
farm, the operator/owner shall provide for a decommissioning plan for the anticipated service life of the
facility or in the event that the facility is abandoned or has reached its life expectanc;y. If the solar farm
is out of service or not producing electrical energy for a period of nine (9) months, it will be deemed
nonoperational and decommissioning and removal of that facility will need to commence according to
the decommissioning plan provided and approved. The decommissioning plan shall have the following
information provided:
1. Removal of the following within nine (9) months:
a. All solar collectors and components, aboveground improvements and outside storage.
b. Foundations, pads and underground electrical wires and reclaim the site to a depth of four feet (4')
below the surface of the ground.
c. Hazardous material from the property and dispose of in accordance with federal and state law.
d. A cost estimate for the decommissioning of the facility shall be prepared by a professional
engineer or contractor who has expertise in the removal of the solar farm. The decommissioning
cost estimate shall explicitly detail the cost before considering any projected salvage value of the
out of service solar farm. The decommissioning cost shall be made by cash, surety bond or
irrevocable letter of credit before any construction commences.
9A-85
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 7 of7
e. A restoration plan shall be provided for the site.
G. Liability Insurance: The owner or operator of the solar farm shall maintain a current general liability
policy covering bodily injury and property damage and name Grundy County as an additional insured
with limits of at least two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) per occurrence and five million dollars
($5,000,000.00) in the aggregate with a deductible of no more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00).
H. Administration And Enforcement: The zoning officer shall enforce the provisions of this section through
an inspection of the solar farm every year. The zoning officer is hereby granted the power and authority
to enter upon the premises of the solar farm at any time by coordinating a reasonable time with the
operator/owner of the facility. Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects,
refuses to comply with, or resists enforcement of any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. Each tower, nacelle, or any other component of the solar farm shall be the
subject of a separate violation and further each week that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. Other actions may be taken by law or in equity to prevent or to remedy
any violation of this section and these remedies shall be in .addition to any other remedies, damages or
penalties. (Ord. 2012-015, 4-10-2012)
9A-86
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page I of I
( ~-2-5-33: UTILITIES, COMMUNITY:
(
Community utilities may be allowed as a special use in the agricultural (A), agricultural residential (AR),
planned residential (PR), residential (R), and commercial interchange (Cl) districts subject to the following
standards:
A. Buffer: The facility shall be surrounded by a landscape buffer 1.5 times the requirements of chapter 9,
"Landscaping And Tree Protection", of this title.
B. Design Compatibility: In the PR and R districts, the design of the community utilities shall be compatible
with the residential environment. Masonry walls, rather than fences, shall be used to screen the facility.
The street faces shall be improved to provide continuation of the sidewalk areas, with landscaping
designed to make the utility a part of the commercial area. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-201 O; amd. Ord. 2012-
015, 4-10-2012)
9A-87
L._,_ ___ I/ _________ .._ ___ !'. ____ T'C" 1 1 1 I ' ,
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page I of2
8-2-6-1: ST AN DAROS FOR ALL TEMPORARY USES:
A. Standards: All temporary uses shall be reviewed against the following criteria:
1. Traffic Circulation: The temporary use shall have adequate sight distances for safe vehicular ingress
and egress. It shall have adequate turn lanes or provide for police control to move traffic in and out of
the use. The adjacent street shall have adequate capacity to handle the anticipated additional flow of
traffic.
2. Public Convenience And Litter Control: Adequate on site restroom facilities may be required to
handle the expected attendance. Adequate waste containers shall be required and a written
guarantee shall be required that all litter generated by the event shall be removed at no expense to
the county. This shall include adjoining public rights of way.
3. Signs: A sign permit is not required; however, the land use department shall review and approve all
signage. The land use department may approve signs up to fifty percent (50%) smaller than would
be permitted in chapter 5, "Signs", of this title, and may also approve attention getting devices. The
number, type, and size of signs and attention getting devices shall be determined using the following
criteria:
a. The need for obvious way finding information, based on the location of the event and its likelihood
of attracting visitors who are unfamiliar with the area, who may lose their way or become confused
if signs are limited to the sign area otherwise allowed by this title.
b. The type, length, and size of the proposed event or use.
c. Sight distances, other signage in the area or on the property, sidewalks, traffic volumes, and
speed on the road.
d. Other lighting in area, type of neighbors, light intensity, and glare potential.
e. Logical travel routes to the site.
B. Modification Of Provisions: The land use department may establish additional conditions deemed
necessary to ensure land use compatibility or minimize potential adverse impacts on neighboring
properties, public streets, or the county. These may include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Modification or restrictions on hours of operation or duration of the event.
2. Posting of a performance bond to ensure cleanup and removal of signage.
3. Arrangements satisfactory to the county for the provision of special or extraordinary services or
equipment, such as traffic control or security personnel, or equipment that is needed to ensure safe
operation of the use or event. This may also include liability insurance.
9A-88
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9/13/2013
(
(
\
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 2 of2
4. The land use department may refuse to issue a permit if the event is too large to be safe for the site
neighborhood, street, or other infrastructure, or may place limits on attendance to ensure it can be '
properly managed.
C. Other P_ermits And Licenses: All temporary uses or special events shall comply with all state and county
. regulations pertaining to the intended activities or occupancy. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
8-2-6-3: FARM STAND OR FARMERS' MARKET:
Temporary farm stands or farmers' markets may be permitted in the agricultural (A) district, subject to
lministrative review that demonstrates that the following provisions are met:
A. Access should be taken by means of the farmer's driveway.
B. Additional curb cuts would need to be approved separately. The township road commissioner, Illinois
department of transportation, or the county highway engineer would provide approval of curb cuts if it
was a township, state, or county road, respectively.
C. In addition to meeting any Illinois department of transportation setback and access requirements, the
development review committee shall ensure that there is adequate access and parking. (Ord. 10-001,
1-12-2010)
9A-89
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of 1
8-2-6-5: SPECIAL EVENTS:
Special events in public athletic fields or parks may be regulated by the county board or appropriates, . ,,
district and are not limited by this section. All other special events may be authorized as a special use in
agricultural (A), commercial general (CG), and commercial interchange (Cl) districts. All other special
events shall meet the following standards:
A. Frequency: Special events shall not be held on a property more than two (2) times per calendar year.
B. Duration: The special event shall be limited to no more than four (4) successive days.
C. Access: If deemed necessary by the county sheriff, property access shall be controlled by special traffic
personnel paid for by the applicant. Prior to receiving a permit, the applicant must provide written
communication from the sheriff indicating adequate provisions have been made.
D. Sanitation: The county health department shall approve the sanitary provisions. Prior to receiving a
permit, the applicant must provide written communication from the environmental health director
indicating adequate provisions h_ave been made.
E. Electrical Service And Lighting: The county's electrical inspector shall approve all electric and lighting
facilities. Prior to receiving a permit, the applicant must provide written communication from the
inspector indicating adequate provisions have been made. J
F. Noise: Maximum noise levels shall comply with Grundy County ordinance 08-004.
G. Surety: The applicant shall provide surety for complete site restoration upon the event's conclusion or
should the permit be revoked. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
9A-90
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of2
( "-3-2-1: RESIDENTIAL DENSITY STANDARDS:
Residential site development standards are shown in table 8-3-2-1, "Residential Density Standards", of
th is section.
TABLE 8-3-2-1
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY STANDARDS
Minimum Open
District And Development Space Ratio (OSR) Minimum Lot Minimum Area Of Site
Type (Average Lot Size) 1 Size Proposed For Development
I Agricultural (A): I
I Farmstead II n/a II 1.5 acres II 20 ac.
Manufactured home park
I
0.20 17,200 sq. ft. - 10 acres with 20 acres
: 12,240 sq. ft. maximum
Single-family (Ag. split
I
n/a
II
5 acres
II
20 acres
option)2
Agricultural residential
I II I (AR):
I Farmstead II n/a II 1.5 acres II n/a
I Single-family II n/a II 1.5 acres II n/a
I Planned residential (PR): I
I Cluster II 0.25 II 18,000 sq. ft. II 15 acres
'
I Single-family II 0.10 II 2 acres II 15 acres
J Residential (R): I
All permitted residential See section 8-3-2-2, "Table 8-3-2-2, Single-Family Lot And Building
types Standards", of this chapter for the residential (R) district
I Commercial general (CG): I
I Multi-family II 0.30 II 8,000 sq. ft. II 4 acres
Notes:
1. OSR - "open space ratio". OSR for single-family and manufactured housing development does not
apply to the development of 1 home on an individual lot of record.
( · Up to 5 lots permitted, provided there is a 20 acre combined required area per single-family residence.
>ee section 8-2-4-10 of this title.
(Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
9A-91
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of3
8-3-2-2: SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED:
A. Generally: The single-family detached housing type consists of a single-family detached residence
located on a privately owned lot with private yards on each side of the unit. There shall be not more
than one such principal residential dwelling on each lot. See figure 8-3-2-2, "Single-Family Detached
Unit", of this section.
FIGURE 8-3-2-2
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED UNIT
Side-*I
F rorzt/Street
Single-Family Detached
fflidth
:;;_:i-_. .-.- .. -.• -.. .- .".I : :: : : : : :: :: : : :
:::.::::::::::::::::: ·-.l(•i!• . ; ;: ;: : ; ; : ~= :: :! : ::: ;: H~;~;'~~~~Q!1:i.
9A-92
..........
.;,; "; :.:..:.:.;. ;:"~.1~~ ..- ._,,_. .,. ,.
''' .............. .
9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 2 of3
B. Standards: The lot and building standards for single-family detached units are set out in table 8-3-2-2,
( "Single-Family Lot And Building Standards", of this section.
(
TABLE 8-3-2-2
SINGLE-FAMILY LOT AND BUILDING STANDARDS
I Minimum II Maximum I μ;J [;;] Corner ~"=~J Zoning Minimum Front Side Building
District Lot Area h Yard d Yard Height Coverage I Agricultural (A) 111.5 acre II 170' II 50· l~I 50' I 50' II 35' II - I
Agricultural LjLJLtJtJtJLJ 0.15
residential
(AR)
Planned 18,000 sq. [_:_J[TILJLJtJ 0.3
residential ft.
(PR)
Residential (R) I See subsection C of this section
subdistricts
Residential EJL:JEJL:JL:JL:J~I 0.06
(R-200)
Residential 40,000 sq. c:JEJc:JL:JL:JC°JI 0.3
(R-40) ft.
Residential 12,500 sq. c:Jc:Jc:Jc:Jc:JC°JI 0.4
(R-12) ft.
Note:
1. See section 8-2-3-11, "Residential Development", of this title, for additional lot area requirements for the
agricultural residential (AR) district.
C. Dwellings In The Residential (R) District: The development standards are intended to allow flexibility to
property owners in established neighborhoods within the residential (R) district to improve and expand
their homes in a manner that is consistent with the character of the immediate area.
1. Subdistricts are established within the residential (R) district to accommodate variation in the forms
and scale of residential development and subdivisions that have been built in the unincorporated
areas of Grundy County under earlier zoning provisions.
2. The lot and building standards for residential (R) subdistricts are as shown in table 8-3-2-2, "SingleFamily
Lot And Building Standards", of this section.
9A-93
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 3 of3
D. Attached Accessory Residential Units: Accessory dwellings may be built on any existing or future
single-family residential lot that meets the standards below. The accessory unit is exempted from ti.
calculation as a dwelling unit when determining the maximum density in section 8-3-2-1, "Table 8-3-
2-1, Residential Density Standards", of this chapter. Accessory units may be constructed as follows:
1. Transition: The plan shall provide a means of protecting adjoining residential uses or residentially
zoned land from any impacts of the additional density and design of the unit. Increased buffer yard
opacity, landscaping, setbacks from the adjoining homes, or prohibiting the lots that abut the site
boundary from having the accessory units are techniques that may be required (see chapter 9,
"Landscaping And Tree Protection", of this title).
2. Unit Standards: An accessory unit shall consist of not more than eight hundred fifty (850) square
feet. It shall have no more than one bedroom or bathroom.
3. Unit Design: The applicant shall submit plans showing how the home will be designed to provide for
an attached accessory unit. The unit shall be within the structure or above an attached garage.
Specific design standards shall be provided for each one of the arrangements that are to be
permitted. In no event shall a single-family or cluster lot smaller than six thousand (6,000) square
feet contain an accessory unit.
4. Appearance: The accessory living unit, and any related changes to the property, shall be designed
so that the appearance remains that of a single-family residence and is consistent with the singlefamily
character of other residences in the neighborhood. Any new entrances shall be located on the
side or in the rear of the building. ·
5. Other Forms Of Ownership Prohibited: The single-family dwelling or the accessory living unit shall
not be converted to a condominium or any other form of legal ownership distinct from the ownership
of the existing single-family dwelling. An accessory living unit shall be recorded by deed addendum,
indicating the conditions and limitations of the approval granted.
i
6. Owner Occupied Principal Dwelling Required: The single-family dwelling to which an accessory
living unit has been added shall be owner occupied.
7. Allowed As Part Of Housing: Accessory living units will be allowed only as part of single-family
detached housing.
8. Access To Principal Dwelling: The accessory living unit shall have convenient and direct access to
the principal dwelling unit.
9. Occupancy: The occupancy shall be limited to a specific extended family member(s). For the
purposes of this title, "extended family" is defined as parents (and their spouses), grandparents (and
their spouses), children (and their spouses), grandchildren and persons under legal guardianship. In
the event that extended family member(s) vacate that unit, the administrative review permit shall
expire and any new occupancy shall require a new administrative review permit application. (Ord.
10-001, 1-12-2010)
9A-94
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9/13/2013
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 1 of2
"-3-4-1:NONRESIDENTIAL BULK STANDARDS:
Nonresidential bulk requirements include the following requirements:
TABLE 8-3-4-1
NONRESIDENTIAL BULK REQUIREMENTS
Minimum Maximum
Minimum Area
Of
Front Proposed
Lot Yard1•2 Side Rear Land Building
District And Use Lot Area Width1 Yard Yard1 Development1 Height
Agricultural (A) and agricultural residential (AR): DODI ICJ
I All uses II 5 acres II n/a 11 50 ft. l@:f!JI 50 ft. II 5 acres II 35 ft. I
Planned residential CJDDDDI I I (PR):
Institutional CS~EJ~~I 2 acres I 35 ft. residential I
Office/retail/service 10,000 ~EJEJ~I 1 acre I 35 ft. sq. ft. I
I All other uses II 5 acres 111 oo ft. II 50 ft. l@:f!J~I 5 acres II 35 ft. I
I Residential (R): II II II IOI I I I
All permitted 4 times 2 times the yards required for 2 acres ' 35 ft.
nonresidential uses the single-family development
minimum
lot area
for singlefamily
Commercial general (CG) and commercial interchange (Cl): DCll ICJ
Commercial retail 15,000 ~EJ~~I 1 acre sq. ft. lc:=J
Office/lodging 15,000 ~EJ~Ell 2 acres lc:J sq. ft.
( I Services
I
15,000 ~EJ~Ell 1 acre lc:=J sq. ft.
I All other uses II 111 oo ft. 11 40 ft. lf2oft.ll 25 ft. 11 1 acre II 35 ft. I
9A-95
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 2 of2
I I 20,000 sq. ft. LJLJLJLJI I I _J
I Industrial (I): II II II IDD .
Light industrial 20,000 120 ft. 40 ft. 20 ft. 30 ft. 1 acre 4 stories
sq. ft. or 50 ft.,
whichever
is lower
Heavy industrial 60,000 150 ft. 50 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 2 acres 4 stories
sq. ft. or 50 ft.,
whichever
is lower
Warehouse 1 acre 150 ft. 50 ft. 30 ft. 30 ft. 2 acres 3 stories
or 40 ft.,
whichever
is lower
All other uses 20,000 120 ft. 40 ft. 20 ft. 25 ft. 1 acre 4 stories
sq. ft. or 50 ft.,
whichever
is lower
Notes:
1. Along Route 47, frontages and yard requirements in excess of the minimum requirements specified
here may be required. See chapter 10, "Overlay District", of this title.
2. Front yard refers to the front yard of a lot. A typical corner lot would have 2 front yards.
(Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
9A-96
http://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/printnow.php 9/13/2013
(
Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
"-4-2-2: RESOURCE PROTECTION LEVELS:
1·he area of resources designated in this section shall be protected as indicated in table 8-4-2-2,
"Resource Protection Standards", of this section.
Page 1 of2
A. Site Plan Requirements: The site plan shall designate the areas and acreages of each resource listed in
table 8-4-2-2, "Resource Protection Standards", of this section. The area to be protected shall meet the
open space requirements for each resource category. The site plan shall include a table that
enumerates the following:
1. The total acreage of each designated resource area on the site.
2. The protected acreage for each resource.
3. The acreage for each resource that is permitted to be disturbed.
4. The acreage for each resource that will be disturbed when the project is completed.
B. Protecting Resources: Protected areas shall be designated on the plan as common open space. The
county board may also permit a conservation easement on properties intended for development as
long as the minimum area requirements for residential lots are met outside the easement.
C. Overlapping Resources: It is likely that resource areas will overlap. In these cases, the area of the most
restrictive resource (that with the highest open space ratio) shall be used.
TABLE 8-4-2-2
RESOURCE PROTECTION STANDARDS
I
11 Required Open Space Ratio I
Resource :1 Agricultural (A) District II All Other Districts I
I Wetlands
11
1 II 1 I
I Steep slopes (10 to 20%) II o .25 0.5 I
I Steep slopes (greater than 20%) II o .6 0.8 I
I Riparian woodland or mature trees II o .25 10 .5 I
.rd. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
9A-97
8-5-4-1: SIGNS PERMITTED IN THE AG RIC UL TURAL (A) DISTRICT:
A. On Premises Signs:
1. Agricultural Uses: There shall be not more than one sign, not exceeding ten (10) square feet in area,
for each principal farm dwelling, except on a corner lot where two (2) such signs for each dwelling
unit shall be permitted. The sign shall indicate the name of the occupant and any specialized
agricultural activities being conducted on the premises.
2. Nonagricultural Uses: A single on premises business identification sign not exceeding sixteen (16)
square feet in area is permitted. On a corner lot, two (2) such signs, one facing each street, shall be
permitted.
3. Projection And Height Restrictions: On premises advertising signs shall be subject to the following
restrictions:
a. Projection: No sign shall project beyond the front lot line.
b. Height: No sign shall project higher than ten feet (1 O') above grade at the near edge of the
roadway pavement.
B. Real Estate Signs: "For sale" and "for rent" signs, subject to the following:
1. Maximum Area: No sign shall exceed twelve (12) square feet in area.
2. Maximum Number Of Signs: There shall be not more than one sign facing each street on which the
property fronts.
3. Projection: No sign shall project beyond the front lot line.
4. Height: No sign shall project higher than ten feet (1 O') above grade at the near edge of the roadway
pavement.
C. Outdoor Advertising Signs: Off premises outdoor advertising signs ("billboards") shall only be permitted
on parcels of land abutting 1-55 and 1-80, provided such signs have no moving parts, shall conform with
other county codes or ordinances and Illinois statutes, and shall conform with the following regulations:
1. Spacing: Along interstate highways, no advertising sign shall be located nearer than two thousand
feet (2,000') from another outdoor advertising sign.
2. Maximum Area Of Displays:
a. Each outdoor advertising sign structure shall contain not more than two (2) display surfaces. ('
one item shall be displayed on each surface.
9A-98
(
Sterling Codifiers, Inc. Page 2 of2
b. The structure shall have a length and height of not more than such dimension needed to secure
either two (2) standardized fifteen foot by twenty five foot (15' x 25') poster panel displays or a
single fifteen foot by fifty five foot (15' x 55') bulletin display on each surface. The overall display
surface (both sides) shall not exceed one thousand six hundred fifty (1,650) square feet.
3. Location:
a. Off premises outdoor advertising signs ("billboards") shall only be permitted on tracts of land
abutting 1-55 and 1-80. No off premises outdoor advertising sign shall be located along other roads
or on other parcels in the county.
b. No outdoor advertising sign shall be located nearer than fifty feet (50') from a side lot line, nor
nearer than one hundred fifty feet (150') from a residential district boundary line.
4. Illumination: Illumination shall be subject to the safety and nuisance restrictions contained in section
8-8-3-3, "Public Safety And Public Nuisance", of this title. (Ord. 10-001, 1-12-2010)
9A-99

(
( .
Section 10.00 - F-1 FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT
10.01 PURPOSE
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this Village by the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5111-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8 and 5/11-31-2) in order
to accomplish the following purposes:
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage hazards to
others;
To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to public
facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the potential
for creating blight areas;
To make federally subsidized flood insurance available, and
To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and
floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water
quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide
recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community
and economic development.
10.02 Definitions
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following definitions are adopted:
Base Flood: The flood having a one percent (1 %) probability of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood. The base flood
elevation at any location is as defined in Section 3 of this ordinance.
Base Flood Elevation (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the crest of the
base flood.
Basement: That portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all
sides.
Building: A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank, which is
principally above ground, including manufactured homes, prefabricated buildings and gas or
10-1
liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed
on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
Critical Facility: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of the population
and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster. Damage to these critical
facilities can impact the delivery of vital services, can cause greater damage to other sectors
of the community, or can put special populations at risk.
Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required include: emergency
services facilities (such as fire and police stations), schools, hospitals retirement homes and
senior care facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching
stations or electrical transformers, and hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals,
petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
Development: Any man-made change to real estate including, but not necessarily limited to:
I. Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a building,
or any structural alteration to a building;
2. substantial improvement of an existing building;
3. installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year;
4. installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or similar
projects;
5. construction or erection oflevees, dams walls or fences;
6. drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other
alterations of the ground surface;
7. storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage
tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might change
the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
"Development" does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities,
resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar practices that do not involve filing,
grading, or construction oflevees.
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading
or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
10-2
(
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: The preparation of
additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency
Flood: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry
land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface
waters from any source.
Flood Fringe: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory floodway.
Flood Insurance Rate Map: A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that depicts the fioodplain or special fiood hazard area (SFHS) within a community.
This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict fioodways and show base
flood elevations.
Flood Insurance Study: An examination, evaluation and determination offiood hazards and,
if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
Floodplain and Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA): These two terms are synonymous.
Those lands within the jurisdiction of the Village of Dwight that is subject to inundation by
the base flood. The tloodplains of Gooseberry Creek and The_West Fork of Gooseberry
Creek are generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the Village of
Dwight prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated December 18,
.2007. The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Livingston and Grundy Counties that
are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village of Dwight or that may be annexed into
the Village of Dwight are generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
prepared for Livingston and Grundy Counties by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and dated December 18, 2007 and December 15, 1994 respectively. Floodplai11 also
i11cludes tlzose areas of k11ow11 flooding as ide11tijied by the commu11ity.
Floodproofing: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate, property and
their contents.
Flood proofing Certificate: A form published by the Federal Emergency management
agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be
structurally dry flood proofed to the flood protection elevation.
Flood Protection Elevation (FPE): The elevation of the base fiood plus one foot of
freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
Floodway: That portion of the fioodplain required to store and convey the base tlood. The
floodway for the tloodplains of Gooseberry Creek_shall be as delineated on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map of The Village of Dwight prepared by FEMA and dated December 18,
10-3
2007. The floodways for each of the remaining floodplains of the Village shallbe according
to the best data available from the Federal, State, or other sources.
Freeboard: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a factor
of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed development, unknown localized
conditions, wave actions and m1predictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
Historic Structure: Any structure that is:
1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
3. Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the Illinois
Historic Preservation Agency.
4. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been
certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water Resources.
Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). The
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access
or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor.
This is provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of Section 7 of this ordinance.
Manufactured Home: A structure transportable in one or more sections that is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to required utilities.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) ofland divided
into two or more lots for rent or sale.
New Construction: Structures for which the start of construction commenced or after the
effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes
any subsequent improvements of such structures.
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision
for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a comm1mity.
10-4
(
(
\
NFIP: National Flood Insurance Program.
Recreational Vehicle or Travel Trailer: A vehicle which is:
1. built on a single chassis;
2. four hundred ( 400) square feet or less in size;
3. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck
and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
Repetitive Loss: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two separate occasions
during a ten yem· period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event on
the average equals or exceeds twenty-five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SFHA: See definition of floodplain.
Start of Construction: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the building
permit was issued. This, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement, was within one hundred eighty (180)
days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of
piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement of
a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part oaf a
building whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure (see "Building")
Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cumulative
percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred regardless of
actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this
determination. The term includes "Repetitive Loss Buildings" (see definition).
Substantial Improvement: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a
structure taking place subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance in which the cumulative
percentage of improvements:
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before
the improvement or repair is started, or
increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
"Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
10-5
affects the external dimensions of the structure. This term includes structures which have
incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
The term does not include:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are
solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
2. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places.
Violation: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the
community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without
the required federal, state, and/or local permits and elevation certification is presumed to be in
violation until such time as the documentation is provided.
10.03 BASE FLOOD ELEVATION
This ordinance's protection standard is the base flood. The best available base flood data are
listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available data, the party shall finance
the detailed engineering study needed to replace the existing data with better data and submit
it to the FEMA and IDNR/OWR for approval prior to any development of the site.
A. The base flood elevation for the floodplains of Gooseberry Creek and The West
Tributary of Gooseberry Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood
profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of the Village of Dwight prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated December 18, 2007.
B. The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an "AH Zone" or "AO
Zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map of the Village of Dwight.
C. The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains delineated as a "A
Zone" on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the Village shall be according to the
best data available from federal, state or other sources. Should no other data exist,
an engineering study must be financed by the applicant to determine base flood
elevations.
D. The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of unincorporated
Livingston and Gnmdy Counties that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of
the Village, or that may be annexed into the Village, shall be as delineated on the
100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Studies of Livingston and Grundy
County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated
December 18, 2007 and December 15, 1994 respectively.
10-6
(
l
(
10.04 DUTIES OF THE BUILDING INSPECTOR
The Building Inspector shall be responsible for the general administration of this ordinance
and ensure that all development activities within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the
Village meet the requirements of this ordinance. Specifically, the Building Inspector shall:
A. Process development permits in accordance with Section 5;
B. ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no delineated
floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of Section 6;
C. ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings subject to Section
7 are met and maintain a record of the "as-built" elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) or floodproof certificate;
D. assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of Section 8;
E. ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the Public Health
standards of Section 9;
F. if a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of Section 11 are met and
maintain documentation of any variances granted;
G. inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions outlined in
Section 13 as a necessary to ensure compliance with this ordinance;
H. assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other required local,
state, and federal permits;
I. notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse;
J. provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about permit
procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
K. cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to coordinate
base flood data and to improve the administration of this ordinance;
L. maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps, copies of state and
federal permits, and documentation of compliance for development activities
subject to this ordinance;
M. perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this ordinance and make
substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain, and
N. maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR and/or
submitting information to FEMA within six months whenever a modification of
10-7
the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to the
floodplain map.
10.05 DEVELOPMENT PEH.lYIIT
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall commence
any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a development permit from the
Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall not issue a developmentpermit ifthe
proposed development does not meet the requirements of this ordinance.
A. The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
1. drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions;
2. existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
3. the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings;
4. the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed
buildings subject to the requirements of Section 7 of this ordinance, and
5. cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer or
architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this
requirement.
B. Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the Building Inspector
shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation. Any
development located on land that can be shown by the base flood elevation. Any
development located on land that can be shown by survey data to be higher than
the current base flood elevation and which has not been filled after the date of the
site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map is not in the floodplain and therefore not
subject to the requirements of this ordinance. Conversely, any development
located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically
connected, but not shown on the current Flood Insurance Rate Map, is subject to
the provisions of this ordinance.
The Building Inspector shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification.
The Building Inspector shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies
of all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or permit-not-required
letters that may be required for this type of activity. The Building Inspector shall
not issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and local permits have been
obtained.
10-8
(
(
(
10.06 PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING
DAMAGES
Within any floodway identified on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map, and within all
other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the following standards shall
apply:
A. Except as provided in Section 6(B) of this ordinance, no development shall be
allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated development
will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to public health and
safety. The following specific development activities shall be considered as
meeting this requirement:
1. Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
conditions of the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of
Water Resources Statewide Permit Number 2:
2. Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions ofIDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit Number 3:
3. Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions ofIDNR/O'vVR Statewide
Permit Number 4;
4. Minor boat docks meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit Nmnber 5:
5. Minor, non-obstructive activities such as underground utility lines, light
poles, sign posts, driveways, athletic fields, patios, playground
equipment, minor storage buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square
feet and raising buildings on the same footprint which does not involve
fill and any other activity meeting the conditions ofIDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 6:
6. Outfall Structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 7:
7. Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Nlllllber 8:
8. Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 9:
9. Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions ofIDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 10:
10. Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 11:
10-9
11. Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening meeting
the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide Permit Number 12:
12. Temporary construction activities meeting the conditions ofIDNR/OWR
statewide Permit Number 13:
13. Any Development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from State Floodway permit
requirements.
B. Other development activities not listed in 6(A) may be permitted only if:
1. permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required), or
2. sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and approval
obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation.
10.07 PROTECTING BUILDINGS
In addition to the state permit and damage prevention requirements of Section 6 of this
ordinance, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be protected from flood damage below
the flood protection elevation. This building protection requirement applies to the following
situations:
1. Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or addition to
an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or
seventy (70) square feet.
2. Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an existing
building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%)
or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this
ordinance. If substantially improved, the existing structure and the
addition must meet the flood protection standards of this section.
3. Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs shall
be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance. If
substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section within twenty-four (24) months of the date the
damage occurred.
4. Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not
apply to returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage).
10-10
(
(
5. Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for more than
one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
6. Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in Section 2.
B. Residential or non-residential buildings can meet the building protection
requirements by one of the following methods:
1. The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance
with the following:
a. The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above
the flood protection elevation.
b. The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
before compaction and should extend at least ten (10) feet
beyond the foundation before sloping below the flood
protection elevation.
c. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural
measure.
d. The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not
incorporated debris or refuse material, and
e. shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from
or onto neighboring properties and when necessary
stormwater management techniques such as swales or basins
shall be incorporated.
2. The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
a. The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts,
piles, walls, crawlspace, or other foundation that is
permanently open to flood waters.
b. The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plwnbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters
shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation.
c. If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood
protection elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by
allowing the automatic entry and exit of flood waters.
Designs must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or by having a minimum of one (I) permanent
opening on each wall no more than one (I) foot above grade
I 0-11
with a minimum of two (2) openings. The openings shall
provide a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch
for every one (1) square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding below the base flood elevation, and
d. the foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to
hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice, and
floating debris.
i. All structural components below the flood protection
elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to
flood damage.
ii. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be
located below the flood protection elevation provided they
are waterproofed.
iii. The area below the flood protection elevation shall be
used solely for parking or building access and not later
modified or occupied as habitable space, or
iv. In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to
comply with these requirements may be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or architect.
3. The building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
a. The building must be designed and adequately anchored to
resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
b. Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by
allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. A
minimum of one opening on each wall having a total net
area of not less than one (1) square inch per one ( l) square
foot of enclosed area. The openings shall be no more than
one (1) foot above grade;
c. The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood
protection elevation must not be more than two (2) feet
below the lowest adjacent exterior grade.
10-12
{
\
d. The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the
interior grade of the crawl to the top of the foundations wall
must not exceed four (4) feet at any point.
e. An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a
reasonable period of time after a flood event.
f. Pmtions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood
damage, and
g. Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated
above the flood protection elevation.
C. Non-residential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of
elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect certifies that:
1. Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant utility
facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base
flood.
2. The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of rise,
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice.
3. Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design and
operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
4. Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
D. Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on site shall be:
1. Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance with
Section 7(B), and
2. Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied
down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois Mobile
Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code § 870.
E. Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one hundred eighty
(180) days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of section 7(D) unless
the following conditions are met:
1. The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty truck.
10-13
2. The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
3. The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as decks and
porches
4. The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel, or
seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
5. The vehicles largest horizontal projections must be no larger than four
hundred ( 400) square feet.
6. The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
7. Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be safe for
movement of the floodplain.
8. Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick-disconnect and above the 100-year flood elevation.
9. The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or park
model, and
10. must either:
a. entirely be supported by jacks, or
b. have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires
touching the ground and be supported by block in a manner
that will allow the block to be easily removed by used of the
hitch jack.
F. Garages, sheds or other minor accessory strnctures constructed ancillary to an
existing residential use may be permitted provided the following conditions are
met:
1. The garage of shed must be non-habitable.
2. The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and
tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
3. The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have the
appropriate state and/or federal permits.
4. The garage or shed must be on a single family lot and be accessory to an
existing principle structure on the same lot.
5. Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
10-14
(
I \
6. All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical must be
elevated above the flood protection elevation.
7. The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one (1) foot above grade with one (1) square inch of
opening for every one (1) square foot of floor area.
8. The garage or shed must be less than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000)
in market value or replacement cost whichever is greater or less than five
hundred and seventy-six (576) square feet (24'x24').
9. The structure shall be anchored to resist floatation and overturning.
10. All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides, fertilizers,
etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
11. The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner advised
of the flood insurance implications.
10.08 SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS
The Dwight Village Board of Trustees shall take into account hazards, to the extent that they
are known, in all official actions related to land management use and development.
A New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, planned unit
developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall
meet the damage prevention and building protections standards of Sections 6 and 7
of this ordinance. Any proposal for such development shall include the following
data:
1. The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the
applicant shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
2. the boundary of the floodway when applicable, and
3. a signed statement by a Licensed Professional Engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface
waters in accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2).
Sh"eets, blocks lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in
such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels. Wherever
possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or other public grounds.
10-15
10.09 PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS
A. Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In addition to
the requirements of Sections 6 and 7 of this ordinance the following standards
apply:
1. No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation
unless such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage
tank and certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building
constrncted according to the requirements of Section 7 of this ordinance.
2. Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric shall be located
and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
3. Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be located
and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into
the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
4. New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other above
ground openings located below the flood protection elevation shall be
wate1iight.
5. Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities shall be
located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new critical
facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible alternative
site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
flood proofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet (3 ')
above the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is
greater. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that
toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters.
Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation
shall be provided to all critical facilities.
B. All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not to alter
flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
10.10 CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance (including levees),
the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained.
10-16
(
(
In addition, the Village of Dwight shall notify adjacent communities in writing thirty (30)
days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the watercourse.
10.11 VARIANCES
Whenever the standards of this ordinance place undue hardship on a specific development
proposal, the applicant may apply to the Dwight Village Board of Trustees for a variance.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall review the applicant's request for a variance and shall
submit its recommendation to the Dwight Village Board of Trustees. The Zoning Board of
Appeals may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further
the intent of this ordinance.
A. No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that all of the
following conditions are met:
I.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain.
An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted.
The relief requested is the minimum necessary.
There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or creation of
a nmsance.
There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, rescue
or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities.
The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a pattern
inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP, and
All other state and federal permits have been obtained.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance
from the requirements of the building protections standards of Section 7 that
would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
1. Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty-five
dollars ($25) per one hundred dollars ($100) of insurance coverage;
2. Increase the risk to life and property, and
3. Require that the applicant proceed with lmowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk
and liability.
10-17
C. Historic Structures
1. Variances to the building protection requirements of Section 7 of this
ordinance which are requested in connection with reconstruction,
repair, or alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in
"Historic Structures", may be granted using criteria more permissive
than the requirements of Sections 6 and 7 of this ordinance subject to
the conditions that:
a. The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure;
b. The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure.
D. Agriculture
Any variance granted for an agricultural structure shall be decided individually based
on a case by case analysis of the building's unique circumstances. Variances granted
shall meet the following conditions as well as those criteria and conditions set forth in
this ordinance.
In order to minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and the threat to public
health and safety, the following conditions shall be included for any variance issued
for agricultural structures that are constructed at-grade and wet-flood proofed.
1. All agricultural structures considered for a variance from the floodplain
management regulations of this ordinance shall demonstrate that the varied
structure is located in wide, expansive floodplain areas and no other
alternate location outside of the special flood hazard area exists for the
agricultural structure. Residential structures or animal confinement
facilities, such as farm houses, cannot be considered agricultural structures.
2. Use of the varied structures must be limited to agricultural purposes in
zone A only as identified on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM).
3. For any new or substantially damaged agricultural structures, the exterior and
interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation, wall framing, exterior
and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base flood elevation, must be built
with flood-resistant materials in accordance with Section 7 of this ordinance.
4. The agricultural structures must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structures in accordance with Section 7 of this
ordinance. All of the building's structural components must be capable of resisting
specific flood-related forces including hydrostatic, buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and
debris impact forces.
5. Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be located above the
base flood elevation or flood proofed so that they are contained within a watertil''
10-18
(
(
flood proofed enclosure that is capable of resisting damage during flood conditions
in accordance with Section 7 of this ordinance.
6. The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the
100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters in accordance with Section 7(B) this ordinance.
7. The agricultural structures must comp! y with the floodplain
management floodway provisions of Section 6 of this ordinance. No
variances may be issued for agricultural structures within any designated
floodway.
8. Wet-flood proofing construction techniques must be reviewed and
approved by the floodplain administrator and a registered professional
engineer or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development
permit for construction.
10.12 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY
The degree of protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory
pnrposes and is based on available information derived from engineering and scientific
methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made
or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that development either inside or outside of
the floodplain will be free from flooding or damage. This ordinance does not create liability
on the part of the Village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results
from proper reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision made lawfully
thereunder.
10.13 PENALTY
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to comply with the
conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this ordinance. Upon
due investigation, the Village of Dwight may determine that a violation of the minimum
standards of this ordinance exists. The Village of Dwight shall notify the owner in writing of
such violation.
A. If such owner fails after ten (10) days notice to correct the violation:
1. The Village shall make application to the circuit court for an injunction
requiring conformance with this ordinance or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance with the ordinance.
2. Any person who violates this ordinance shall upon conviction thereof be
fined not less than fifty dollars ($50) or more than seven hundred fifty
($750) for each offense.
3. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues, and
10-19
4. The Village shall record a notice of violation on the title of the property.
B. The Village shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered a willful
act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause coverage by a Standard
Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended.
The Village is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of the subject
development. The stop-work order shall be in writing, indicate the reason for the
issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances
requiring the stop-work order. The stop-work order constitutes a suspension of the
permit.
No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a
hearing is held by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Written notice of such hearing
shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
1. The grolmds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation, and
2. The time and place of the hearing.
At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence on
their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
C. Nothing herein shall prevent the Village from taking such other lawful action to
prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to
the person or persons responsible.
10.14 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS
This ordinance repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the Village Board of
Trustees to fulfill the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program including:
Ordinance Number 1235, dated November 26, 2007. However, this ordinance does not repeal
the original resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the program. Nor does
this ordinance repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. Where this ordinance and other ordinance easements, covenants or deed
restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.
10.15 SEVERABILITY
The provisions and sections of this ordinance shall be deemed separable and the invalidity of
any portion of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of the remainder.
10-20
(
SECTION 11.00 - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
11.01 JURISDICTION
Any use hereafter established in any zoning district in the Village of Dwight shall be used
and maintained in such a manner as to comply with applicable performance standards as
hereinafter set forth governing noise, smoke, particulate matter, toxic or noxious matter,
odors, fire and explosive hazards, vibration, radiation, or glare or heat, for the district in
which such use shall be located; and no use already established on the effective date of
this ordinance shall be so altered or modified as to conflict with, or further conflict with
applicable performance standards for the district in which such use is located.
11.02 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS - NOISE
Each land use must conform to the standards set forth from time to time by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, other agencies of the State of Illinois or the United
States Government. External noises incidental to the l!!-nd use on a particular property,
such as vehicles entering and exiting the property and operation of lawn maintenance
equipment on the property, shall be excluded from this standard.
11.03 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS - VIBRATION
1. In any district, no activity or operation shall cause or create earthborne vibrations
in excess of the displacement values given below:
2.
Measurements shall be made at or beyond the adjacent lot line or the nearest
residence district boundary line, as described below: i
Vibration displacements shall be measured with an insh·ument or complement of
instruments capable of simultaneously measuring in three (3) mutually
perpendicular directions. The maximum vector shall be less than the vibration
displacement permitted. For the purpose of this ordinance, steady state vibrations
are vibrations which are continuous, or vibrations in discrete impulses more
frequent than one hundred ( 100) per minute. Discrete impulses which do not
exceed one hundred ( 100) per minute shall be considered impact vibrations.
The maximum permitted displacements shall be determined in each district by the
following formula:
D = K D = displacement in inches
f
K = a constant to be determined
by reference to the following tables
f= the frequency of the vibration transmitted
through the ground expressed in cycles per
second
l l-1
3. The maximum earth displacement permitted at the points described below shall be
determined by use of the formula in the preceding paragraph 2 and the appropriate
K constant shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Values of K to be used in Vibration Formula
Location
In any neighboring lot --
Steady state
Impulsive
Less than 8 pulses per 24 hour period
In any residence district --
Steady state
Impulsive
Less than 8 pulses per 24 hour period
0.008
0.015
0.037
0.003
0.006
0.015
11.04 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS - SMOKE AND PARTICULATE
MATTER
Each land use must conform to the standards set forth from time to time by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, the Illinois Air Pollution Control Board, or other
agencies of the State of Illinois or the United States which may promulgate related to the
discharge of smoke and particulate matter.
t
11.05 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS - TOXIC MATTER
No use shall, for any period of time, emit into the atmosphere, store on site, or discharge
across the boundaries of the lot wherein it is located, toxic or noxious matter in such
concentrations as to be detrimental to, or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or
welfare or cause injury or damage to property or business.
11.06 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS - ODOROUS MATTER
No use shall, for any period of time, emit an odorous matter in such quantity as to be
readily detectable at any point along lot lines or as to produce a public nuisance or hazard
beyond the lot line.
Each land use must conform to the standards set forth from time to time by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, the Illinois Air Pollution Control Board, and any other
standards as promulgated by the State of Illinois or government of the United States.
11-2
(
(
'
11.07 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS - FIRE AND EXPLOSION
1. Detonable Materials. In accordance with Chapter 19, Article I of the Municipal
Code of Dwight, Illinois.
2. Flammable Solids. In any district, the storage, utilization, or manufacture of
solid materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is
permitted, provided that all Village building codes and fire prevention codes are
complied with.
In any district, the storage, utilization, or manufacture of solid materials or
products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning is permitted,
provided that all Village building codes and fire prevention codes are complied
with.
3. Flammable Liquids and Gases. The storage of flammable liquids shall be
permitted only in accordance with Chapter 20, Section 20.127 of the Municipal
Code of Dwight, Illinois. Below ground, gas storage tanks not to exceed a size of
thirty thousand (30,000) gallons.
11.08 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS - GLARE
1. In any district, any operation or activity producing glare at night shall be
conducted so that direct and/or indirect illumination from the source of light on
the lot shall not cause illumination in excess of one-half (Yi) foot candle when
measured in the residence district. ·
2. Flickering or intense sources of light shall be controlled or shielded so as not to
cause a nuisance across lot lines. When street lighting produces illumination in
excess of one (I) foot candle at any point in the residence district, the contribution
by light sources from within the industrial use measured at the same period shall
not exceed fitly percent (50%) of the street lighting.
11.09 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS - RADIATION HAZARDS
Radioactive materials shall be governed by the latest Atomic Energy Commission
standards or by standards set forth by the State of Illinois, whichever are more stringent.
11.10 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS- WATER POLLUTION
Each land use must conform to the standards set forth from time to time by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency and the Illinois Pollution Control Board, as may be
amended.
11-3

(
(
SECTION 12.00 - SIGNS
12.01 PERMIT REQUIRED
No person, firm or corporation shall erect any sign, signboard, or rigid canopy in the
Village without having first obtained a permit therefore. Permits for signs, canopies or
signboards shall be issued by the Village Clerk, upon payment of the fee as designated in
the building fee schedule and shall designate the location of the proposed structure,
ensuring that it complies with all of the regulations as herein specified.
12.02 APPLICATIONS
Applications for such permits shall be made in writing to the Building Inspector. Each
application shall state thereon the name, address and telephone number of the owner of
the premises, the name, address and telephone number of the person or corporation
constructing the sign; and specifications showing the size, material and manner of
construction of the sign.
12.03 EXEMPTIONS FROM PERMITS
The following signs shall not require a permit; however, such signs shall be subject to the
sign regulations:
1. Non-electrical real estate signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in area, which
advertise the sale, rental, or lease of the premises upon which said signs are
located only.
2. Signs, including bulletin boards, which are not over sixteen (16) square feet in
area for public, educational, charitable, fraternal or religious institutions when the
same are located on the premises of such institution.
3. Signs denoting only the name and profession/business of an occupant in a
commercial building, public institution building, or dwelling house and not
exceeding two (2) square feet in area.
4. A non-electrical single sign denoting the architect, engineer or contractor when
placed upon work under construction and not exceeding thirty-two (32) square
feet in area.
5. Memorial signs or tablet, names of buildings, and date of erection when cut into
any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other noncombustible
materials.
12-1
6. Publicly owned street name signs, traffic control signs, legal notices, railroad
crossing signs, danger and temporary warning or emergency signs; and emblems,
names, logo, and symbols on motor vehicles and equipment being used for
purposes other than the display of signs or advertising devices.
7. Public service signs which give only directions "in and out" or signs which
provide only information about directing people to ancillary facilities such as
parking, entrance, etc.
8. A non-electrical temporary sign supporting a candidacy for office or urging action
on any other matter on the ballot of a primary, general or special election or
Village election, provided that said signs be removed within five (5) days after the
election to which said signs pertain.
9. A non-electrical temporary or portable sign.
12.04 INSPECTION
The Building Inspector or designee shall inspect signs subject to the provisions of the
sign regulations for the purpose of determining whether the same is in compliance with
the sign regulations. All signs shall be constructed in such a manner and installed with
such materials so as to be considered safe and substantial by the Building Inspector and
to meet the requirements of the BOCA Code. Signs shall be maintained so as to be
structurally sound and in a safe condition, and shall be kept in a state ofundeteriorated
appearance by means of painting, sealing or coating and repair or replacement of
damaged parts, panels or lights.
12.05 REMOVAL OF SIGNS
Any sign now or hereafter existing, which for a period of six ( 6) months no longer
advertises a bona fide business conducted, or a product sold, or a service offered, shall be
taken down and removed by the owner or owners of the building or premises upon which
it is located within thirty (30) days of written notice from the Building Inspector.
12.06 PROHIBITIONS
No person shall have or permit on any premises:
1. A ground sign which extends to any degree over public property.
2. Any signs which employ flashing, blinking or rotating lights, except time and
temperature signs.
12-2
(
3. Any off premises sign shall not be permitted in any residential district in the
Village, nor shall any off premises sign exceed three hundred (300) square feet,
contain more than two (2) surfaces back to back, or be nearer than a three hundred
fifty (350) foot radius from any other off premises sign.
4. Signs attached to or placed upon rocks, fences, trees, utility poles, or benches.
12.07 TRAFFIC HAZARDS
No person shall erect any sign at the intersection of any street in such a manner as to
obstruct free and clear vision of such intersection, or at any location where by reason of
the position, shape or color it may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with
any authorized traffic sign, signal or device.
12.08 ILLUMINATION
Lighting shall be pe1mitted on signs provided, however, the reflectors shall be provided
with proper lenses, concentrating the illumination on the area of the sign so as to prevent
glare upon the street or adjacent property. It shall be unlawful for any person to have any
sign which is wholly or partially illuminated by floodlights or spotlights that interfere
with the vision of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or residences.
12.09 ON PREMISES SIGNAGE
For all signs subject to the sign regulations, in the Village of Dwight there may be three
(3) square feet of signage for each foot of street frontage. Where any side of a building
abuts on an alley, only painted on wall signs shall be permitted on the side abutting the
alley. Such sign shall be calculated as part of total permissible signage.
For all signs subject to the sign regulations in residential zoning districts, only the
following signs shall be allowed:
I. Those signs listed in Section 12.03, paragraphs 1 through 9, defined as exempt
from permitting requirements.
2. Signs bearing the name and address of a residential development having a
character of design and construction in harmony with that of the development
itself, and not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in area. Such signs may be
incorporated in or affixed to fences or walls, provided that all applicable standards
and requirements are complied with.
12-3
12.10 GROUND SIGNS
All ground signs subject to sign regulations shall meet the following requirements:
1. All letters, figures, characters or representations in cut out or irregular form
maintained in conjunction with or attached to or superimposed upon any ground
sign shall be safely and securely built or attached to the sign's structure.
2. Signs and location:
a. It shall be unlawful to erect or permit any ground sign of a height greater
than seventy (70) feet.
b. Off premises ground signs will be permitted to have a maximum of three
hundred (300) square feet of sign surface on a side.
c. No ground sign shall be erected or permitted nearer the street than the
property line. No part of said sign shall be permitted to overhang the
public domain or present a traffic hazard by limiting visibility.
d. The minimum distance between on premises ground signs on any one
business location shall be fifty (50) feet.
12.11 WALL SIGNS
Wall signs subject to the sign regulations shall meet the following location requirements:
1. Limitation on placement. No wall sign shall cover wholly or partially any wall
opening or project beyond the ends or tops of the wall to which it is attached.
2. Projection over public property. No wall sign shall be erected in a plane which
is more than twelve (12) inches over the surface of any public right-of-way.
3. Alleys. Only wall signs painted on the wall of a building will be permitted.
12.12 ROOF SIGNS
1. Materials. The uprights, supports, and braces thereof shall be constructed of
materials as set forth in the BOCA Code adopted by the Village of Dwight.
2. Location.
a. No roof sign shall have its highest point extend more than twenty (20) feet
above the roof level.
12-4
,(
\
(
b. No roof sign shall be erected or maintained with a face thereof nearer than
five (5) feet to the outside wall toward the sign faces.
c. No roof sign shall be placed on the roof of any building or structure in
such manner as to prevent free passage from one part of said roof to
another part thereof, or interfere with openings on said roof.
3. Bracing, anchorage, and supports. Every roof sign shall be thoroughly secured
to the building by iron or other metal anchors, bolts, supports, rods, or braces.
The sign supports shall be anchored to the basic building structure, roof joists, or
roof girders. The bearing posts of such sign may bear on masonry walls or
intermediate steel columns in the building or shall be supported or anchored to the
structural members of the building.
4. Off premises signage. Off premises roof signs shall not be permitted.
12.13 PROJECTING SIGNS
All projecting signs subject to the sign regulations shall meet the following requirements;
1. Support. All bracing systems shall be designed and constructed to transfer lateral
forces to the foundations. For signs on buildings, the dead and lateral loads shall
be transmitted through the structural members of the building to the ground in
such manner as not to over stress any of the elements thereof.
2. Limitations on glass. The lettering or advertising design to be illuminated on
projecting signs may be composed of glass or other transparent or semitransparent
material. Any glass forming a part of any sign shall be safety glass or
wire glass.
3. Movable parts. Any movable parts of a projecting sign such as a cover of a
service opening shall be securely fastened by safety chains or hinges.
4. Height. The top line of the projecting sign shall not be higher than the roof or
parapet line of the building to which it is attached, except that when the roofline
is less than fifteen (15) feet in height, the sign may extend three (3) feet above;
but lmder no circumstances shall the top line of a projecting sign be permitted at a
height of more than sixty (60) feet above ground level.
5. Thickness. The distance measured between the principal faces of any projecting
sign shall not exceed eighteen (18) inches.
6. Location. The bottom line of every projecting sign shall be placed at least ten
(10) feet above any public sidewalk over which it is erected. A maximum
12-5
extension of six (6) feet will be permitted providing it is no nearer than two (2)
feet from the curb line. No projecting signs shall be erected in an alleyway. No
projecting signs shall project across or over any portion of a public roadway. The
minimum distance between projecting signs on any one business location shall be
fifty (50) feet.
12.14 TEMPORARY AND/OR PORTABLE SIGNS
Temporary and/or portable signs subject to the sign regulations shall meet the following
requirements:
1. Banners. A banner shall not exceed one hundred ( 100) square feet in area. All
other temporary and/or portable signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet
m area.
2. Advertising. Advertisement or announcements contained on any temporary
and/or portable sign shall pertain only to civic, political, religious, fraternal or
other nonprofit activities. Temporary or portable signs for the purpose of
commercial advertising are prohibited, except for announcement of special onetime
sales or one-time events or occurrences not exceeding fifteen (15) days. No
temporary or portable sign shall be displayed longer than fifteen (15) consecutive
days, except that political campaign signs and signs pertaining to any election or
ballot issue in an election may be displayed any length of time but shall be
removed by the person in possession and control of the property on which they
are displayed, not later than five ( 5) days following the election to which said
signs shall pertain.
12.15 MARQUEE SIGNS
Marquee signs subject to the sign regulations shall meet the following provisions:
1. Signs attached to or placed upon the roof of a marquee shall be completely within
the border line of the marquee's outer edge.
2. Signs hung from a marquee shall be completely within the border line of the
marquee's outer edge and in no instance shall the bottom of said sign be lower
than seven and one-half (7Yz) feet above the sidewalk or public thoroughfare. No
hanging or suspended sign shall exceed eighteen ( 18) inches in height overall.
12.16 AWNING AND CANOPY SIGNS
The name of the owner and the business, industry, or pursuit conducted within the
premises may be painted or otherwise permanently placed in a space not exceeding
12-6
(
(
(
twelve (12) inches in height on the front and side pmiions thereof, or on signs suspended
beneath a canopy, but no portion thereof may be lower than seven and one-half (7\1,) feet
above a sidewalk.
12.17 NONCONFORMING SIGNS
Signs, except temporary and/or portable signs, in existence on December 1, 1990 when
these sign regulations became effective, may continue in existence provided they comply
with all regulations of this section, including the following:
1. Structural alterations. A sign shall not be altered structurally or moved unless it
is made to comply with the provisions of this section, except that the changing of
the movable parts of an existing sign that is designed for such changes, or the
repainting or reposting of display matter shall not be deemed a structural
alteration.
2. Discontinuation of use. The lawful use of a sign existing on the effective date of
these regulations, although such sign does not conform to the provisions hereof,
may continue; but if such nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of six
3.
( 6) months, any future use of such sign shall be in conformity with the provisions
of this section.
Damages. No sign which has been damaged by fire, wind, explosion, or other act
of God to the extent that fifty percent (50%) or more of the sign is destroyed, shall
be restored except in confo1mity with the regulations of this section. Any sign
which has been damaged to an extent less than fifty percent (50%) may be
restored to its condition which existed as a nonconforming use prior to its damage
within six ( 6) months after having been so damaged. If not restored within six ( 6)
months, such sign shall be in conformity with the provisions of this section.
4. Temporary and/or Portable Signs. Any temporary and/or portable sign in
existence as of December 1, 1990, shall be considered as newly placed and
subject to the requirements of this section.
12-7

(
(
SECTION 13.00 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
13.01 PURPOSE
The purpose of this section is to alleviate or prevent the congestion of the public streets,
and so promote the safety and welfare of the public by establishing minimum
requirements for the off-street parking and loading and unloading of motor vehicles in
accordance with the use to which property is put.
13.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS - PARKING AND LOADING
1. Scope of Regulations. The off-street parking and loading provisions of this
ordinance shall apply as follows:
a. For all buildings and structures erected and all uses ofland established
after the effective date of this ordinance, accessory parking and loading
facilities shall be provided as required by the regulations of the district in
which such buildings or use are located.' However, where a building
permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance, and
provided that construction is begun within one ( 1) year of such effective
date, and diligently prosecuted to completion, parking and loading
facilities as required shall meet the requirements of Ordinance #674,
passed by the Village of Dwight on September 26, 1977.
b. When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premises shall be
increased through addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating
capacity or other unit of measurement specified herein for required
parking or loading facilities, parking and loading facilities as requi:tled
c.
herein shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use. '
However, no building or structure lawfully erected or use lawfully
established prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall be required to
provide such additional parking or loading facilities unless and until the
aggregate increase in units of measurement shall equal not less than fifteen
percent (15%) of the unit of measurement existing upon the effective date
of this ordinance, in which event parking or loading facilities as required
herein shall be provided for the total increase.
Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereafter be
changed to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be provided as
required for such new use. However, if the said building or structure was
erected prior to the effective date of this ordinance, additional parking or
loading facilities are mandatory only in the amount by which the
requirements for the new use would exceed those for the existing use ifthe
latter were subject to the parking and loading provisions of this ordinance.
13-1
2. Existing Parking and Loading Facilities. Accessory off-street parking or
loading facilities which are located on the same lot as the building or use served
which were in existence on the effective date of this ordinance or were provided
voluntarily after such effective date shall not hereafter be reduced below, or if
already less than, shall not further be reduced below the requirements of this
ordinance for a similar new building or use.
3. Permissive Parking and Loading Facilities. Nothing in this ordinance shall be
deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off-street parking or loading
facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings provided that all
regulations herein governing the location, design, improvement and operation of
such facilities are adhered to.
4. Damage or Destruction. For any conforming or legally non-conforming
building which is in existence on the effective date of this ordinance, which
subsequent thereto is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or other
cause, and which is reconstructed, reestablished or repaired, off-street parking or
loading facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of such damage or
destruction shall be restored or continued in operation. However, in no case shall
it be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in excess of
those required by this ordinance for equivalent new uses or construction.
5. Control of Off-Site Parking Facilities. When required parking facilities are
provided on land other than the zoning lot on which the building or use served by
such facilities is located, they shall be and remain in the same possession or
ownership as the zoning lot occupied by the building or use to which the parking
facilities are accessory. No such off-site parking facilities shall be authorized and
no occupancy permit shall be issued where the plans call for parking facilities
other than on the same zoning lot until and unless the Zoning Board of Appeals
has reviewed the plans and heard the applicant and made findings ~hat the '
common ownership or possession of the zoning lot and the site of the parking
facilities are reasonably
certain to continue and that the off-site parking facilities will be maintained at all
times during the life of the proposed use or building.
6. Submission of Plot Plan. Any application for a building permit, or for a
certificate of occupancy where no building permit is required, shall include
therewith a plot plan - drawn to scale and fully dimensioned - showing any
parking or loading facilities to be provided in compliance with this ordinance.
13.03 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS -PARKING
1. Use of Parking Facilities. Off-street parking facilities accessory to residential
use and developed in any residential district in accordance with the requirements
of this section shall be used solely for the parking of passenger automobiles
13-2
(
(
2.
3.
4.
5.
owned by occupants of the dwelling structures to which such facilities are
accessory or by guests of said occupants. Under no circumstances shall required
parking facilities accessory to residential structures be used for the parking of
automobiles belonging to the employees, owners, tenants, visitors or customers of
business or manufacturing establishments.
Joint Parking Facilities. Off-street parking facilities for different buildings,
structures or uses or for mixed uses, may be provided collectively in any zoning
district in which separate parking facilities for each constituent use would be
permitted, provided that the total number of spaces so located together shall not
be less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use.
Computation. When determination of the number of off-street parking spaces
required by this ordinance results in a requirement of a fractional space, any
fraction of one-half (Y:.) or less may be disregarded while a faction in excess of
one-half (Y:.) shall be counted as one (1) parking space.
Size. A required off-street parking space shall be at least nine (9) feet in width
and at least twenty (20) feet in length, exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps,
columns or office or work areas. Such space shall have a vertical clearance of at
least seven (7) feet.
Access. Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle
or driveway of such width and design as to provide and efficient means of
vehicular access to such parking space. All off-street parking facilities shall be
designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a
manner which will least interfere with traffic movements. No driveway across
public property nor curb cut shall exceed a width of thirty (30) feet.
6. In Yards. Except as hereinafter noted in this paragraph, off-street parkingispaces
may be located in any yard except required front yards, but shall not be closer
than five (5) feet to the lot line. Provided, however, automobile dealerships,
whether located in a B-4 auto oriented business district or elsewhere by special or
traditional use, shall be allowed to park motor vehicles in a required front yard,
but not closer than five (5) feet to the lot line.
7. Design and Maintenance
a. Open and Enclosed Parking Spaces. Accessory parking spaces located on
the same lot as occupied by the use served may be open to the sky or
enclosed in a building. Accessory parking spaces located in a residence
district elsewhere than on the same lot occupied by the use served shall be
open to the sky except when otherwise allowed as a special use.
b. Surfacing. All open off-street parking areas, driveways, and loading
berths shall be improved with a compacted macadam base, not less than
13-3
four ( 4) inches thick, surfaced with asphaltic concrete or some comparable
all weather dustless material.
c. Screening and Landscaping. All open auto-mobile parking areas
containing more than five (5) parking spaces shall be effectively screened
on each side adjoining or fronting on any property situated in a residence
district or any institutional premises by a wall, fence or densely planted
compact hedge not less than four ( 4) feet nor more than seven (7) feet in .
height. Such required screening shall conform with the :front and side yard
setback requirements of the district in which the parking is located.
d. Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas as not to
create a nuisance.
e. Disabled Parking. Construction of all parking facilities shall comply with
state and federal statutes related to providing disabled parking spaces.
Disabled parking spaces shall conform with design criteria and signage
requirements set by the State of Illinois and federal government.
13.04 LOCATION OF ACCESSORY OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES
The location of off-street parking spaces in relation to the use served shall be as
prescribed hereinafter. All distances specified shall be walking distances between such
parking spaces and a main entrance to the use served.
1. For Uses in a Residence District. Parking spaces accessory to dwellings shall be
located on the same zoning lot as the use served. Spaces accessory to uses other
than dwellings may be located on a lot adjacent to, or directly across a street or
alley from the lot occupied by the use served, but in no case at a distance irt
excess of three hundred (300) feet from such use.
2. For Uses in Business and Industrial Districts. All required parking spaces shall
be within one thousand (1,000) feet of the use served, except for spaces accessory
to dwelling units, which shall be within three hundred (300) feet of the use served.
However, no parking spaces accessory to a use in a business or manufacturing
district shall be located in a residence district, except that private, free, off-street
parking accessory to such us and municipal parking lots may be allowed by
special use permit in accordance with the Administrative Section within two
hundred (200) feet of and adjacent to any business or industrial district.
13.05 . SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS
For the following uses, accessory off-street parking spaces shall be provided as required
hereinafter. Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall be based on the
13-4
(
(
maximum number of employees on duty or residing, or both, on the premise at any one
time.
1. Residential uses.
2.
a. One-Family Dwellings and Two-Family Dwellings. Two (2) parking
spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
b. Multiple-Family Dwellings (including Apartment-Hotels). Two (2)
parking spaces shall be provided for every single dwelling unit. For
lodging rooms located in an apartment hotel, one (1) parking space shall
be provided for each two (2) lodging rooms.
c. Motels, Hotels, Inns and Auto Courts. One (1) parking space shall be
provided for each guest or sleeping room or suite, plus one (1) additional
space for the owner or manager.
d. Lodging. Rooming and Boarding Houses. One (1) parking space shall be
provided for each two (2) lodging rooms, plus one (1) space for the owner
or manager.
e. Private Clubs and Lodges (with Sleeping Facilities for Guests). One (1)
parking space shall be provided for each two (2) lodging rooms, plus
parking spaces equal in number to ten (10%) percent of the capacity in
persons (exclusive of lodging room capacity) of such club or lodge.
f. Mobile Home Camps. Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each
mobile home space.
Retail and Service uses.
a. Retail Stores and Banks. One (1) parking space shall be provided for each
two hundred (200) square feet of floor area in excess of two thousand
(2,000) square feet. Drive-in banks or other similar drive-in
establishments shall provide three (3) stacking spaces per teller or
customer service window.
b. Automobile Service Stations. One (1) parking space shall be provided for
each two (2) employees.
c. Automobile Laundry. Twenty (20) stacking spaces shall be provided for
each wash rack, plus one (1) parking space for each four (4) employees.
d. Bowling Alleys. Three (3) parking spaces shall be provided for each
alley, plus such additional spaces as may be required herein for affiliated
uses - bars, restaurants and the like.
13-5
e. Establishments Dispensing Food or Beverages for Consumpticiri on the
Premises. One ( 1) parking space shall be provided for each three hundred
(300) square feet of floor area.
f. Furniture and Appliance Stores, Household Equipment or Furniture Repair
Shops. One (1) parking space shall be provided for each six hundred
(600) square feet of floor area in excess of two thousand (2,000) square
feet.
g. Motor Vehicle Sales and Machinery Sales. One (1) parking space shall be
provided for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area.
h. Theaters (indoor). One (1) parking space shall be provided for each five
(5) seats.
1. Undertaking Establishments, Funeral Parlors. Six (6) parking spaces shall
be provided for each chapel or parlor, plus one (1) parking space for each
funeral vehicle kept on the premises.
3. Offices -- Business, Professional and Governmental. One ( 1) parking space
shall be provided for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area.
4. Medical or Dental Clinics. Ten (10) parking spaces shall be provided for each
doctor.
5. Wholesale Establishments (but not including vVarehouses and Storage
Buildings other than Accessory.) One (1) parking space shall be provided for
each six hundred (600) square feet of floor area in excess of four thousand ( 4,000)
square feet.
I
6. Manufacturing uses or Any Establishments Engaged in Production,
Processing, Cleaning, Servicing, Testing or Repair of Materials, Goods or
Products, . One (I) parking space shall be provided for each two (2) employees,
plus one (1) parking space for each vehicle used in the conduct of the enterprise.
7. Warehouses and Storage Buildings. One (I) parking space shall be provided
for each two (2) employees, plus one (l) space for each vehicle used in the
conduct of the enterprise.
8. Community Services Uses,
a. Church, School, College and Other Institutional Auditoriums. One (1)
parking space shall be provided for each three (3) auditorium seats.
Adequate space shall also be provided for buses used in connection with
the activities of the institution, and all loading and unloading of passengers
shall take place upon the premises.
13-6
{
\
(
(
b. Colleges, Universities and Business, Professional and Trade Schools. One
(1) parking space shall be provided for each three (3) employees and one
( 1) parking space shall be provided for each four ( 4) students based on the
maximum number of students attending classes on the premises at any one
time during any twenty-four (24) hour period.
c. Hospitals. One (1) parking space shall be provided for each two (2)
hospital beds, plus one (1) parking space for each two (2) employees
(other than staff doctors),
plus one ( l) parking space for each doctor assigned to the staff.
d. Libraries, Art Galleries and Museums - Public. One (1) parking space
shall be provided for each one thousand (l ,000) square feet of gross floor
area.
e. Municipal or Privately Owned Recreation Buildings or Community
Centers. One (1) parking space shall be provided for each two (2)
employees, plus spaces adequate in number, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator, to serve the visiting public.
f.
g.
h.
1.
Public Utility and Public Service Uses. One (1) parking space shall be
provided for each three (3) employees, plus spaces adequate in number, as
dete1mined by the Zoning Administrator, to serve the public.
Schools - Nursery and Elementary. One (1) parking space shall be
provided for each employee.
Schools - High. One (1) parking shall be provided for each employee,
plus one (1) additional space for every four (4) students.
t
Rest Homes and Nursing Homes. One (1) parking space shall be provided
for each four (4) beds, plus one (1) parking space for each two (2)
employees, (other than staff doctors), plus one ( 1) parking space for each
doctor assigned to the staff.
9. Places of Assembly.
10.
a. Stadiums, Arenas. Auditoriums (other than church, college or institutional
schools). Convention Halls, Dance Halls. Exhibition Halls, Skating Rinks
and Other Similar Places of Assembly. Parking spaces equal in number to
twenty-five percent (25%) of the capacity in persons shall be provided.
Mixed Uses. When two (2) or more uses are located on the same zoning lot
within the same building, parking spaces equal in number to the sum of the
separate requirements for each such use shall be provided. No parking spaces or
portion there of shall serve as a required space for more than one (1) use unless
otherwise authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
13-7
11. Other Uses. For uses not listed heretofore in this schedule of parking
· requirements, parking spaces shall be provided on the same basis as required for
the most similar listed uses, or as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
13-8
(
(
(
SECTION 14 FENCES
14.01 RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL
No fence may be erected within a residential, commercial or industrial district which does
not comply with the following specifications:
I. Any fence erected in a required front yard shall be at least fifty percent (50 %) open,
and no fence erected in a required front yard may exceed five ( 5) feet in height measured
from ground level. A clearance of three (3) inches shall be allowed for installation
purposes and shall not count in determining the height of a fence. No privacy fence may
be erected in the front of a residence. For through lots, that yard which is used as a rear
yard, and which would normally be considered a rear yard for lots other than through
lots, shall be considered a rear yard for purposes of erecting a fence. (See also Paragraph
22.120 of the Dwight ivfunicipal Code).
2. Any fence on an interior side or rear yard may be placed on the property line.
3. No fence may be erected which exceeds six (6) feet in height above ground level in a
residential area. In commercial and industrial areas, no fence may be erected which
exceeds eight (8) feet in height.
4. No fence may be constructed with barbed wire, metal spikes, or any other sharp
pointed materials. All chain link fences shall be installed with the knuckle portion of the
fence up and with the barb portion of the fence at or near the ground. No fence may be
electrified.
5. All areas of a lot on the exterior side of the fence, including the fence itself, are to be
maintained by the property owner.
6. The finished side of all fences shall face outward from the property on which the
fence is being erected.
14.02 RECREATIONAL PURPOSE FENCES
Fences erected for purposed of providing fencing around sports or recreation facilities or
areas as listed below, shall not be subject to the height restrictions specified elsewhere in
this Section. The maximum height of a fence is listed by each sports or recreational
facility or area as follows:
Tennis Courts
Baseball Diamond Backstop
Public Swimming Pools
14-1
MAXIMUM HEIGHT
Twelve (12) feet
Sixteen ( 16) feet
Eight (8) feet
14.03 PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS AND OTHER BODIES OF WATER
Every person owning land on which there is situated a swimming pool or other manmade
body of water, which contains twenty-four (24) inches or more of water in depth at
any point, shall erect and maintain thereon, an adequate enclosure, either surrounding the
property or pool area, sufficient to make such body of water inaccessible to small
children. Such enclosure, including gates therein, shall be not less than four (4) feet
above the underlying ground and shall comply with the maximum height restrictions
listed elsewhere in this section. All gates shall be self-closing and self-latching with
latches placed four ( 4) feet above the underlying ground and otherwise made inaccessible
from the outside to small children.
A protective device approved the Village Administrator shall be an acceptable enclosure
so long as the degree of protection afforded by the substituted devices or structures is not
less than the protection afforded by the enclosure.
14-2
(
\
DWIGHT MUNICIPAL CODE, CHAPTER 22
the sharp pointed materials must be at least six (6) feet above but not further than eight
(8) feet above ground level and extend inward of property. No fence may be electrified.
22.117 Deposits on streets. It shall be unlawful to deposit on any street any
material, which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, glass, or
other article, which may cause injury to any person, animal or property.
22.118 Deposits on sidewalks. It shall be unlawful to deposit on any sidewalk
any material, which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or
any glass or other article, which might cause injury to persons, animals or property.
Merchandise or other articles may be deposited on sidewalks preparatory to
delivery, provided that the usable width of the sidewalks is not thereby reduced to less
than four (4) feet; and provided that no such article shall remain on such walk for more
than one half (2) hour.
22.119 Burning leaves and rubbish. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to burn any leaves, paper, rubbish or other substances upon any public street,
sidewalk or alley in the Village.
22.120 View at corners. It shall be unlawful to construct, or maintain or permit
to remain, any fence or other structure or any bushes or other plants, on a corner lot
within fifty feet of the street line, which obstructs the view, at a height of more than five
( 5) feet above the level of the adjacent street pavement.
22.121. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of sections
22. l 01 through 22.120 shall be fined as designated in the fine rate schedule for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which such obstruction to view is permitted to remain after notice from any official of the
Village to remove the same.
22.122. It shall be unlawful to consume alcoholic beverages on the public streets,
sidewalks, rights-of-way and/or Village property within the Village of Dwight except
when approved by the Village Liquor Commissioner or a permit has been obtained from
the Police Department.
22.123 Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of Section 22.122 shall be
subject to a penalty in the form of a fine, as designated in the fine rate schedule, in
addition to any other fine or penalty under this Chapter for each such separate offense.
ARTICLE II
Driveways
*22.201 Permission required. No person, firm or corporation shall perform
curb cuts or construct a driveway for vehicles across any sidewalk or Village easement in
22-3

{
I
·'
SECTION 15.00 ADMINISTRATION
15.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
The administration of this ordinance is hereby vested in the following:
1. The Zoning Administrator.
2. The Zoning Board of Appeals.
3. The Plan Commission.
15.02 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER
The Building Inspector, as Zoning Administrator, shall be in charge of the administration and
enforcement of this ordinance.
I. Duties. The Building Inspector shall:
a. Will receive and review all application requests from the Village Clerk and shall
issue permits and certificates after the approval and consent by the Village Administrator
of such certificates and permits, after compliance with the Ordinance.
b. Examine premises for which permits have been issued, and make necessary
inspections to determine compliance.
c. When requested by the Village Administrator or by the President of thy Board of
Trustees or when the interest of the Village so requires, make investigations add render
written reports. '
d. Issue such notices or orders as may be necessary.
e. Adopt rules and procedures consistent with this ordinance.
f. Keep careful and comprehensive records of applications, permits, certificates,
inspections, reports, notices, orders and all localized actions of the Board of Trustees, and
shall file the same permanently by street address.
g. Keep all such records open for public inspection, at reasonable hours, but not for
removal from his office.
h. Request and receive the assistance and cooperation of the Police Department, the
legal department, and of other Village officials.
1. Inform the President and Board of Trustees of all violations and all matters
requiring prosecution or legal action.
15-1
j. Be entitled to rely upon any opinion of the legal department as to the
interpretation of this ordinance or the legal application of this ordinance to any actual
situation.
k. Discharge such other duties as may be placed upon him by this ordinance.
15.03 ZONING CERTIFICATES
1. No permit as required by the Building Ordinance of the Village of Dwight shall be issued
by the Building Inspector without the consent and approval of the Village Administrator
for the construction of a building, structure, or land improvement or an alteration or
enlargement of an existing building, structure or land improvement and the uses thereof,
tmtil the Building Inspector certifies in such permit that the application for a permit with
accompanying plans and specifications conforms with the regulations of this ordinance.
2. When a permit is not required by the Building Ordinance of the Village of Dwight, for an
improvement and the use thereof requiring conformance with the regulations of this
ordinance, an application for a zoning certificate shall be filed with the Building
Inspector. A zoning certificate shall be issued only.when the application shows
conformance with the regulations of this ordinance.
3. All applications for building permits or zoning certificates shall be accompanied by a
plat, in duplicate, drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot or lots to be
built upon, the size of the building or structure to be erected or structurally altered, its
location on the lot or lots and such other information as may be necessary to provide for
the enforcement of these regulations. A careful record of such applications and plats
shall be kept in the office of the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall, after
approval of the Village Administrator of all building permits or zoning certificates, issue
written verification of such approval or of such disapproval within thirty (30) days after
the submission of the application to the Village Board. Any such application for a
building permit or zoning certificate shall be presented to the Village Administrator
within thirty (3 0) days after the same is presented to the Building Inspector. If the
Building Inspector does not present an application for a building permit or zoning
certificate within thirty (30) days after it is submitted to him, then the person requesting
such permit or certificate may approach the Village Administrator in their own right.
15.04 OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATE
1. No building or addition thereto, constructed after the effective date of this ordinance and
no addition to a previous existing building shall be occupied and no land vacant on the
effective date of this ordinance shall be used for any purpose until an occupancy
certificate has been issued by the Building Inspector with the approval of the Village
Administrator. No change in a use in any district shall be made until an occupancy
certificate has been issued by the Building Inspector and approved by the Village
Administrator. Every occupancy certificate shall state that the use or occupancy
complies with all the provisions of this ordinance.
15-2
(
( )
2. Every application for a building permit shall also be deemed to be an application for an
occupancy certificate. Every application for an occupancy certificate for a new or
changed use of land or building where no building permit is required shi'\ll be made to the
. Building Inspector.
3. No occupancy certificate for a building or addition thereto, constructed after the effective
. date of this ordinance, shall be issued until construction has been completed and the
premises have been inspected and certified by the Building Inspector to be in full and
complete compliance with the plans and specifications upon which the zoning certificate .
was based. No addition to a previously existing building shall be occupied, and no new
use of a building in any district shall be established until the premises have been
inspected and certified by the Building Inspector to be in full compliance with all the
applicable standards of the zoning district in which it is located. Pending the issuance of
a regular certificate, a temporary certificate may be issued to be valid for a period not to
exceed six ( 6) months from its date during the completion of any addition or during
partial occupancy of the premises. An occupancy certificate shall be issued, or written
notice shall be given to the applicant stating the reasons why a certificate cannot be
issued, not later than fourteen (14) days after the Building Inspector is notified in writing
that the building or premises is ready for occupancy.
IS.OS DENIAL/APPEAL
The Village Administrator shall set forth in writing the reasons why any building permit, zoning
certificate or occupancy permit has been denied, and shall date the same. Such denial shall then
be served upon the Applicant at the Applicant's address, either by regular mail or personally
served upon the Applicant. Such denial shall be served upon the Applicant within a reasonable
time. ·
With respect to any building permit, zoning certificate, or occupancy certificate which' has been
approved or denied by the Village Administrator, the Applicant or any interested party may
appeal such decision to the Village Board of Trustees for a final determination thereon. Such
appeal shall be filed with the Village Clerk, shall specifically refer to the requested permit or
certificate which has been denied, and specifically shall set forth the reasons why the Applicant
believes such permit or certificate should be issued and why the denial of the same was
inappropriate.
Thereafter, such appeal shall be held before the Village Board of Trustees as soon as thereafter
as is reasonably possible.
IS.06 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
1. Creation and Procedure.
a. The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of Dwight is hereby created and
under the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the Village of Dwight shall serve
in such capacity for the full term for which they are appointed and until their
15-3
respective successors are appointed and qualify. The successor of each member
shall serve for a term of five (5) years.
b. All appointments to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be made by the President
of the Board subject to approval of the Village Board. One (1) of the members so
appointed shall be named as Chairman at the time of his appointment. The
President of the Board, subject to the approval of the Village Board, shall have the
power to remove any member of the Zoning Board of Appeals for cause and if a
public hearing is requested by the member of the Zoning.Board of Appeals for
cause and if a public hearing is requested by the member being removed a public
hearing shall be held. Vacancies shall be filled as soon as possible for the
unexpired term of any member whose place has become vacant. In the event that
the office of Chairman is vacated for any reason, the President of the Board,
subject to approval of the Village Board, shall immediately appoint either one of
the remaining members of the Board of Appeals or any member who is appointed
to fill such vacancy on the Zoning Board of Appeals as the new Chairman.
c. All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the
Chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. All testimony by
witnesses at any hearing provided for in thi~ ordinance shall be given under oath.
The Chairman, or in his absence the Vice Chairman, may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open to
the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of
each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that
fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and other official actions.
Every rule, regulation, order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board
shall immediately be filed in the office of the Villag(J Clerk and shall be a public
record.
d. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall decide matters as authorized by thiS ordinance
in a specific case and after public hearing. A concurring vote of four (4) members
of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be necessary on any matter upon which it is
authorized to decide by this ordinance.
2. Jurisdiction and Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals is here by vested with the
following jurisdiction and authority:
a. To hear and decide an appeal from an administrative order, requirement or
determination made by the Building Inspector under this ordinance.
b. To hear or decide all other matters referred to it upon which it is required to
decide under this ordinance.
c. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Building
Inspector, or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is
required to pass under this ordinance.
15-4
(
15.07 APPEALS
1. Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals from an
administrative order, requirement or· determination under this ordinance, made by the
Building Inspector.
2. Initiation and Processing. An appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals by
any person, firm or corporation, or by any office, department, board, bureau or
commission, aggrieved by an administrative order, requirement, decision, or
determination under this ordinance.
The appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the Board of Appeals
by a general rule by filing with the Village Clerk and with the Board of Appeals, a notice
of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. Such appeal shall be taken upon forms
provided by the Zoning Board of Appeals. The officer from whom the appeal is taken
shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the
action appealed was taken.
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the
Building Inspector certifies to the Bo.ard of Appeals, after the notice of appeal has been
filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion,
cause imminent peril of life or property. In this event the proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Appeals or
by a court of record on application and on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is
taken, and on due causes shown.
The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and give
due notice thereof to the parties and decide the appeal within a reasonable tim'!. Upon
the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The Boaild of
Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the mder, req~Jirement,
decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises and to that
end has all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
3. Decisions. All decisions, after hearing of the Zoning Board of Appeals on appeals from
an administrative order, requirement, decision or determination of the Building Inspector
shall, in all instances, be appealable to the Village Board of Trustees wherein a vote of
any four members of the Village Board of Trustees shall be necessary to reverse a
decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals. All such decisions upon final appeal shall be
subject to judicial review in accordance with applicable Illinois statutes.
15.08 VARIATIONS
!. Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall decide variations of the provisions of this
ordinance in harmony with its general purpose and intent, and shall vary then only in the
specific instances hereinafter set forth where the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have
made a finding of fact based upon the standards hereinafter prescribed that there are
15-5
practical difficulties or particular hardships in the way of carrying out the ·strict letter of
the regulations of this ordinance. ·
2. Initiation. An application for a variation may be made by any person, firm, or
corporation, or by any office, department, board, bureau or commission requesting or
intending to request application for a building permit or zoning certificate.
3. Processing. An application for a variation shall be filed with the Village Clerk. The
Village Clerk shall forward such application to the Zoning Board of Appeals for
processing in accordance with applicable statutes of the State of Illinois, and the
provisions of this ordinance.
4.
No variation shall be made by the Zoning Board of Appeals except after a public hearing
before the Zoning Board of Appeals, of which there shall be a notice of time and place of
the hearing published at least once, not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15)
days before the hearing, in one or more newspapers with a general circulation within
Dwight; and a written notice is served at least fifteen (15) days before the hearing on the
owners of the properties located adjacent to the location for which the variation is
requested. ·
Decisions. All final administrative decisions and findings of the Zoning Board of
Appeals on variations arrived at after the hearing shall be accompanied by findings of
facts specifying the reason or reasons for approving or disapproving the variation and
shall be final and subject to judicial review only in accordance with applicable statutes of
the State of Illinois.
5. Standards.
a. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not vary the provisions of this ordinal). Ce as
. '
authorized in this section, unless it shall have made findings based upon the
evidence presented to it in the following cases: '
(1) That the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical conditions
of the specific property involved will bring a particular hardship upon the
owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience if the strict letter of the
regulations were to be carried out;
(2) That the conditions upon which the petition for variation is based would not
be applicable generally to other property within the same zoned
classification;
(3) That the purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire to
make more money out of the property;
( 4) That the alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by any person
presently having an interest in the property;
(5) That the granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public
15-6
. ( welfare or unduly injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located; or
(6) That the proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply oflight and
air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the danger of fire, or
otherwise so endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair
prope1ty values within the neighborhood.
b. The Zoning Board of Appeals may require such conditions and restrictions upon
the premises benefitted by a variation as may be necessary to comply with the
standards set forth in this section to reduce or minimize the effect of such
variation upon other property in the neighborhood, and to implement the general
purpose and intent of this ordinance.
6. Authorized Variation. Variations from the regulations of this zoning ordinance shall be
granted by the Village Board of Trustees, but only after a public hearing as set fo1th
herein for an authorized variation and a report from the Zoning Board of Appeals
recommending the variation be approved or disapproved. The concurring vote of four ( 4) ·
members of the Village Board shall be necessary to reverse the recommendation of the
Zoning Board of Appeals .
. ( . 15.09 PLAN COMMISSION
1. Jurisdiction. The Plan Commission of the Village of Dwight which has been duly
established is the Plan Commission referred to in this ordinance, and shall have the
following duties under this ordinance:
a. To hear all applications for amendments and special uses and thereafter submit
reports of findings and recommendations thereon to the Village Board fo the
manner prescribed in this section for amendments and special 1'\se; '
b. To initiate, direct and review, from time to time, studies of the provisions of this
ordinance, and to make reports of its recommendations to the Village Board; and
c. To hear and decide all matters upon which it is required to pass under this
ordinance.
2. Meetings and Rules. All meetings of the Plan Commission shall be held at the call of
. the Chairman, and at such times as the Plan Commission may determine. All hearings
conducted by said Plan Commission under this ordinance shall be in accordance with
Illinois statutes. In all proceedings of the Plan Commission provided for in this
ordinance, the Chairman, and in his absence, the Vice Chairman, shall have the power to
administer oaths. All testimony by witnesses at any hearing provided for in this
ordinance shall be given under oath. The Plan Commission shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official actions. A copy
of every rule or regulation, every amendment and special use, and every
recommendation, order, requirement, decision or determination of the· Plan Commission
15-7
under this ordinance shall be filed in the Office of the Village Clerk and shall be a public
record. The Plan Commission shall adopt its own rules and procedures, not in conflict
with this ordinance or with applicable Illinois statutes.
15.10 AMENDMENTS
1. Authority. The regulations imposed and the districts created under the authority of this
ordinance may be amended from time to time, by ordinance in accordance with
applicable statutes of the State of Illinois. An amendment shall be granted or denied by
the Village Board of Trustees only after a public hearing before the Plan Commission and
a report of its findings and recommendations has been submitted to the Village Board of
Trustees.
2. Initiation of Amendment. Amendments may be proposed by the Village Board, by the
Plan Commission, the Zoning Board of Appeals, other governmental bodies, or by any
resident of or owner of property within the jurisdictional limits of this ordinance.
3. Processing. An application for an amendment shal.J be filed with the Village Board and
thereafter introduced into the Village Board of Trustees. Such application shall be
forwarded from the Village Board to the Plan Commission, with a request to hold a
public hearing. Notice shall be given of the time and place of the hearing, not more than
thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, by publishing a notice
thereof at least once in one or more newspapers with a general circulation within Dwight.
15.11 SPECIAL USES
1. Purpose. The development and execution of the zoning ordinance is based upqn the
division of the Village into districts, within any one of which the use ofland ~d
buildings and the bulk and location of buildings or .structures, as related to the land, are
essentially tmiform. It is recognized, however, that there are special uses which, because
of their tmique character, cannot be properly classified in any particular use or the
particular location. Such special uses fall into two categories:
a. Uses operated by a public agency or publicly regulated utilities, or uses
traditionally affected with a public interest.
b. Uses entirely private in character, but of such a nature that the operation may give
rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon neighboring property or
public facilities.
2. Authority. Special uses shall be authorized or denied by the Village Board in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance applicable to amendments of this
ordinance and the regulations and conditions set forth in this ordinance for special uses.
No application for a special use shall be acted upon by the Village Board until after:
15-8
a. Written report is prepared and forwarded to the Village Board by the Plan
Commission in a manner prescribed herein for amendments to this ordinance; and
b. A public hearing has been held by the Plan Commission,. after due notice by
publication as prescribed herein, for amendments and the findiμgs and
recommendations of the Plan Commission have been reported to the Village
Board.
3. Initiation. An application for a special use may be made by any person, firm or
corporation, or by any office, department, board, bureau or commission requesting or
intending to request a building permit or occupancy certificate. .
4. Processing. An application for a special use, in such form and accompanied by such
information as shall be established from time to time by the Plan Commission shall be
filed with the Village Clerk and thereafter processed in the manner prescribed heretofore
for· applications and amendments.
5.
6.
The Plan Commission shall hold the public hearing and forward its recommendations in
the form of a written report, to the Village Board within forty-five (45) days of the date
the petition was submitted to the Plan Commission, unless it is withdrawn by the
petitioner.
In the case of a written protest against any proposed amendment of the regulations or
districts, signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty (20%) percent of the frontage
proposed to be altered, or by the owners of twenty (20%) percent of the frontage
·immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of twenty (20%)
percent of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, is filed with
the Clerk of the municipality, the amendment shall not be passed except by a ff!vorable
vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all of the Trustees of the Village of Dwight. Any pfoposed
amendment which fails to receive the approval of a majority of the Plan Com~ission
members and is so reported; shall not be passed by the Village Board except by a
favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the Trustees of the Village of Dwight.
Decisions. The Village Board, upon report of the Plan Commission and without further
public hearing, may grant or deny any proposed amendment in accordance with
applicable statutes of the State of Illinois, or may refer it back to the Plan Commission for
further consideration.
Guidelines. In guiding its decision as to whether or not to recommend a Special Use to
the Dwight Village Board of Trustees, and the Village Board of Trustees in considering
· whether or not the recommendation of the Plan Commission should be accepted, rejected,
or modified, the Plan Commission and the Village Board of Trustees shall use the
. following criteria when considering a Special Use Request, such criteria to be as. follows:
a. Is the Special Use a Special Use as set forth in the Dwight Zoning Ordinance and
is the Special Use a Special use for the particular zoning district involved?
15-9
b. Will the Special Use be harmonious with and in accordance with the general
objectives or with any specific objective of the Village of Dwight's
Comprehensive Plan and/or Dwight Zoning Ordinance?
c. Will the Special Use and any structure or improvement to be built, constructed, or
remodeled pursuant thereto, be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so
as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity and zoning district and that .such special use will .
not change the essential character of the area in which it is to be placed?
d. That the Special Use will not be hazardous or disruptive to existing or future
neighboring uses now existing or permitted in the particular zoning district.
e. That the Special Use will not create excessive additional requirements at public
expense for public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the
economic welfare of the Village of Dwight.
f. That the Special Use will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials,
. equipment and/or conditions or operations *at will detrimental to any persons,
property, or to the general welfare. of the citizens of the Village of Dwight by
reasons of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare, and/or
odors, and that su.ch criteria shall be viewed with respect to the zoning district in
which the Special Use .is being requested and the surrmmding uses.
g. That the Special Use will have sufficient vehicular, foot and bicycle approaches to
the property on which the Special Use is to be located which shall be designed as
to not create an interference with traffic on surrounding public thoroughfares and
surrotmding private property.
h. That the Special Use will not result in the destruction, loss, or damage Many
natural, scenic or historic features of major importance. '
i. That although a Special Use being requested may not satisfactorily meet each and
every requirement of the aforementioned criteria, that a!l criteria need not be met
so long as in the opinion of the Plan Commission and/or thereafter the Board of
Trustees of the Village of Dwight that any such deficiencies have been remedied
by the placing o{specific conditions on the c.onstruction and/or operation of the
Special Use and issuance of the Special Use Permit. The attachment of special
conditions on a Special Use Permit may be made by recommendation of the Plan
Commission after approval of such special conditions by the Village Board of
Trustees, or upon special conditions being placed on any Special Use Permit by
the Village Board of Trustees of the Village ofDwightshall have the final
legislative authority to reject, approve, or approve as modified any Special Use
recommendation from the Plan Commission.
15-10
( 15.12 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
I. Pllrpose. To encourage the most orderly development of propei:ties through advance
planning and thus assure adequate standards for the development of residential
neighborhoods; provide regulations to encourage a variety of dwelling types; assure
adequate open space; protect residential areas from undue traffic congestion; protect
residential areas from the intrusion of business, industrial and other land uses that may
create an adverse effect upon the living environment; and thus promote the general
welfare of the community.
2. Provisions. The basic provisions and requirements concerning Planned Unit
Development are as follows: The subdivision, development and use ofland containing
ten (10) or more acres as an integral unit, combining more than one (1) primary land use
and which may provide for single-family residential, multiple-family residential,
educational, business, commercial, industrial, recreational, park and common use areas
may be described as a Planned Unit Development.··
a. In its establishment and authorization as a special use, in addition to the foregoing
provisions, the following procedures, requi~ements, restrictions, standards and
conditions shall be observed.
b. The Planned Unit Development may be excluded from the provisions of the
Subdivision Regulations and of the Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Dwight to
the extent specified in the final authorization of the Planned Unit Development.
3. ·Procedure.
4.
a. Pre-application Conference. A pre-application conference shall be held with the
Plan Commission. At such conference, the applicant shall provide information as
to the location of the proposed Planned Unit Development, the uses, arld
approximate area of use for each use category; a list of any and all exceptions to
the Subdivision Regulations and Zoning Ordinance of Dwight, and any other
information necessary to clearly explain the Planned Unit Development to the
Plan Commission.
b. Review. The Plan Commission shall review and consider the proposed plan as to
its compatibility with the Comprehensive Plan and the goals and policies for
planning of the Village of Dwight and advise the applicant on the information,
documents, exhibits, drawings, and any limitations on the proposal that should be
included in the application to the Village for a Special use Permit for Planned
Unit Development.
Preliminary Plan. The applicant shall request the Special use Permit, by letter
addressed to the Village Board, to be placed on the agenda of the meeting of the Plan
Commission for.a preliminary discussion of the proposed Planned Unit Development,
and the Plan Commission shall consider the proposed Planned Unit Development at such
meeting, which may be continued from time to time. The applicant shall present such
exhibits and written information as may be necessary to fully acquaint the Plan
15-11
Commission with the proposed development which shall include, but not necessarily be
limited to the following:
a. The map or maps which shall be included as part of the application shall be drawn
at a scale of one hundred feet to the inch (1" = 100'), orif the area of the
site is more than two hundred (200) acres, two hundred feet to the inch (I"=
200'). The following information shall be shown :
(1) Boundarv Survey .. A boundary line survey of the subject site which shall be
prepared and certified by a registered land surveyor. ·
(2) Topography. The existing topographic character of the land with contours
shown at intervals no greater than five (5) feet. Topographic data
shall refer to the use U.S.G.S. North American Datum - Mean Sea
Level Elevation.
(3) Site Analysis. A detailed site analysis of the property in question, which
shall show the following information:
(a) Physical factors information:
Existing land uses both on the site and immediately adjacent to it.
Scenic views.
Wooded areas.
Soil problem areas based upon a soil survey of the site to include a
report from the Soil Conservation Service. Additional soil . .
information may be requested by the Plan Commission andi/or the
Village Engineer. '
Portions of the site in any flood plain and/or flood plain fringe area.
Streams, drainage ditches, culv.erts and standing water.
Isolated preservable trees six (6) inches or mo.re in diameter at one (1)
foot above ground level.
General directions of the storm water run-off across the property.
(b) Public utilities information, which shall show the location and size of
any existing sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and water lines both on
the site and in easements and rights-of-way immediately adjacent to
the site, gas, electric and telephone.
(c) Other information:
15-12
/'''•'
\
\(
\
1(
i (
Existing county and/or municipal zoning on all parts of the site.
Municipal corporate boundaries across and adjacent to the subject
site.
School district boundaries across and adjacent to subject site.
Utility easements across and adjacent to the subject site.
( 4) Land use Plan. A proposed land use plan which shall be drawn upon a print
of the topographic map for the site. The proposed land use plan shall
. contain the following information:
(a) Identification and description:
Name of the Planned.Unit Development.
Location of the subject site by section, town, and range or by other·
approved legal description. ·
Name and address of the site planner and/or engineer.
Name and address of the owner and/or Trust Beneficiary or
developer.
Scale, north point and date.
(b) Design features information, which shall show:
Right-of-way alignments, widths, and names of all streets. isuch
street names shall not duplicate the name of any street heretofore used
in the Village of its environs unless such street is an extension of or is
in line with an already named street in which event that name shall be
used.
The location of all multiple family or single-family attached buildings
and structures ..
Off-street parking and service areas.
All areas to be dedicated as comrrion open space and all sites to be
conveyed, dedicated, or reserved for parks, playgrounds, school sites,
public buildings, and similar public and quasi-public uses.
The pedestrian circulation system, any parkway belt system, or
bicycle circulation system.
15-13
All other information necessary to clearly show the proposed
elements of the Planned Unit Development.
( 5) Utility Plan. A proposed utility plan which shall be drawn on a print of the
proposed land use plan. The proposed utility plan shall show the
approximate location and dimensions of all sanitary sewer, storm
sewer, and water lines for all proposed land uses, drainage ditches,
culverts and water retention areas, as well as any utility easements.
The utility plan shall be accompanied by a statement from the Village
Engineer attesting to the capability of existing sewer systems to
service the proposed development.
(a) The written statement which shall be included as part of the
application for approval of the Preliminary Plan shall contain the
following information:
(i) A statistical tabulation of the acreage amounts of all of the land
uses proposed in the Preliminary Plan.
(ii) The type and number of dwelling units for any proposed
residential land uses.
(iii) The stages in which the project will be built and the
approximate dates when construction of each stage can be
expected to begin and to end.
(b) Other information may be requested if the Plan Commission finds that
the Planned Unit Development may create special problems for
traffic, parking, landscaping and/or economic has ability. ~uch
information may include but not be limited to any of the fo~lowing:
(i) An off-street parking and loading plan.
(ii) A traffic study indicating the volume of traffic to be generated
by the Planned Unit Development or this phase of it and
proposing any special engineering design features and/or traffic
regulation devices needed to insure the proper safety of traffic
circulation to, through, and around the Planned Unit
Development or this phase of it.
(iii) Economic impact-tax impact study detailing the impact which
the Planned Unit Development or this phase of it will have
upon all taxing bodies. In addition, the expected number of
students to be generated by any residential portion of it shall
also be quantified.
(iv) A landscaping planting plan, indicating the height,size,
location, quantities and variety of stock to be planted.
15-14
\
' I '\ (c) The procedure for approval of the Preliminary Plan shall be as
follows:
(i) The Village Board shall refer the Preliminary Plan to the
Dwight Plan Commission. The Village Board shall instruct the
appropriate Village departments and consultants to collaborate
with the Plan Commission in reviewing the Preliminary Plan
for the Planned Unit Development for its compliance with
these regulations and other ordinances of the Village of
Dwight. Such collaboration may include meetings at which the
developer shall meet with Village officials and consultants in
order that the Plan Commission may have prior to its public
hearing the informal recommendations of its experts.
(ii) The Village Board shall notify the applicant as to the time and
place of the public hearing at which the applicant shall present
his Preliminary Plan. The Village Board shall cause notice of
such public hearing to be published in a manner approved by
the Village Attorney for the Plan Commission for all special
use permits arid as required by statute.
\ (iii) The Plan Commission and the Village Board may utilize the i,( services of the professional Village consultants in arriving at
recommendations or decisions. The applicant shall pay the
Village the reasonable cost incurred for the services rendered
by its consultants within ten (10) days after the submission of
the bill from the Village to him. The consultants shall bill for
their services at the hourly rate which they normally charge
municipal clients. The Village consultants shall ind'u de but not
be limited to the persons who provide the Village with advice
in the fields of engineering, law, planning, traffic, design and
finance.
(d) The Plan Commission shall proceed as quickly as possible in its
review of the Preliminary Plan. Within no more than thirty (30) days
after the final adjournment of the public hearing, the Plan
Commission shall:
(i) Approve or disapprove the Preliminary Plan and shall submit its
written recommendation, which may include the
recommendations of the Village Engineer, Village Planner,
and/or Village Attorney, to the Board of Trustees, with a copy
being sent to the applicant; or
i ' \
\ (ii) Advise the applicant in writing if the Plan Commission finds
that changes, additions, or corrections are required in the
Preliminary Plan. The applicant shall resubmit ten (10) copies
15-15
of the reviewed Preliminary Plan for consideration of the Plan
Commission at a continuation of or a new public hearing. The
applicant shall do so without paying an additional filing fee.
The Plan Commission shall submit its recommendations in
writing to the Village Board, which may also include the
recommendations of the Village Engineer, Village Planner
and/or Village Attorney, with a copy also being sent to the
applicant.
(e) The Village Board of Trustees shall accept or reject the Preliminary
Plan within forty-five ( 45) days after its next regular meeting
following the receipt of the written recommendations of the Plan
Commission. The applicant and the Village Board of Trustees may ·
mutually agree to extend the forty-five ( 45) day period:
(i) If the Preliminary Plan is disapproved, the Village Board may
state in writing the reasons for the disapproval and such
writing, if prepared, shall be filed with the Village Clerk, and a
copy shall be sent to the ~pplicant.
(ii) If the Preliminary Plan is approved, the Village Board shall
authorize the applicant to submit a final development plan for
the Planned Unit Development.
(iii) Within one (1) year following the approval of the Preliminary
Development Plan, the applicant shall file with the Plan
Commission, a final development plan completing in final
form all information required as noted in this section.
5. Final Development Plan. Within one (1) year following the approval of the fueliminary
Development Plan, the applicant shall file with the Plan Commission a final development
plan containing in final form the information required in the preliminary plan. The final
development plan shall also include the following:
a. A final land use plan, suitable for recording with the County Recorder of Deeds.
The purpose of the final development plan is to designate the land subdivided into
lots as well as the division of other lands not so treated, into common open areas
and building areas and to designate and limit the specific internal use of each
building or structure, as well as of the land in general.
b. An accurate legal description of the entire area under immediate development
within the Planned Unit Development.
c. If subdivided lands are included in the Planned Unit Development, a subdivision
plat of all subdivided lands in the same form and meeting all the requirements of a
normal subdivision plat, to the extent that compliance with the subdivision
regulations of the Village shall be required,
15-16
..........
/
\ d. An accurate legal description of each separate unsubdivided use area, including
,ff
\ common open space.
e. Designation of the location of all buildings to be constructed, arid a designation of
the uses for which each building is designed.
f. Certificates, seals and signatures required for the dedication of land, and
recording the document.
g. Tabulations of each separate unsubdivided use area, including land 'area and
number of dwelling units per gross acre.
h. Landscaping plan.
i. Utilities and drainage plan,
J. Final agreements, bylaws, provisions, or covenants which govern the use,
maintenance and continued protection of the Planned Unit Development and any,
of its common open area or other common facilities.
k. Final development and construction schedule.
I I. Final architectural plans.
m. Final engineering drawings.
The Final Development Plan shall be approved as follows:
a. The Plan Commission shall review the Final Development Plan within,thirty-five
(35) days of its submission and shall recommend approval if it is in cotlipliance
with the Preliminary Development Plan. The Plan Commission shall certify to
the Board of Trustees that the Final Development Plan is in conformity with the
previously filed Preliminary Development Plan.
b. If the Final Development Plan is substantially changed from the approved
Preliminary Development Plan, the Plan Commission shall recommend to the
Village Board that a new public hearing be held in conformance with the
procedures for approval of a Preliminary Development Plan.
c. The Board of Trustees after receipt of the recommendation of the Plan
Commission shall itself review the Final Development Plan and shall, if it is in
conformity with the Preliminary Development Plan, authorize issuance of Special
Use Permits. If the Final Development Plan is held not to be in conformity with
the Preliminary Development Plan, the Village Board shall inform the applicant
\ with regard to the specific areas found to be not in compliance.
(
15-17
15.13 CHANGES AND MODIFICATIONS OF THE PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
AFTER APPROVAL OF THE FINAL PLAN.
1. After the approval of the Final Development Plan, the use of land and the construction,
modification or alteration of any buildings or structures within the Planned Unit
Development will be governed by the approved Final Development Plan, rather than by
any other provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the Village.
2. No changes may be made in the approved Final Development Plan except upon
application to the appropriate agency according to the following procedures:
a. During the construction of the Planned Unit Development, the procedure shall be
as follows:
(1) Minor changes in the location, siting, and height of buildings and
structures and in the location of streets and ways of public access and
in the size and location of open space, may be authorized by the Plan
Commission as required by engineering or other circumstances not
foreseen at the time that the fim\l plat was approved.
(2) All changes in land uses, any rearrangement oflots, blocks, and
building tracts, any major changes in the provisions for common open
space and all other changes in the approved Final Development Plan
must be made by the Village Board of Trustees, under the procedures
authorized by the Zoning Ordinance for the amendment to the zoning
map.
(3) Any changes which are approved for the Final Plat must be recorded
as amendments to the recorded copy of the Final Plat. If cqanges are
allowed in a final site plan a new site plan reflecting such changes
shall be filed with the Village. '
b. After the completfon of the construction of the Planned Unit Development, the
procedure shall be as follows: ·
( 1) Any minor extension, alterations, or modifications of existing
buildings or structures may be recommended by the Plan Commission
if they are consistent with.the purpose and intent of the Final Plat.
(2) Any building or structure that is totally or substantially destroyed may
be reconstructed only in compliance with the Final Plat unless an
amendment to the Final Plat is approved following the procedures for
·the amendment of the zoning map.
(3) All other changes in the Final Development Plan must be made by the
Village Board of Trustees, under the procedure authorized by the
Zoning Ordinance for the amendment of the zoning map. No changes .
may be made in the Final Development Plan unless they are required
15-18
\
' (
15.14 STANDARDS
for the continued successful functioning of the Planned Unit
Development, or unless they are required by changes in conditions
that have occurred since the Final Development Plan was approved or
by changes in the development policy of the Village. ·
No Planned Unit Development shall be authorized unless the Plan Commission shall find and
recommend, in addition to those standards established herein for special uses, that the following
. standards will be met: ·
1. General
a. The uses permitted by such exceptions as may be requested or recommended are
necessary or desirable and appropriate to the purpose of the development.
b. The uses permitted in such development are not of such nature or so located as to
exercise an undue detrimental influence or yffect upon the surrounding
neighborhood.
c.
d.
e.
That any industrial park areas established in the Planned Unit Development
conform to all requirements therefore as set forth elsewher.e in this ordinance.
That all minimum requirements pertaining to c;ommercial, residential,
institutional, or other uses established in the Planned Unit Development shall be
subject to the requirements for each individual classification as established .
elsewhere in this ordinance, except as may be specifically varied in this ordinance
granting and establishing a Planned Unit Development use.
When private streets and. common driveways are made a part of the Planned Unit
Development or private common open space or recreation facilities are provided,
the applicant shall submit, as part of the application, the method and arrangement
whereby the private facilities shall be operated and maintained. Such
arrangements for operating and maintaining private facilities shall be subject to
the approval of the Village Board.
2. Residential
a. Residential density for a Planned Unit Development shall not be greater than the
recommended density, as shown in the Zoning Ordinance for the Village, nor
shall any lot to be used for residential purposes be less in area or dimension than
that required by the district regulations applicable to the district in which the
Planned Unit Development is located, except that the Plan Commission may
recommend and the Village Board may grant a reduction in such lot.area and
dimension, but not more than fifteen (15%) percent when the Planned Unit
Development provides common open space equal to not less than ten (10%)
percent of the gross area of the Planned Unit Development.
15-19
b. The open areas provided in the part of the Pfanned Unit Development containing
only residential structures shall be preserved over the life of the Planned Unit
Development for use only by the residents of the Planned Unit Development.
c. For that part of a Planned Unit Development devoted to residential uses, the Plan
Commission may recommend and the Village Board of Trustees may approve,
access to a dwelling by a driveway or pedestrian walk easement, and spadng
between buildings of lesser widths or depths than required by district regulations
for the district in which the Planned Unit Development is located, provided:
( 1) That adequate provisions are made which perpetuate during the period
of the special use, access easements and off-street parking spaces for
use by the residents of the dwelling served;
(2) The spacing between buildings shall be approved by the Plan
Commission and shall be consistent with the application of
recognized site planning principles for securing a unified
development, and due consideri'\tion is given to the openness normally
afforded by intervening streets and alleys;
(3) The yards for principal buildings along the periphery of the
development shall be not less in width or depth than required for
permitted uses in the district regulations applicable to the districts in
which the Planned Unit Development is located; and the plan is
developed to afford adequate protection to neighboring properties as
recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the Village
Board of Trustees.
d. Business uses may be included as part of a planned residential developtnent when
the Plan Commission finds that such business uses are beneficial to the' overall
Planned Unit Development and will not be injurious to adjacent or neighboring
properties. Such business uses shall not be greater in area than ten ( 10%) percent
of the Plaimed Unit Development.
3. Cluster Subdivision. In any single-family cluster subdivision, the Plan Commission
may recommend and the Village Board may authorize the following exceptions to the
regulations of the district in which the cluster subdivision is permitted as a special use:
a. A reduction of the lot width to seventy (70) feet in the R-1 Residential District.
b. That in the part of the Planned Unit Development containing only residential uses,
the minimum lot area per dwelling unit may be not more than five (5%) percent
less than that required for permitted uses in the district regulations applicable to
the district in which the Plmmed Unit Development is located.
Reduction of such lot area shall be recommended by the Plan Commission and
approved by the Village Board only where there is contained within the Plmmed
15-20
(' -,
( .· )
I .
.\
\(
\ (
Unit Development permanent open area, the area and location of which shall meet
with the approval of the Plan Commission, and that such open space shall not be
less than that which would pertain if developed on ind.ividual lots.
Such open areas shall be preserved over the life of the Planned Unit Development,
for tise only by the residents 6fthe Planned Unit Development.or dedicated to the
Village of Dwight for school, park, playground or other public uses; and
c. · That in a Planned Unit Development devoted to residential uses, the Plan
Commission may recommend and the Village Board may approve, access to a
. dwelling by a driveway or pedestrian walk easement; however, off-street parking
facilities for such dwellings shall be located not more than two hundred (200) feet
from the dwelling served; yards of lesser widths or depths than required for ·
permitted uses in the district regulations applicable to the district in which the
Planned Unit Development is located, provided
(1) That protective covenants are recorded which perpetuate access
easements and off-street parking spaces for use by the residents of the
dwellings served;
(2) That spacing between buildings shall be consistent with the
application of recognized site planning principles for securing a
unified development and due consideration is given to the openness
normally afforded by intervening streets and alleys;
(3) Spacing between principal buildings within a part of a Planned Unit ·
Development shall be equivalent to such spacing as would be required
between buildings by district regulations for the district in which it is
located.
d. That in a Planned Business Development, the following additional requirements
are hereby specified:
(1) All buildings shall be setback not less than thirty (30) feet from all
streets bounding the site;
(2) Required off-street parking space shall be provided in the ratio of not
less thanten (10) parking spaces for every one thousand (1,000)
square feet of gross floor area;
(3) All walks within the Planned Business Development shall be paved
with a hard surfaced material meeting the specifications of the Village
Engineer;
( 4) Any part of the Planned Business Development not used for
buildings, loading and access ways, shall be attractively landscaped
with grass, trees, shrubs or pedestrian walkways, according to a
landscape plan, as approved by the Plan Commission;
15-21
(5) The buildings in the Planned Business Development shall be planned ·
and designed as a unified and single project.
4. Variations of Minimum Requirements.
a. Residential. Wherever the applicant proposes to provide and set out, by platting,
deed, dedication, restriction, or covenant, any land or space separate from
single-family or multiple-family residential districts to be used for parks,
playgrounds, commons, greenways or open areas, the Plan Commission may
.consider and recommend to the Village Board and the Village Board may vary the
applicable minimum requirements of the Subdivision Regulations and the Zoning
Ordinance which may include but not necessarily be limited to the following:
b. Business.
(!)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Rear yard
Side yard
Lot area
Bulk
Intensity of use
Street Width
Sidewalks
Public Utilities
Off-Street Parking
Business uses shall be as prescribed by the Plan Commission.
All business and/or age of materials shall be conducted or stored
within a completely enclosed building.
Not more than thirty (30%) percent of the lot area shall be covered by
buildings or structures.
At least ten ( 10%) percent of the lot shall be provided for landscape
and open space purposes.
No building shall be more than thirty-five (35) feet in height.
No dwelling shall be permitted in a Planned Business Development.
Off-street parking shall be provided and maintained on the same lot
based upon three (3) square feet of parking space for each foot of
gross floor area unless otherwise recommended by the Plan
Commission and approved by the Village Board.
(8) Service and loading and unloading facilities shall be provided as
recommended and approved by the Plan Commission.
(9) No building shall be located nearer than fifty (50) feet to any street
line.
15-22
)
\(
'
\
\(
i (
5.
( 10) Outside lighting shall be so designed and placed so as fo not be
disturbing to adjacent residential areas.
(1 l)Business developments shall be adequately screened by fencing or
landscaping or both along the boundaries of adjacent residential,
public open space, schools, churches or other similar uses. The
screen planting shall be prepared by a landscape architect and shall
meet the approval of the Plan Commission.
(12) Signs shall comply with the regulation ofB-1 Retail Business District
uses permitted in this ordinance. ·
c. Industrial.
(1) The standards for industrial areas in a Planned Unit Development
shall conform to the applicable standards in this Zoning Ordinance of
the Village for industrial areas.
(2) At least twenty percent (20%) of the industrial land use areas shall be
reserved for landscape and open space purposes.
Conditions and Guarantees. Prior to granting any special uses, the Plan Commission
may recommend, and the Village Board shall stipulate such conditions and restrictions
upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the special
use as deemed necessary for the protection and requirements specified herein or as may
be from time to time required. In all cases in which special uses are granted, the Village
Board shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that
the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with.
6. Effect of Denial of a Special Use. After a public hearing, no application ford special
use which has been denied wholly or in part by the Village Board shall be restibmitted for
a period of one (I) year from the date of said order of denial, except on the grounds of
substantial new evidence or proof of changed conditions found to be valid by the Plan
Commission and the Village Board.
7. Termination of Special Use Permit. If work on the proposed development has not
begun within twenty-four (24) months from the date of the authorization order of the
Village Board, the authorization shall become null and void and all rights thereunder
shall lapse.
15.15 FEES
The Village Board shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses for zoning
certificates, appeals, application for amendments or special use, site plan review and other
matters pertaining to this ordinance. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the
Village Clerk and may be altered or amended only by the Village Board.
15-23
Until all applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on
any application or appeal.
15.16 VIOLATION, PENALTY, ENFORCEMENT
Any person, firm or corporation, who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this ordinance unless otherwise
specified, shall upon conviction be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist
after notification thereof shall constitute a separate offense.
15-24
(
(
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
VILLAGE OF DWIGHT
VILLAGE OFFICIALS
PRESIDENT
Jared Anderson
VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Justin Eggenberger
Marla Kinkade
Jerry Curtis
Randy Irvin
James Mixen
Jenny Johnson
CLERK
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
Kevin McNamara
PLANNING COMMISSION
Earl McCoy, Chairman
Scott Sand
Gene Mortensen
Barb Christensen
Ryan Van Der Karr
Joel Steichen
John Duffy

(
(
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
4.01
4.02
5.00
5.01
5.02
6.00
7.00
7.01
7.02
7.03
7.04
7.05
7.06
7.07
7.08
TITLE
PURPOSE
APPLICATION OF ORDINANCE
GENERAL PROVISION
Interpretation
Separability
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
Rules
Definitions
IMPACT FEES
GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL
Plan Commission Guidelines
Unsuitable Land
Dedication of Land for Public Use
Reservation of Public Spaces and Sites
Contribution of Land for Public School Sites or of Funds in Lieu Thereof
Dedication and Development of Detention Ponds or Funds in Lieu Thereof
Vacation of a Plat of Subdivision
Land Divisions Other than Subdivisions
8.00 PROCEDURE FOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL
8.01 Preliminary Consultation
8.02 Procedure for Approval of Preliminary Plan
8.03 Preliminary Plan Requirements
8.04 Plans and Specifications for Required Land Improvements
8.05 Construction of Required Improvements
8.06 Agreements and Guarantee ofimprovements
8.07 Acceptance of Required Land Improvements
8.08 Procedure for Approval of Final Plat
9.00 PLANNING STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION DESIGN
9.01 Street Standards
9.02 Easements
9.03 Blocks
9.04 Lots
9.05 Building Setback Lines
9.06 Parks, School Sites, and Public Areas
10.00 MATERIALS AND METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION FOR
REQUIRED UNDERGROUND IMPROVEMENTS
10.01 Sanitary Sewer System
10.02 Storm Water Drainage System Required
10.03 Manholes and Drainage Appurtenances
10.04 Water Supply and Distribution System
11.00 STREET IMPROVEMENTS
11.01 Curb and Gutter
11.02 Frontage Roads
11. 03 Parkways
11.04 Alleys
11.05 Sidewalks
11.06 Cross-Walkways
11. 07 Street Lighting Improvements
11.08 Filing of Engineering Plans and Review Fee
11.09 Acceptance of Required Land Improvements
11.10 Landscaping
11.11 Blasting
11.12 Markers
11.13 Water Retention or Detention Facilities
11.14 Inspection of Surface Improvements
12.00 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
12.01 Organization
12.02 Enforcement
12.03 Variations and Exceptions
12 .04 Record of Plats
12.05 Validity
(
12.06 Repeal
12.07 Amendments
12.08 Violations and Penalties
12.09 Fees
12.10 Adoption
12.11 Publication
12.12 Effect
(
(

(
(
PREAMBLE:
Because each new subdivision accepted by the Village of Dwight becomes a permanent
unit in the basic physical structme of the future community and to which the future
community, will, of necessity, be forced to adhere, all subdivisions hereafter planned
within the incorporated limits of the Village of Dwight and for a distance of one and onehalf
miles beyond said Village limits shall in all respects be in full compliance with the
regulations hereafter contained in this ordinance. These regulations are designed to
provide for the orderly and harmonious development of the Village and its environs, for
the coordination of streets within new subdivisions with other existing or planned streets,
and otherwise to promote realization of the official plan of the Village.
BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Dwight
that:
SECTION 1.00 - TITLE
This ordinance shall be known, cited and referred to as the "Dwight Subdivision
Ordinance."
SECTION 2.00 - PURPOSE
While it is obvious that regulations are needed to assme orderly extension of Village
streets, the other purposes of these regulations are:
A. To insure sound, harmonious subdivision development and community growth, and
to safeguard the interests of the home owner, the subdivider, the investor and the Village.
B. To provide permanent assets to the locality and to the Village.
C. To prevent scattered development beyond existing public utilities and prevent
excessive development costs.
D. To assure the development of land for optimum use with necessary protection
against deterioration and obsolescence.
E. To limit and control the pollution of the environment that can be caused by
inadequate or incomplete urban development.
F. To provide common grounds of understanding and sound working relationships
between the Village and the subdivider.
G. To lessen congestion in the streets and highways.
H. To provide for adequate light and air.
I. To facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, and
other public necessities.
J. To insure proper legal description and proper monumenting of subdivided land.
The regulations are established with reasonable consideration of the character of the
Village with a view toward conserving the value of buildings upon the land and providing
the best possible environment for human habitation. It is intended that these regulations
shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and development
standards contained in the Building Code, Official Map Regulations, Zoning Ordinance,
and the Official Village Comprehensive Plan.
(
(
(
SECTION 3.00 - APPLICATION OF ORDINANCE
The Subdivision Ordinance of the Village of Dwight, Illinois, shall apply to all
subdivisions ofland, as defined herein, located within the Village of Dwight or entirely
or in part within the unincorporated area within one and one-half (1 Yz) miles of the
corporate limits of the Village, in accordance with Chapter 24 of the Illinois Revised
Statutes and that area that is excluded by the Subdivision Ordinance of Livingston
County. The subdivision plans and plats, proposed improvements to be installed, and all
procedures relating thereto, shall in all respects be in full compliance with the regulations
herein.
SECTION 4.00 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Wherever any subdivision ofland shall hereafter be laid out within the incorporated
limits of the Village of Dwight, or within contiguous territory not more than one and onehalf
(1 Yz) miles beyond the incorporated boundaries of the Village of Dwight, the
subdivider thereof or his agent shall submit both a preliminary and a final subdivision
plat to the Village of Dwight for its approval. The subdivision plats and all procedures
relating thereto shall in all respects be in full compliance with these regulations.
B. Until preliminary plats and plans for the subdivision are approved:
1. No land shall be subdivided, nor any street laid out, nor any improvements
made to the natural land.
2. No lot, tract or parcel of land within any subdivision shall be offered for sale,
nor shall any sale, contract for sale, or option be made or given.
3. No improvements - such as sidewalks, water supply, storm water drainage,
sanitary sewerage facilities, gas service, electric service, lighting, grading, paving,
or surfacing of streets - shall hereafter be made by any owner or owners or his or
their agent, or by any public service corporation at the request of such owner or
owners or his or their agent.
4. Unsuitable Land - No land shall be subdivided for any use which is determined
by the Plan Commission, after investigation by the Village Engineer, to be
unsuitable for such use by reason of flooding or bad drainage, adverse earth and
rock formation or topography, or any other feature likely to be harmful to the
health, safety, or welfare of the future residents in the proposed subdivision or of
the community. However, ifthe subdivider agrees to make improvements which
will, in the opinion of the Village Engineer, make the area safe for occupancy and
provide adequate lot and street drainage and storm water detention facilities, the sub
division may then be approved.
For flood limits, surface water runoff and hardship, refer to the following:
a. Flood Hazards
Any use of the flood plain that would not reduce the area available for flooding
purposes nor cause any hazard to surrounding properties.
b. Surface Water Runoff
Runoff of surface water from each tract or parcel would be limited to a
maximum of 1/20th of one inch per hour of runoff per acre of land or fraction
thereof.
Detention basins or equivalent shall be provided by the subdivision and/or
development to accomplish the limit of surface water runoff as hereinbefore set
forth. Where waterways, channels, ditches, streams or rivers are traversed, the
design of the facilities should not be less than a 25 year frequency storm.
Due cognizance shall be taken to the effect of development of any land tract to
down stream owner and surrounding areas affected by rainfall and surface water
runoff.
c. Hardship
Where the land developer or subdivider can show that the strict adherence to the
design standards set forth causes an unnecessary hardship, the Village Board
may approve a variance. Such variance may be granted or denied after
recommendation of the Plan Commission, and where topography and conditions
peculiar to the site or surrounding area substantiate a variance without
destroying the intent of the provisions of this ordinance. Such recommendation
of the Plan Commission may be based on an opinion of the Village Engineer.
C. All offerings or dedications of land to the Village for use as streets, highways,
alleys, schools, parks, playgrounds, or other public uses shall be referred to the Plan
Commission for review and recommendation before being accepted by the Village Board
or by any other governing authority of the Village of Dwight.
D. Where a tract of land proposed for subdivision is part of a larger, logical
subdivision unit in relation to the Village as a whole, the Plan Commission may, before
approval, cause to be prepared a plan for the entire area or neighborhood, such plan to be
used by the Plan Commission as an aid in judging the proposed plat. The Village
Engineer shall cooperate with the Plan Commission in the preparation of this plan and
shall furnish such surveys and data as may be necessary.
(
(
4.01 - INTERPRETATION
A. Minimum Standards Established In this interpretation and application the
provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
B. Higher Standards Govern. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of
this ordinance upon the subdivision ofland are either more restrictive or less restrictive
than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this ordinance or of any
other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations
which are more restrictive and impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
C. Easements or Covenants Not Abrogated. This ordinance is not intended to
abrogate, abolish or annul any easement, covenant, or any other private agreement,
provided that where the regulations of this ordinance are more restrictive or impose
higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement,
the requirements of this ordinance shall govern.
D. Existing Subdivisions. No subdivision of land which was not lawfully existing at
the time of the adoption of this ordinance shall be made lawful solely by reason of the
adoption of this ordinance, and to the extent that said subdivision of land is in conflict in
any manner with the requirements of this ordinance, said subdivision of land remains
unlawful hereunder.
4.02 - SEPARABILTY
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Village Board of the Village of Dwight that
the several provisions of this ordinance be separable in accordance with the following:
A. Separabilitv of Parts. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any
provision of this ordinance to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other
provision of this ordinance not specifically included in said judgment.
B. Separabilitv of Application. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge
invalid the application of any provision of this ordinance to a particular subdivision of
land, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other
subdivision of land, not specifically included in said judgment.

(
(
(
SECTION 5.00 - RULES AND DEFINITIONS
5.01-RULES
The language set forth in the text of this ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with
the following rules of construction:
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and words used in the
singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the singular.
B. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
C. The word "may" is permissive.
D. The word "lot" shall include the words "plot", and "piece", and "parcel".
E. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for", "designed for",
"intended for", "maintained for", and "occupied for''.
5.02 - DEFINITIONS
Alley -A public right-of-way primarily for vehicular traffic along the side or in the rear
of properties which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting properties.
Block -A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public
parks, cemeteries, railroad right-of-way, bulkhead lines or shore lines of waterways, or
corporate boundary lines of the Village.
Borings, Soil - Examination and analysis of the subsoil conditions of a specific parcel of
land by drilling.
Building - Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed to the land and
entirely separated on all sides from any other structure by space or by walls in which
there are no communicating doors, windows or openings; and which is designed or
intended for shelter, enclosure or protection of persons, animals or chattels.
Building Permit - A permit issued by the Village of Dwight for the construction,
erection, or alteration of a structure or building.
Building Setback Line -A line parallel to the street line at a distance from it, regulated
by the front yard requirements of the Dwight Zoning Ordinance.
Comprehensive Plan - The composite of the functional and geographic elements of the
Official Comprehensive Plan of the Village of Dwight and Environs or any segment
thereof, in the form of plans, maps, charts, text ofreports, implementing ordinances, and
the Official Map.
Corings, Pavement - Examinations and analysis of the completed surface and/or
subsurface of a finished pavement by removing a core by drilling.
Crosswalk - A public right-of-way located across a block to provide pedestrian access to
adjacent streets or alleys.
Cul-de-sac - A minor street having one open end and being permanently terminated by a
vehicular tmn around.
Curb - The permanent edge of a paved surface designed to separate the vehicular
travelway from the landscaped parkway.
Datum Plane - A reference point from which elevations are measured. The datum plane
is mean sea level as established by the United States Geodetic Survey (U.S.G.S.).
Detention Basin - A covered or uncovered reservoir designed to hold an excessive
accumulation of storm water so as to reduce peak flow in a storm water drainage system.
Drainage Swale - A turf drainage ditch of shallow depth with side slopes not exceeding
one to twelve (1-12).
Easement - A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by the general
public, a corporation, or a certain person or persons for a specific purpose or purposes.
Elevations - The vertical distance measured from a point on the ground to datum plane.
Excavation - Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other
similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or
bulldozed, and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
Existing Grade -The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to excavation
or filling.
Fill - Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material is deposited,
placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by man to a new location
and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
General Development Plan - Reference to "General Development Plan' shall mean the
approved General Development Plan included in the Comprehensive Plan of the Village
of Dwight, Illinois.
Grade - The slope of the land, road, street, or other public way expressed in percent.
(
(
(
Grading - Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the conditions
resulting from any excavation or, fill.
Gross Land Area - The entire area of a development including lots, streets and alleys,
measured to the center line of any bounding streets.
Lot - A parcel of land legally described as a distinct portion or piece of land of record.
Lot, Through - A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets,
and which is not a comer lot. On a through lot, both street lines shall be deemed front
lines.
Official Map - The map showing the streets, highways and parks theretofore laid out,
adopted and established by law and any amendments or additions thereto resulting from
the Board of Trustees action or the approval of subdivision plats.
Parcel - All contiguous land in one ownership.
Parkway - A route intended to be used primarily by passenger vehicles and whose rightof-
way is or is intended to be developed in a park-like character.
Person - Any person, firm or corporation, public or private, the State of Illinois and its
agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of America, its agencies and
instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, off ices, or employee of any of the foregoing.
Plan Commission - The words "Plan Commission" as used herein, refer to the Plan
Commission of the Village of Dwight, Illinois.
Planned Development - A parcel or tract of land, initially under single ownership or
control, which contains two or more principal buildings and one or more principal uses,
planned and constructed as a unified development where specific regulations of a given
zoning district are modified through the issuance of a special use permit.
Plat - A plan, map, drawing or chart on which the subdivider's plan for the subdivision of
land is presented and which he submits for approval and intends to record in final form.
Plan, Final - The drawings and documents presented for final approval as described in
Subsection 8 08.
Plan, Preliminary - The drawings and documents presented for tentative approval in
Subsection 8.03.
Plan, Sketch - A general map or drawing on which the subdivider's design for the
subdivision of land is presented for discussion purposes prior to the preparation of the
preliminary plan.
Residue Area - A residue area is that portion of a planned development not platted as
residential lots or designed for dedication as streets or alleys.
Roadway - The paved area within a street right-of-way intended for vehicular traffic,
including all curb and gutter facilities.
Site - A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is
performed as a single unified operation.
Site Development - Altering terrain and/or vegetation and constructing driveways.
Soil Testing - Determination and analysis of the subsoil conditions of a specific land area
by use of soil borings.
Street, Approved - Any streets, whether public or private, meeting standards and
specifications of the Village of Dwight.
Street, Half - A street ofless than the total required width along one or more property
lines of a subdivision.
Street, Major -A street of considerable continuity which serves or is intended to serve
as a major traffic artery connecting various sections of Dwight.
Street, Marginal Access - A minor street which is parallel and adjacent to highways and
major streets and which provides access to abutting properties and protection to local
traffic from fast, through moving traffic on the highways and major streets.
Street, Minor - A street primarily as access to abutting properties.
Street, Public - Any major or secondary street or minor street which is shown on the
subdivision plat and is or is to be dedicated to public use.
Street, Secondary or Collector. A street which carries traffic from minor streets to the
major street system, including the principal entrance streets of residential developments
and streets for circulation within such developments.
Street Width - The shortest distance between lines of lots delineating the public street.
Subdivider - The person or persons responsible for preparing and recording the plats of
the subdivision and for carrying out all appropriate requirements relating thereto as
outlined in this ordinance.
Subdivision - A described tract of land which is to be, or has been, divided into two (2)
or more lots or parcels, any of which is less than five (5) acres, for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development, including all
public streets, alleys, ways for public service facilities, parks, playgrounds, school
(
(
(
grounds or other public grounds, and all the tracts, parcels, lot or blocks and numbering
of all such lots, blocks, or parcels by progressive numbers, giving their precise
dimensions. The term subdivision includes re-subdivision and where it is appropriate to
the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided, provided,
however, that the following shall not be considered a subdivision and shall be exempt
from the requirements of this ordinance:
1. The division oflots or blocks of less than one (1) acre, of any recorded
subdivision which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
2. The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining and
contiguous land;
3. The conveyance of parcels of land or interest therein for use as rights-of- way
for railroads or other public utility facilities which does not involve any new streets or
easements of access;
4. The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility which does
not involve any new streets or easements of access;
5. The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or grants or
conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or instruments relating to the
vacation of land impressed with a public use;
6. Conveyances made to con-ect descriptions in prior conveyances;
7. The division of lots ofrecord into no more than two (2) parts and not involving
any new streets or easements of access, provided that the two (2) parts meet the
requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance and all other ordinances of the Village of
Dwight.
Village Engineer - The person or firm charged with the responsibility of municipal
engineering matters.
Water Level, Constant-The minimum depth of water designed to be contained at all
times within a retention basin.
Water Level, Occasional- The maximum depth of water designed to be contained
within a retention or detention basin during periods of peak storm water flow.

(
(
(
SECTION 6.00 - IMP ACT FEES
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
6.11 - SHORT TITLE
These regulations shall be known, cited, and referenced as the DEVELOPMENT
IMPACT FEES ORDINANCE of the Village of Dwight, Illinois.
6.12 - FINDINGS AND PURPOSE
A. Many factors have contributed to growth pressures in the Village, including the
following:
1. Continued urbanization of the south suburban Chicago metro area.
2. Proximity and access to south suburban employment centers.
3. The general attractiveness of the rural, small community setting offered by the
Village.
B. It is the responsibility of Village officials to exercise responsible growth
management in its environs.
C. Healthful, productive and responsible community life depends, in part, on the
availability of adequate school facilities for the residents of the Village.
D. The Village recognizes that park land is a vital component of the quality of life
experienced by community residents.
E. It is declared to be the policy of the Village that the provision of various public
facilities required to serve new development is subject to the control of the Village in
accordance with the comprehensive plan of the Village for the orderly, planned, efficient
development of the Village.
F. New development causes and imposes increased and excessive demands upon
public facilities and services that are specifically and uniquely attributable to those
developments. Affected facilities and services include Dwight Common School District
232, Dwight Township High School District 230, Dwight Fire Protection District and the
Dwight Parks and Recreation System.
G. Development potential and property values are influenced and affected by Village
policy as expressed in the comprehensive plan and as implemented by the Village Zoning
and Subdivision Ordinances.
H. To the extent that new development places demand upon public facilities which are
specifically and uniquely attributable to that development, those demands should be
satisfied by requiring that developments creating the demands pay the cost of meeting the
demands.
I. The amount of the development impact fees to be required of new development
shall be determined by the proportionate share cost of the additional public facilities
needed to support such development.
J. The Village Board of Trustees, after careful consideration, hereby finds and declares
that development impact fees required of new development to finance specified public
facilities, the demand for which is created by such development, are in the best interests
of the general welfare of the Village and its residents, are equitable, and do not impose an
unfair burden on such development. Therefore, the Village Board deems it necessary and
desirable to adopt this title as herein set forth.
6.13 - INTENT:
This title is intended to require development impact fees, payable at the time of building
permit issuance, in an amount based upon the proportionate share of the cost of the
various public facilities required to serve new development.
6.14 - DONATIONS REQUIRED
Unless otherwise provided for in an annexation agreement with the Village, as a
condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision or of a final plat of a planned unit
development, each subdivider or developer shall be required to dedicate land and/or make
cash contributions in lieu of land for acquisition of park and school sites; and cash
donations for school construction and recreation to serve the immediate and future needs
of the residents of the subdivision or planned unit development as hereinafter set forth.
6.15 - DONATIONS REQUIRED FROM PROPERTIES OUTSIDE VILLAGE
CORPORATE LIMITS
In the event that land that is subject to subdivision approval by the Village is not within
the corporate limits of the Village at the time of approval of a final plat of subdivision for
the land, the subdivider or developer shall agree in a separate agreement with some form
of financial guarantee to pay the fees at the time another governmental body issues a
building permit.
6.16 - DONATIONS COMPUTED ON PROJECTED POPULATION
A. For purposes of computing the amount of land donations or cash contributions in
lieu of land for park and school sites, and cash donations for school construction and
recreation facilities that will be required of each subdivision or planned unit development
to enable the Village to provide facilities and services to meet the needs of such
subdivision or planned unit development, its projected population density shall be
computed in accordance with the most current version of the Table of Estimated Ultimate
(
(
(
Population Per Dwelling Unit set forth in Exhibit A to this Title for School Calculation
and in Exhibit B for Park Calculation.
B. The current versions of the Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling
Unit in Exhibit A and Exhibit B to this Title shall be used for all population estimates
unless a subdivider or developer files a written objection to the Village data, together
with his or her own demographic study showing the estimated population to be generated
by his or her subdivision or planned unit development. In that event, the final
determination of the density formula to be used in such calculations shall be made by the
Village's corporate authorities on the basis of the most CUTI'ent version of the Table of
Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit, data submitted by the. subdivider or
developer, and from other sources which may be submitted to the Village's corporate
authorities by the .Dwight Schools.
C. Population density, age distribution and local conditions change over the years and,
accordingly, the Table of Estimated Ultimate Population per Dwelling Unit in Exhibit A
& B to this Title shall be subject to periodic review and amendment, as necessary, and in
the sole and absolute discretion of the Village's corporate authorities.
ARTICLE II - SCHOOL DISTRICT LAND AND CASH CONTRIBUTIONS
6.21 - LAND CONTRIBUTION TO SCHOOL DISTRICT
School sites shall be donated and conveyed to the Village in accordance with the
following criteria:
A. Number of students - The ultimate number of students that will be generated by the
proposed subdivision or planned nnit development shall be determined in accordance
with the school demographic study required by Section 8.03 of the Dwight Subdivision
Ordinance and Exhibit A.
B. Land donation to school - The amount of land required to be dedicated shall be
determined by dividing the estimated number of children in each of the school age
brackets hereinafter set forth that will be generated by the proposed subdivision or
planned unit development by the maximum recommended number of students that can be
served in the type of school assigned to such age bracket, hereinafter set fotih, and
multiplying the quotient times the minimum number of acres recommended for a school
site, hereinafter set forth. The product thereof shall be the acres of land deemed needed
to have sufficient land for school sites to serve the estimated increased children in each
such school classification.
School Classification by Grade
Elementary Schools Grades K-5
Middle Schools Grades 6-8
High School Grades 9-12
Maximun1 Number of Students
for each such School
Classification
600
800
1,250
Minimum number of acres
of land for each school site
or such Classification/Acres
per student
IS
29
75
.025
.0362
.060
*This Schools' classifications and size of school site data table shall be subject to periodic
review by Dwight Common School District #232, and Dwight Township High School District
#230 (hereafter referred to as Dwight Schools), and may request that the Village's corporate
authorities amend such data from time to time. Any such request shall be made in writing by a
resolution adopted by the corporate authorities of the Dwight Schools
D. Location of school site - The comprehensive plan of the Village shall be used as a
guideline in locating sites
E. Improved sites - Prior to conveyance, all sites shall be prepared in accordance with
the Village Subdivision Ordinance. All sites shall be conveyed in a condition ready for
full service of electrical, water, sewer and streets (including enclosed drainage and curb
and gutter) as applicable to the location of the site, or acceptable provision made
therefore. The sidewalks and trees normally included within the definition of improved
sites may be deferred due to the delay time between conveyance of any such school sites
and construction of school facilities thereon.
F. School land conveyed to the Village - School land conveyed to the Village shall be
held by it for transfer to Dwight Schools. Any school land conveyed to the Village or
thereafter transferred to the Dwight Schools which is not used for school purposes within
20 years after it is conveyed to the Village, shall be reconveyed to the developer.
G. Contribution of Funds in Lieu of Site - In the event that it is determined by the
Village Board and Dwight School Boards that it is not in the best interest of the school
districts to require any such dedication or conveyance of land, the Village Board may
then require the subdivider to pay any such school district, in lieu of such acreage
allocations for each school classification, a reasonable sum of money herein defined in
Subparagraph 6.55 (E) found to be the fair cash market value of the total allotment, said
sum to be determined by multiplying the number of acres by the fair cash market value of
each acre of improved land.
6.22 CASH CONTRIBUTION TO SCHOOL DISTRICTS
A. In addition to the land and/or cash donation referred to above in subparagraph 6.21,
each subdivider or developer shall be required to make an additional cash contribution to
aid in the provision of necessary funds for the construction, expansion or rehabilitation of
a school for the use by the children who will be generated by the proposed subdivision or
planned unit development, or for other improvements to the extent required in whole or
part in whole or part by the existence of a school.
B. The amount of the cash donation under this subparngraph 6.22 shall be determined
by multiplying the estimated number of children in the K-12 school age bracket that will
be generated by the proposed subdivision or planned unit development times $1,000 per
child as shown on Exhibit A The contribution required for school construction shall be
regularly updated. Funds contributed by a developer pursuant to this Section shall be
deposited with the Village Treasurer to be held in a special fund which shall not be used
for any purpose other than for payment of the cost of school construction, expansion or
(
(
(
rehabilitation or for the other improvements to the extent required in whole or in part by
the existence of a school. Any interest which accrues shall also be used for the purposes
set forth in this section. Any cash donated to the Village for school construction or
expansion purposes pursuant to this Article which has not been expanded for those
purposes within 20 years shall be refunded to the developer.
C. This cash contribution is a requirement of the Village of Dwight Subdivision Code.
6.23 CONTRIBUTIONS; ADDITIONAL SCHOOL SERVICES
A. In addition to the contribution required under subparagraph 6.21 and 6.22 above and
in order to provide the Dwight Schools with funds to provide such services before tax
revenues are generated by such new subdivision or planned unit development, a cash
contribution in the amount of $5,000.00 per student shall be made to the Village on the
basis of the most cun-ent version of the Estimated Ultimate Population per Dwelling Unit
in Exhibit A to this Title, and all such funds shall be paid over by the Village to the
Dwight Schools. The contribution required for school services shall be regularly updated.
ARTICLE III - RECREATION AND PARKS LAND AND CASH
CONTRIBUTIONS
6.31 - CONTRIBUTIONS; PARK SITES
Park sites shall be donated and conveyed to the Village in accordance with the following
criteria:
A. Number of residents. The ultimate number of residents that will be generated by the
proposed subdivision or planned unit development shall be determined in accordance
with the most current version of the Table of Estimated Ultimate Population per Dwelling
Unit in Appendix B to this Title. The amount of land required to be dedicated for park
sites in each subdivision or planned unit development shall be determined by dividing the
estimated population of such subdivision or planned unit development by 1,000 and
multiplying the quotient times 11 acres of park land required for each 1,000 people.
B. Location of park sites.
1. Except for combined school/park sites, the comprehensive plan adopted by the
Village shall be used as a guideline in locating sites. If the Village has not planned a park
within the subdivision or planned unit development or the neighborhood in which the
subdivision or planned unit development is located, the park site shall be so located as to
be readily accessible to the people within such neighborhood. Play and athletic fields and
large park sites must be conveniently accessible to the community at large.
2. Proper ingress, egress and curb cuts shall be provided. For water areas,
provisions must be made for pathway/driveway around these areas for emergency
vehicles and police patrol. Provisions for major use of pathway/driveway for bike riding,
walkway, jogging trail and pedestrian traffic shall be made.
C. Environmental quality.
1. Land to be dedicated for park sites shall be approved by the Village according to
its environmental quality, as well as its suitability for active and passive recreational
activities. The land is to be dry and usable at all times and not subject to flooding or used
as detention. No bogs or swamps shall be acceptable as required perk sites. Lakes and
native prairie wetlands shall not normally be acceptable, but may be approved by the
Village where the area offers an exceptional amenity or the change to protect a significant
natural resource. No site that has been part of an unlicensed land till or a toxic waste
dump shall be acceptable as required park acreage.
2. Every effort shall be made to conserve for public use and enjoyment those areas
of significant natural and environmental value. Except in those specific areas designated
by the Village for development as playfields or other active areas, all trees, other plant
materials, streams and other natural features shall be retained on land to be dedicated for
park site use, unless specifically cited by the Village for removal by the developer.
D. Shape. Dedicated park sites shall be regularly configured to permit efficient park
programming, security and maintenance. Sites shall be rectangular, or nearly rectangular,
in shape with no interior angle of the boundary line less than 60 degrees, unless
specifically approved by the Village. Narrow strips of land, small parcels that intrude
into adjacent orderly development, or left over parcels that are oddly shaped or locater
shall be avoided.
E. Improvements.
1. Prior to conveyance, all sites shall be prepared in accordance with the Village
Subdivision Ordinance and the Village's storm water management requirements, except
as varied by the specific terms of the Title. All areas must be final graded and seeded to
meet park specifications as to seed mixture.
2. All sites shall be conveyed in a condition ready for full service of electrical,
water, sewer, and streets (including enclosed drainage and curb and gutter) as applicable
to the location of the site, or acceptable provision made therefore. In addition, location of
hydrants shall be made in conformance with Village requirements. Provision for water
for watering vegetation and flooding for ice skating shall be made where appropriate.
Sewers for possible installation ofrestrooms/shelter at a later date shall be provided.
Electricity for street lights for future lighting for shelters and security shall be provided.
Security lighting along pathway shall be provided.
6.32 - CREDIT FOR PRIVATE OPEN SP ACES AND RECREATION AREAS
A. When sub dividers or developers provide their own space for recreation areas and
facilities, it has the effect of reducing the demand for local public recreational services.
Depending on the size of the development, a portion of the park and recreational area in
subdivisions or planned unit developments may, at the option of the Village's corporate
authorities, be provided in the form of "private" open space in lieu of dedicated "public"
(
(
open space. The extent of such private open space shall be determined by the Village's
corporate authorities, based upon the needs of the projected residents and in conformance
to the total park and recreation land for the general area.
B. In general, a substitution of private open space for dedicated parks will imply a
substantially higher degree of improvement and the installation ofrecreational facilities,
including equipment by the developer as part of his or her obligation. Detailed plans of
such areas, including specifications of facilities to be installed, must be approved by the
Village's corporate authorities, and before any credit is given for private recreation areas,
the subdivider or developer must guarantee that these private recreation areas will be
permanently maintained for such use by the execution of the appropriate legal
documents.
6.33 - RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND
Where the Comprehensive or Official Pan of the Village calls for a larger amount of park
and recreational land or school sites in a particular proposed subdivision or planned unit
development than the developer is required to dedicate, the land needed beyond the
developer's contribution shall, if so determined by the Village's corporate authorities, be
reserved for subsequent purchase by the Village; provided, that such acquisition is made
within one year from the date of approval of the final plat.
ARTICLE IV - COMBINED SCHOOL AND PARK SITES
6.41 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
The developer, Village, and Dwight Schools may agree that the developer, shall dedicate
and convey land (or contribute cash in lieu ofland pursuant to Section 6.55of this Title)
for combined school/park sites in lieu of land donations otherwise required under Article
2 and Article 3 of this Title. The standards set forth in Article 2, Article 3, and Section
6.54 of this Title as to location, improvements, and topography shall be applicable to
combined school and park sites.
ARTICLE V - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
6.51 - DISTRIBUTION OF PLANS AND PLATS
Copies of each subdivision plat or planned unit development plan shall be transmitted to
both Dwight School Districts and the Dwight Fire Protection District for its written
recommendations at the same time they are transmitted to the Dwight Plan Commission
but nothing herein contained shall be construed as requiring receipt of a recommendation
prior to action by the corporate authorities of the Village.
6.52 - TIME OF CONVEYANCE OF DONATIONS
All land donations required pursuant to this Title shall be conveyed no later than 180
days after a written demand by the Village.
6.53 - TITLE INSURANCE, SURVEY, ASSESSMENT PLATS
Each deed or other instrument conveying land to the Village or Dwight School Districts
shall be accompanied by the following:
A. A written commitment issued by a title insurer licensed to do business in the State of
Illinois to insure that grantee has good merchantable title to such real estate in an amount
equal to its value computed pursuant to Subsection 6.55(E) of this Chapter, subject only
to then current general real estate taxes as of the date of transfer; covenants, conditions
and restrictions which do not prohibit the use of the subject real estate for school or park
use; utility easements located within twenty feet (20') of the boundary lines of the subject
real estate; drainage ditches, feeders, laterals, and underground pipe or other conduit.
B. A current boundary line survey, prepared in compliance with the Illinois Plat Act,
765JLCS 205/0.01 et seq., or its successor statute, by a State of Illinois licensed land
surveyor.
C. Except in instances where the real estate to be conveyed is a lot in a recorded
subdivision, an assessment plot and tax division petition in form acceptable to the
appropriate county authorities so that the land to be conveyed can be assigned its own
pennanent real estate index number for exemption purposes.
6.54 - TOPOGRAPHY AND GRADING
The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site, as well as its surroundings, must
be suitable for its intended purposes. Grading on sites dedicated for park and recreational
uses shall not differ greatly from surrounding land.
6.55 - CASH CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF LAND
Criteria for requiring cash contributions in lieu of land donations:
A. Small Land Donations: Whenever, in the determination of the Village, any
subdivision or planned unit development is so small that the school or park sites required
under the provisions of Section 6.21and6.31 and/or Article 4 of this title will not be
large enough for practical development and maintenance as school or park sites, or when
the available land cannot meet the standards set forth in Sections 6.21and6.31 of this
title, or is otherwise inappropriate for park or recreational purposes or for a school site,
the Village shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of
the land dedication required.
B. Cash Contribntion: The cash contribution to be paid in lieu of land donations for
school sites shall be held in trust by the Village solely for use in the acquisition of a
school site to serve the immediate or future needs of children from that subdivision or
planned unit development, or for reimbursement to the Dwight Schools for prior
acquisition of school sites for which bonds or other financing obligations are outstanding
which will serve immediate or future needs of children from that subdivision or planned
(
(
(
unit development, or for the improvement of any existing school site which
predominantly serves such needs, but not for the construction, repair or rehabilitation of
any school building or addition thereto.
C. Cash Contribution For Park and Recreational Purposes: The cash contribution to
be paid in lieu of land donations for park and recreational purposes shall be designated by
the Village solely for the acquisition of park and recreational land which will be available
to serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of that subdivision or planned unit
development or for the improvement of existing park and recreational lands which
predominantly serve such needs.
D. Time Limit For Cash Expenditures: If any portion of a cash contribution in lieu of
park or recreational land donations, or school site donations made pursuant to this section
is not expended for the purposes above set forth within twenty (20) years from the date or
its receipt, it shall be refunded to the subdivider or developer who made such
contribution.
E. Fair Market Value: The amount of cash contributions in lieu of land shall be based
on the "fair market value" ofland in the proposed subdivision or planned unit
development improved as specified in sections 6.21 and 6.31 of this title that otherwise
would have been donated for park, recreational and school sites. The Village's corporate
authorities have determined that the present fair market value of such improved land in
and sutTOunding Village is forty five thousand dollars ($45,000.00) per acre. Such figure
shall be regularly updated pursuant to section 6.56 of this chapter, and shall he used in
making any calculation herein unless the subdivider or developer files a written objection
thereto. In the event of any such written objection, the developer shall submit an appraisal
showing the fair market value of such improved land in the area of his or her
development or other evidence thereof and final determination of such fair market value
per acre of such improved land shall be made by the corporate authorities based upon
such information submitted by the subdivider or developer and from other sources which
may be submitted to the corporate authorities by the school districts or others.
F. Combinations: There will be situations in subdivisions or planned unit developments
when, in the determination of the Village, a combination of land donation and cash
contribution in lieu of land is appropriate. These occasions will arise when:
1. Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the location for a park
or school site. That portion of the land within the subdivision or planned unit
development falling within a park or school site shall be conveyed as aforesaid, and cash
shall be donated by the developer, and cash shall be donated in an amount equal to the
difference between the fair market value of the land donated and the fair market value of
the land required to be donated under section 6.21 and 6.31 of this title.
2. A major part of a local park or recreation site or school site has already been
acquired and only a small amount ofland is needed from the proposed subdivision or
planned unit development to complete the site. The remaining amount of land shall be
donated between the fair market value of the land donated and the fair market value of
the land required to be donated under sections 6.21 and 6.31 of this title.
G. Prorated: The cash contributions required in this section shall be prorated and
payable upon the issuance of the building permit for each dwelling unit.
6.56 - UPDATING OF REQUIRED CONTRIBUTIONS AND FAIR MARKET
VALUE
Population density, age distribution, land values, the cost of providing park, school, fire
and Village services, construction costs and other local conditions change over the years.
Therefore, the specific formula for the dedication ofland, or the payment of fees in lieu
thereof, the required contribution for school construction, and the fair market value of
land in and around the Village shall be reviewed in consultation with the affected
governmental units at least every two (2) years and amended as necessary, and is the sole
and absolute discretion of the Village's corporate authorities.
ARTICLE VI - DWIGHT FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT IMP ACT FEES
6.61 - CASH CONTIBUTION FOR FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT
This title is intended to require development impact fees, payable at the time of building
permit issuance, in an amount based upon the proportionate share of the cost of the
various fire protection facilities and/or required to serve new development. The Village
of Dwight will impose a fee of $200.00 per dwelling constructed to be collected by the
Village before the issuance of a building permit.
ARTICLE VII - ANNEXATION AGREEMENTS
6.71 - IMPACT FEES SET FORTH IN ANNEXATION AGREEMENTS
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this title, any impact fees established in an
annexation agreement between the Village and a developer or subdivider shall supersede
the fees otherwise established in this title, including any fees otherwise provided for in
Article V of this title, and the terms of payment of any such impact fees in an annexation
agreement provide that impact fees are to be paid in accordance with this title, then the
amount and manner of payment provided in this title shall apply.
ARTICLE VIII - HOMEBUILDER IMP ACT FEES
6.81: HOMEBUILDER IMPACT FEES PER DWELLING UNIT
A. Impact Fees shall be imposed to each residential builder for each dwelling unit and be
due and payable before a building permit is issued. The fees are set forth in Exhibit C and
may be amended as needed.
(
(
(
B. The cash contributions required in this Section shall be payable upon the issuance of
the building permit for each dwelling unit and will be distributed to the Dwight Schools
as stated above.
ARTICLE IX - INDEMNIFICATION; REMEDIES
6.91- INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT
The Dwight Schools and the Dwight Fire Protection District shall be required, as a
condition of receiving the dedications or donation hereunder, to enter into a binding,
written intergovermnental agreement with the Village, acceptable in form and content to
the Village attorney, providing for the indemnification and holding harmless of the
Village from any loss, claims and causes of actions of every kind that may be incurred by
the Village as result, either directly or indirectly, of an enactment of this title, or the
administration or enforcement thereof, including any loss, claims, or causes of action
incurred as a result of a lawsuit brought or threatened by the Dwight School and/or the
Dwight Fire Protection District. The intergovermnental agreement shall provide that if
the Village is sued by any subdivider or developer as a result, directly, or indirectly, of
the enactment of this title, the Village may, at its option, undertake the defense, and the
Village's costs and expenses related thereto, including attorney fees, shall be immediately
reimbursed by the Dwight Schools and/or the Dwight Fire Protection District, as the case
may be. Where the Dwight Schools and the Dwight Fire Protection District improperly
uses funds or fails to use funds and does not return same as specified in this title, the
Village may sue either party and shall be entitled to recover as a part of the judgment
therein, or any settlement thereof, all costs and expenses, including attorney fees,
incurred by the Village.

(
VILLAGE OF DvVIGHT
EXHIBIT "A"
FOR SCI-IOOL- CALCULATIONS.
Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit
Children Per Dwelling Unit
Elementary Junior High High School
Grades K-5 Grades 6-8 Grades 9-12
Type of Unit 5-10 Years 11-13 Years . f4-l 7 Years TOTAL
Single - Family Detached Dwellings
3 Bedroom 0.58 0.26 0.30 1:14
4 Bedroom .0.64 0.38 0.42 1.44
5 Bedroom 0.86 0.68 0.57 2.11
or more
Single - Family Attached Dwellings (i.e. townhouse dwellings and two-family dwellings)
2 Bedroom 0.15 0.02 0.04 . 0.21
3 Bedroom 0.47 0.13 0.16 0.76
4 Bedroom
or more
0.93 0.34 0.41 1.68
Low Density Apartment (i.e. three-. and four-unit apartment buildings)
1 Bedroom 0.052 0.017 0.000
2 Bedroom 0.225 0.064 0.063
3 Bedroom 0.384 0.184 0.240
4 Bedroom 0.670 0.250 0.330
High Density Apartment (i.e. five-and more-unit apartment buildings)
1 Bedroom 0.026 0.014 0.007
2 Bedroom 0.065 0.035 0.029
3 Bedroom 0.150 0.080 0.092
0.069
0.352 .
. 0.808
1.250
0.047
0.129
0.322
VILLAGE OF DWIGHT
EXHIBIT "B"
FOR PARK CALCULATIONS
Table of Estimated Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit
Pre~ Elementary
School . Grades K-5
0-4Years 5-!0Years.
Single - Family Detached Dwellings
2 Bedroom 0.013 0.136
3 Bedroom 0.292 · . 0.369
4 Bedroom 0.418 0.530
5 Bedroom 0.283 0.345
or more
Single - Family Attached Dwellings
2 Bedroom 0.064 0.088 ·
3 Bedroom 0.212 0.234
4 Bedroom 0.323 0.322
or more
Junior High
Grades 6-8
High School
Grades 9-12
11-!J Years 14-17 Years
0.048
0.173
0.298
0.248
0.020
0.184
0.360
0.300
Adults
18-up
1.700
1.881
2.158
2.594
TOTAL
Per Unit
2.017
2.899
3.764
3.770
(i.e. townhouse dwellings and two-family dwellings)
0.048 0.038 1.752 1.990
0.058 0.059 1.829 . 2.932
0.154 0.173 2.173 . 3.145.
Multiple Family Dwellings & Residences
l Bedroom 0.000 0.002 0.001
2 Bedroom 0.047 · 0.086 0.042
· 3 Bedroom 0.052 0.234 . 0.123
or more
0.001
0.046
0.118
1.754
1.693
2.526
1.758
1.914
3.053.
(
VILLAGE OF DWIGHT
EXHIBIT "C"
SCHOOL IMPACT FEE FOR RESIDENTIAL PERMITS
Effective January 1, 2DD6, this Residential Impact fee for local Dwight Schools will be $.90 per
· square foot of the residential building, distributed as follows:
Residential Dwellings:
K-5 $.40 per square foot
6-8 $.20 per square foot
High School $.30 per square foot
VILLAGE OF DWIGHT
EXHIBIT "D"
IMPACT FEE COST CHARTS·.
Section I: DEVELOPER'S FEES:
SCHOOL LAND Contribution
Number ofK-12 Children (Exhibit A) divided by maximum
recommended number of students in Chart I __ (multiplied) times the minimum .
number of acres per school site in Chart I = (equals) (number
of acres needed ).
SCHOOL CASH CONTRIBUTION in lieu of School Land
Number of Acres needed (from above) (multiplied) times
the fair market value of improved land per Section 6-5-5 (E) ___ _
=(equals) (school cash .contribution required)
SCHOOL CASH Contribution
Number ofK-12 Children (Exhibit A)· (multiplied) times $1,000.00
= (equals) (school cash donation required).
Additional S~hool Service CASH Contribution
Number ofK-12 Children (Exhibit A) (multiplied) times ·
$5,000.00 =(equals) (additional cash school donation required) ..
PARKLAND Contribution
Number of residents (Exhibit B) __ divided by 1,000 (multiplied)
times 11 (acres per 1,000 people)= (equals) (park land required).
Cash Contribution in lieu of Park Land
Acreage of park land required contribution {above) ____ (multiplied)
times $45,000 per acre (fair market value)= (equals)_· ___ _
* The cash contributions required in this Section shall be payable before
acceptance of the Final Plat by the Village. ·
*The .land contributions required by this Section shall be conveyed within 180 days
after a written request by the Village.
( ( '
(
l
(
-S.ection II.: Bl)JLDER'S FEES:
Schools.Impact Fee:
Square Footage ____ (multiplied) times $0.90 =(equals) __ _
Fire Protection District Fee
$200.00 per dwelling
' .
*The cash contributions required in this Section shall be payl!lble upon· the
application for the building permit. ·
SECTION 7 .00 - GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL
7.01 - PLAN COMMISSION GUIDELINES
A. Particular Attention of the Plan Commission. The Plan Conunission, In the
examination of subdivision plans for approval, and in the application of this
ordinance, shall take into consideration the requirements of the conununity and the
best use of the land being subdivided. Particular attention shall be gh:en to width
and location of streets, suitable sanitary utilities, storm water drainage, lot sizes and
arrangements, as well as local requirements such as parks and playgrounds, schools
and recreation sites, and other public uses.
B. Conformity with Comprehensive Plan. The Plan Conunission shall especially
require that all subdivisions conform to the provisions and conditions of the
Comprehensive Plan. Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision does not
conform to the provisions of the Comprehensive Plan.
C. Area Plan Required. Where a tract of land proposed for a subdivision is part of a
larger, logical subdivision unit in relation to the Village as a whole, the Plan
Conunission may, before reconunending approval, cause to be prepared a plan for
the entire area or neighborhood, such plan to be used by the Plan Commission as an
aid in judging the proposed plat.
D. Storm Water Provisions Required. The Plan Commission shall not recor,nmend.
for approval by the Village Board any plat of subdivision which does not make
adequate provision for storm or flood water runoff channels or baslns.
E. Preseryation of Natural Features. In all subdivisions due regard shall be given to
the preservation of natural features such as large trees, watercourses, historical sites
or structures, and similar features.
7.02- UNSUITABLE LAND
No land shall be subdivided for any use which is determined by the Plan Commission and
the Village Board after investigation by the Village Engineer, to be unsuitable for such use
by reason of flooding or bad drainage, adverse earth or rock formation or topography, or
any other feature likely to be harmful to the health, safety' or welfare of the future
residents in the proposed subdivision or of the community. However,. if the subdivider
agrees to make improvements which will, in the opinion of the Village Engineer, make the
area safe for occupancy and provide adequate lot and street drainage and storm water
detention facilities, the subdivision may then be approved.
12
•I '
For flood limits refer to: The Dwight Zoning Ordinance and, when available, any Flood
Prone Maps as prepared by the Federal government or any Flood Maps prepared by the
U.S. Geological Survey.
7.03 - DEDICATION OF LAND FOR PUBLIC USE
A. Acceptance of Designated Land. When a final plat of a subdivision has been
approved by the Village Board and all other required approvals are obtained and
the plat is recorded, that approval shall constitute acceptance for the purpose
designated on the plat of all lands shown on the plat as dedicated to the public,
excepting street and utility dedications which shall be accepted only after
inspection and recommendation by the Village Engineer.
B. Refusal of Designated Land. Whenever a preliminary plan includes a
proposed dedication of land to public use and the Plan Commission finds that
such land is not required or not suitable for public use, the Plan Commission
may either refuse to approve such dedication or require the rearrangement of
lots in the proposed subdivision to include such land.
C. Minimum Dedication. A minimum of five (5) percent of land shall be
. dedicated for public use, other than land dedicated for streets and right-of-ways,
as determined by the President and Board of Trustees and the Plan Commission.
Right-of-way not included in minimum dedication.
7 .04 - RESERVATION OF PUBLIC SPACES AND SITES
A. Plan to Show Public Land. Whenever a tract to be subdivided includes a
proposed street, highway, or parkway, or proposed site for a park, playground,
school or other public use as indicated on the Official Map of the Village of
Dwight, such space shall be suitably incorporated by the developer into his
subdivision plat after proper determination of its necessity by the Plan
Commission and the appropriate Village office or other public agency involved
in the acquisition and use of each such site.
B. Adequate Open Space Required
1. Flood Plain Areas. The Village Board may, when it deems it necessary for
the health, safety, or welfare of the present and future population of the area
and necessary to the conservation of water, drainage, and sanitary facilities,
prohibit subdivision of any portion of the property which lies within the
flood plain of any stream or drainage course. These flood plain areas shall
be preserved from any and all destruction or damage resulting from clearing,
grading, or dumping of earth, waste material, or stumps.
13
2. Park and Playground Sites. Unless appropriate provision for dedication or
donation of park or playground sites has been made by the Village Board in
a previous action, any required parks or playgrounds shall be acquired by
the appropriate village, county or state agency.
C. Acquisition of Land for Public Use. The Plan Commission shall consider all
preliminary plans and adopted or proposed studies related thereto, to determine the
need for acquisition for public use of any of the land included in the preliminary
plan. Land may be acquired for: parks, playgrounds, or other public recreation
areas public purposes as provided by law.
1. Referral to Public Body. The Plan Commission shall refer the plat to
the public body concerned with acquisition for its consideration and
report. The Plan Commission may propose alternate areas for such
acquisition and shall allow the public body or agency thirty (30) days for
reply. The agency's recommendation, if affirmative, shall include a map
showing the boundaries and area of the parcel to be acquired and an
estimate of the time required to complete the acquisition.
2. Notice to Property Owner. Upon receipt of an affiirnative report from
an acquiring agency, the Plan Commission shall notify the property
owner and shall designate on the preliminary plan and final plat that area
proposed to be acquired by the public body.
3. Duration of Land Reservation. The acquisition of land reserved by a
public agency on the preliminary plan or final plat shall be initiated
within twelve (1 2) months of notification in writing, from the owner that
he intends to develop the land. The twelve (12) month period shall
commence from the date of approval of the final plat or the written
notification, whichever is later.
Failure on the part of the public agency to initiate acquisition within the
prescribed twelve (12) months shall result in the removal of the
"reserved" designation from the property involved and the freeing of the
property for private development.
4. The value of such land shall be established by three qualified appraisers;
one of whom shall be appointed by the Plan Commission, one by the
subdivider, and one of whom shall be mutually agreed upon by the other
two. Should the Village Board decide to acquire such premises, then and
in that case, it shall make arrangements to pay the subdivider therefore,
the appraised value as determined by the above described appraisers, or a
sum that is mutually agreed upon. The Village Board may accept any
donation of land as above described should the subdivider desire to
contribute the same to the Village.
14
!
(
7.05 - CONTRIBUTION OF LAND FOR PUBLIC SCHOOL SITES OR OF FUNDS
IN LIEU THEREOF
A.
B.
Contribution of Sites or Funds Required. No final plat shall I be approved
until such time as the subdivider shall have fully complied with the provisions of
this ordinance by either contributing land for public school sites to the school
districts situated wholly or in part within the area depicted in such plat or by
contributing funds in lieu of contributing land to any such school district, unless
such requirements are waived by the Village Board after recommendation by the
Plan Commission. Such contribution shall be based on acreage allotments
uniquely attributable to the particular subdivision for which approval is sought,
determined in accordance with the following criteria:
1. School Demographic Study. The school demographic study required by
Subsection 8.03 of this ordinance to be prepared and submitted by the
developer in conjunction with the Preliminary Plan of Subdivision.
2. Official School District Policy. An official resolution from the
governing board of each school district affected setting forth the official
policy of such school district as to school classifications, maximum
number of students for a school in each classification, and the minimum
recommended number of acres needed for school sites in each school
classification.
Village Board Makes Final Determination. Upon detennination of the specific
acreage allotments for each school classification, within each school district, the
Village Board may give notice to the subdivider that such acreage allotment
represents the burden uniquely and specifically attributable to the development of
such subdivision; and the subdivider may thereupon be required to contribute the
number of acres which is detennined to be the acreage allotment to each school
district affected and to enter into an agreement with such school districts for the
subsequent improvement of said land, so that the site or sites shall be improved land
as herein defined.
C. Transfer of Site to Public. Such contribution to each school district may be made
either by a legal dedication of such acreage allotment and the land represented
thereby, by indication on the final plat so dedicating such property to said school
district, or by conveying fee simple title thereto by separate instrument of
conveyance.
D. Contribution of Site Prior to Final Plat Approval. Dedication or conveyance of
such title may be a condition precedent to the approval of the final plat. If the
Village Board finds that it would not be in the best interests of the school districts to
require the dedication of all or a portion of school sites within a given subdivision,
the Village Board may require the subdivider to contribute funds, in lieu of such
acreage allotment, to such school districts.
15
E. Site Improvements Covered by Letter of Credit. All land improvements required
by this ordinance shall be provided for all dedicated public lands to the extent they
are required for non-public lands within a subdivision, and shall be included in any
agreement as required by this ordinance.
F. C st ibution of Funds in Lieu of Site. In the event that it is determined by the
Vi ge Board that it is not in the best interest of the school districts to require any
such dedication or conveyance of land, the Village Board may then require the subdivider
to pay to any such school district, in lieu of such acreage allocations for
each school classification, a reasonable sum of money found to be the fair cash
market value of the total allotment, said sum to be determined by multiplying the
number of acres by the fair cash market value of each acre of improved land. Such
sum of money is hereinafter referred to as "in lieu funds."
G. Payment of in Lien Funds. Upon determining the amount of in lieu of funds due
from a subdivider, the Village Board may require that such funds be paid to any
such school districts either in lump sum prior to approval of the final plat or that
such funds be paid on an installment basis as initial occupancy of each family unit
occurs. Such installment payments shall be determined as follows:
A "per student allocation" shall be determined by dividing the estimated
number of children from each subdivision who shall be served by each
elementary, Jr. High and High School of each school district as determined
by the School Demographic Study accompanying the preliminary
plan, into the total in lieu funds found to be due in lieu of the acreage
allotment pertaining to such school classification. The quotient therefrom
shall be the "per student allocation" for each school classification
for each school district. Thereupon, the Village Board may determine
the percentage of estimated children to be served by each such school
classification from each family unit, and may apply each percentage
against the per student allocation for each school classification for each
school district, thereby determining the payment to be made by the
subdivid~r as each family units is initially occupied.
7.06 - DEDICATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF DETENTION PONDS OR FUNDS
IN LIBU THEREOF
A. Contribution of and Development of Detention Ponds or Funds Required. No
final plat shall be approved until such time as the subdivider shall have fully
completed with the provisions of this ordinance by either submitting detailed plans
and specifications for the development of storm water detention ponds on the
property to be subdivided, or, shall agree to deposit funds for the development of
storm water detention ponds (as required by the development of his subdivision) to
be constructed off the site in an area designated by the Village of Dwight.
16
I •
(
B. Engineering Studies. The developer, at his expense, shall hire a professional·
engineer, registered in the State of Illinois to prepare a detailed study of the
detention required by his subdivision.
C. Location of Detention Ponds. After the required storm water detentfon has been
determined, as specified in paragraph A above, these calculations shall be submitted
to the Village for review by the Village Engineer.
D.
If the detention area required to serve the proposed subdivision is more than three
(3) acre feet in size, the detention pond shall be constructed as part of the
subdivision improvements.
In subdivisions where less than three (3) acre feet of detention is required, the
· developer shall deposit with the Village of Dwight, the funds necessary to provide
for construction of the required detention facilities in conjunction with the required
detention facilities off the site and as designated by the Village of Dwight.
Determination of the Cost of Off -Site Detention Ponds. It is has been
determined (by the criteria specified in paragraph C above) that the detention pond
is to be construction off the site of the subdivision, the developer, at his expense,
shall have a professional engineer, registered in the State of Illinois, prepare an
estimate of the cost to construct the detention pond on the site, including the
comparable cost of the land. The estimate shall be submitted to the Village for
review by the Village Engineer.
Upon approval by the Village, the funds in the amount of the approved estimate
shall be deposited with the Village of Dwight in lieu of the construction of the
detention pond on the site. Once deposited with the Village, the funds shall become
the property of the Village of Dwight. If said funds are on deposit with the Village
for more than ten (10) years, they may be transferred to the General Fund and. used
for any lawful purpose as designated by the President and Board of Trustees.
7.07 - VACATION OF A PLAT OF SUBDIVISION
A. Any plat or any part of a plat may be vacated by the owner of the premises, at any
time before the sale of any lot therein, by a written instrument, to which a copy of
such plat shall be attached, declaring the same to be vacated.
B. Such an instrument shall be approved by the Village Board in like manner as plats
of subdivisions. The Village Board may reject any such instrument which abridges
or destroys any public rights in any of its streets. Such an instrument shall be
executed, acknowledged or approved, and recorded, or filed, in the like manner as
plats of subdivisions; and being duly recorded, or filed, shall operate to destroy the
force and effect of the recording of the plat so vacated, and to divest all public
rights in the streets, and public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described in
such plat.
17
C. When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner herein provided by
all the owners of lots in such plat joining in the execution of such writing.
7.08 - LAND DIVISIONS OTHER THAN SUBDIVISIONS
A. Interpretation and Scope. Any division of a lot, parcel, or tract of land into two
(2) or more parcels or building sites, of five (5) acres or more in size, and not
requiring the development and/or installation of any new street or ease.ment of
access, shall be subject to the provisions of this section.
B. Preliminary Consultation Reguired. Prior to the submission of the certified Plat
of Survey required herein, the divider shall meet with the Plan Commission for the
purpose of minimizing the risk of objections to, or rejection of, the prepared Plat of
Survey, and for the purpose of ascertaining the problems and requirements affecting
his property.
C. Procedure for Approval. The owner or subdivider shall file with the Village Clerk
ten (10) contact prints of a certified Plat of Survey showing the proposed division of
such lots, blocks, parcels, or tracts of land. Ten (10) prints of the Plat of Survey
shall be forwarded to the Plan Commission at least ten (10) days before the next
meeting of the Plan Commission. Not more than fifteen (15) days after the meeting
at which the Plat of Survey is referred to the Plan Commission, the Chairman of the
Plan Commission shall notify the owner or divider whether a new street or
easement of access is required. In the event that a new street or easement of access
is required, the notice shall stipulate that an application for final plat approval
containing such maps, certifications and supporting documents as required by the
Plan Commission shall be filed with the Village Clerk for processing as herein set
forth in this ordinance.
The Plan Commission shall recommend to the Village Board, within forty (40) days
approval, approve conditionally, or reject the proposal. The Village Board shall be
notified in writing of any conditions of approval or the reasons for rejection.
D. Reguirements for Approval
1. Compliance with this Ordinance. To the extent reasonably
practicable, the division of land shall comply with the provisions
of this ordinance governing general requirements, design
standards, and required improvements.
2. Survey. The survey shall be performed and the map prepared by
a Registered Illinois Land Surveyor.
18
(
E.
3. Monuments. All corners shall be monumented as follows:
a. All lot corners shall be moumnented in the field by iron pipes
at least twenty-four (24) inches long and one (1) inch in
diameter, or by round or square iron bars at least twenty-four
(24) inches long.
b. The lines of lots that extend to rivers or streams shall be
monumented in the field by iron pipes at least thirty (30)
inches long and one (1) inch in diameter or by round or
square iron bars at least thirty (30) inches long. These
monuments shall be placed at the point of intersection of the
river or stream lot line with a meander line established, not
less than twenty (20) feet back from the bank of the river or
stream.
Certificates and Affidavits
1. Affidavits Required. The survey map shall include the affidavit of
the surveyor who surveyed and mapped the parcel, typed, lettered, or
reproduced legibly with non-fading black ink, giving a clear and
concise description of the land surveyed by bearings and distances,
commencing with some corner marked and established in the U.S.
Public Land Survey or some corner providing reference to a corner
marked and established in the U.S. Public Land Survey. Such
affidavit shall include the statement of the surveyor to the effect that
he has fully complied with the requirements of this section.
2. Certificates Required. The certificate of approval of the Plan
Commission shall be typed, lettered, or reproduced legibly with nonfading
black ink on the face of the survey map.
F. Filing of the Survey Map. The survey map shall be filed by the Village
and recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of Livingston County.
19
SECTION 8.00 - PROCEDURE FOR SUBDIVISION APPROVAL -
GENERAL GUIDELINES
Any owner of land which is within the corporate limits of the Village of Dwight
or within one and one-half (l Vz) miles of such corporate limits on
unincorporated land, wishing to divide the same into lots or to resubdivide for
the purpose of sale or assessment, or both, or wishing to dedicate streets, alleys,
or other lands for public use, shall follow the procedures and requirements of
this ordinance.
8.01 - PRELIMINARY CONSULTATION
Prior to the submission of the preliminary plan of any proposed subdivision
within the jurisdiction of this ordinance, the subdivider shall make known his
intentions to the Village Board. During this preliminary or pre-application
stage, the following actions shall be taken:
A. Action by the Subdivider. The subdivider shall meet with the Village
Administrator for the purpose of presenting a general outline of his
proposal, including but not necessarily limited to the following:
1. Written Notification. Written notification in the form of a letter of
intent from the subdivider to the Village Clerk establishing the subdivider'
s intent to develop the land.
2. General Subdivision Information. General subdivision information
that shall describe or outline the existing conditions of the site and
the proposed development as necessary to supplement the submitted
plans. This information shall include data on existing covenants,
land characteristics, and available community facilities and utilities;
and information describing the subdivision proposal, such as number
of residential lots and units broken down by type and bedroom count,
typical lot width and depth, price range, business areas, school,
playground and park areas, and other public areas, proposed
protective covenants and proposed utilities, street improvements and
soil boring test results.
3. Sketch Plan. A plan on a topographic survey that shall show in
simple sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots and other
features in relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a
free hand (or better quality) sketch made directly on a print of the
topographic survey. The sketch plan shall include the existing
topographic data and contours of not less than five (5) foot intervals.
This shall be attached to U.S.G.S. topographic data.
4. Tentative Eneineering Proposals. Tentative engineering proposals
regarding water supply, sewage disposal, storm water drainage, and
street improvements.
20
f
'
(
(
B. Action by the Village. The Village Administrator shall discuss the
proposed subdivision with the subdivider and so advise of any Village
plans or projects which might affect the proposed subdivision, the
procedural steps, design and improvement standards, and the general
planning requirements. After which, the Village Administrator in
conjunction with the Village Engineer shall proceed with the following
investigations:
1. Zoning Check. Check the existing zoning of the tract and advise the
subdivider If a zoning change is necessary or desirable.
2. Public Facility Impact. Determine the adequacy of existing or
proposed schools, parks, and other public spaces in the vicinity of the
proposed subdivision
3. Site Inspection. Inspect the site or otherwise determine its
relationship to major streets, utility systems, and adjacent land uses,
and determine any unusual problerns in regard to topography,
utilities, flooding, etc.
4. School Sites. Advise the developer of the potential acreage
allotment, or funds in lieu thereof, to be donated and utilized for
public school sites based upon the developer's estimates of the
number and type of dwelling units to be constructed, the potential
needs of each affected school district, and the Comprehensive Plan or
Official Map of the Village of Dwight.
5. Comprehensive Plan Conformity. Advise the developer of the
Comprehensive Plan. which delineates the areas to be served by either
public and/or private water and/or sanitary sewer service. This will
determine the feasibility of the proposed subdivision, the sizes of the
utilities, and the lots therein.
8.02 - PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAN
A. Action by the Subdivider. The subdivider shall cause to be prepared a
preliminary plan, which plan shall include all of the property owned or
controlled by the applicant, which properties are adjacent to or considered to be
contiguous to the proposed subdivision, together with improvement plans and
other supplementary material as specified shall be submitted to the Village
Clerk, with written application for approval. Accompanying this preliminary
plan shall be a School Demographic Study, prepared in accordance with Subsection
8.03 of this ordinance. Seven (7) copies of the preliminary plan and all
accompanying documentation including the School Demographic Study and the
required filing fee shall accompany the application.
B. Action by the Plan Commission. The Village Administrator shall refer the
preliminary plan to the Dwight Plan Commission to schedule a public hearing.
21
The Plan Commission shall obtain the required recommendations from the
affected school districts, and other Village officials as necessary. The Plan
Commission shall:
1. Make Recommendations. Approve, conditionally approve or
disapprove the proposed preliminary subdivision plan and submit its
written recommendations, which shall include the recommendations of
the Village Engineer, to the Village Board of Trustees and subdiyider; or
2. Advise Subdivider. If the Plan Commission finds that changes,
additions or corrections are required on the preliminary plan, the Plan
Commission shall so advise the subdivider in writing. The subdivider
may resubmit the preliminary plan to the Plan Commission without
paying an additional fee, for its consideration at the next meeting of said
Commission. The Plan Commission shall at said meeting approve or
disapprove the preliminary plan and submit its recommendation in
writing, which shall include the recommendations of the Village
Engineer and Village Administrator, to the Village Board of Trustees
and the subdivider.
3. Notification to Subdivider. The Plan Commission shall notify the
owner or subdivider in writing as to the time and place of the Plan
Commission meeting of which he will be afforded an opportunity of
being heard.
C. Action by the Village Board. The Village Board of Trustees shall accept or reject
said plan within one (1) month after its next regular meeting following the action of
the Plan Commission. The applicant and the Village Board of Trustees may
mutually agree to extend the one month period.
1. Qualifications of Approval. The following qualifications shall govern
approval of the preliminary plan:
a. Approval of a preliminary Plan by the Dwight Plan Commission and
the Village Board of Trustees is tentative only, involving merely the
general acceptability of the layout as submitted.
b. The Dwight Plan Commission and Village Board of Trustees may
require such changes or revisions as are deemed necessary in the
interest of the needs of the community.
c. Approval of the preliminary plan shall be effective for a maximum
period of three (3) years, unless upon application of the developer,
the Village Board of Trustees grants an extension. The application
for said extension shall not require an additional filing fee, or the
submittal of additional copies of the plan of subdivision.
22
{
'(
(
2. Notice of Approval. Upon approval of the preliminary plan by the Board.
of Trustees, the following Notice of Approval shall be stamped upon four
(4) prints thereof, and required signatures affixed:
NOTICE OF APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAN
"Notice is hereby given that the preliminary plan of a subdivision sho_wn hereon
has received conditional approval by the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Dwight, Illinois, and upon compliance by the subdivider with requirements or
qualifications governing the approval of preliminary plans and with other
revisions and, stipulations that may be required, the Board of Trustees will
receive the final plat for consideration when submitted by the subdivider in such
form and within such time as required by this ordinance."
NOTICE OF DISAPPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAN
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Dwight, Illinois
Date _________ _ 19"-----
By ________________________ _
President
Attest. _________________________ _
Village Clerk
"Notice is hereby given that the preliminary plan of a subdivision shown hereon
has been disapproved by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Dwight,
Illinois. The reasons for disapproval are as follows:"
D. Distribution of Approved Plans. Ten (10) prints of such approved preliminary
plan shall be distributed by the Village Clerk as follows:
1. One (1) print shall be sent to the Plan Commission;
2. One (1) print shall be sent to each affected school district;
3. One (1) print shall be sent to the Village Engineer;
4. Six (6) prints shall be retained by the Village Clerk for filing and
departmental use; and
5. One (1) print shall be returned to the subdivider.
23
8.03 - PRELIMINARY PLAN REQUIREMENTS
The purpose of the preliminary plaq is to allow the Plan Commission, the Board of ·
Trustees, and other public bodies to determine whether the proposed layout of the land in
question is satisfactory from the standpoint of the public interest. The preliminary plan
shall be prepared by a qualified professional, trained and experienced in the layout of
subdivisions.
The following graphic and descriptive items are normally required to be shown on the
preliminary plan and the accompanying application for approval. The lack of information
under any item specified herein, unless waived or improper information supplied by the
applicant, shall be cause for disapproval of a preliminary plan.
A. Application for Approval. Written application by the owner, or his agent, for
approval shall accompany each preliminary plan and contain the following
information:
1. Name for File Identification
a. Name of subdivision if property is within an existing subdivision.
b. Proposed name if not within a previously platted subdivision. The
proposed name shall not duplicate the name of any plat previously
recorded in Livingston County.
c. Name of property if no subdivision name has been chosen. (This is
commonly the name by which the property is locally known.)
2. Location and Description of Property. Location of property by
government lot, section, township, range, and county.
3. Basic Facts and Proposal Pertaining to the Property
a. Size of tract in acres or of existing lots, if any, in square feet.
b. Existing zoning classification of property and any rezoning proposed
to be requested.
c. Number of lots proposed in subdivision.
d. Area of lots proposed; minimum, average, and maximum.
e. Proposed linkage with water and sewer facilities.
24
(
B.
(
f. Any other proposals, such as parcels of land intended to be
dedicated, conveyed, or reserved for public use, and the conditions
proposed for such disposal and use.
g. Drainage area that goes through the property being subdivided from
the outside of the developed land.
4. Information as to Ownership. Preparation of Plat, and Subdivision
a. Name and address, including telephone number of legal owner or
agent of property and citation of last instrument, conveying title
to each parcel of property involved in the proposed subdivision,
giving grantor, grantee, date, and land records reference.
b. Citation of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements affecting
the property.
c. Existing covenants on the property, if any.
d. Name and address, including telephone number, of the
professional responsible for the subdivision design shall be shown
on the preliminary plat as submitted - Registered Professional
Engineer of Illinois, responsible for the design of public
improvements, and Registered Illinois Land Surveyor,
responsible for surveys.
School Demographic Study and Determination of Acreage Allotment
1. Demographic Study Requirements. A school demographic study shall
be prepared by the subdivider and shall be submitted for approval in
conjunction with the preliminary plan. It shall include, but need not be
limited to the following:
a. The number and types of dwelling units to be constructed upon
approval of the plan, the density of such dwelling units on the
land, and a breakdown of each type of dwelling unit by the
number of bedrooms.
b. Estimates of the number of children to be generated from the
different types of dwelling units based on general standards
approved by and on file with .the Village of Dwight.
c. Estimates of the number of children to be generated in each
school classification of each school district situated wholly or
partially within the area depicted in any such plat.
25
2. From the estimates made in this school demographic study, the subdivider
shall estimate the added acreage necessitated for each school
classification of each school district for school sites resulting from
the estimated additional school children to be generated from the
particular subdivision. Such estimate shall be in accordance with the
following:
a. Each school district's official policy as to the various
school classifications of the district, the maximum recommended
number of students for each school classification,
and the minimum recommended number of acres for
school sites under each such school classification shall be
as filed with and as approved by the Village Board.
b. Estimates by the subdivider of this added acreage requirement
shall be herein referred to as the "acreage allotment"
as to each such school classification.
c. The acreage allotment for each school district and school
classification shall be determined by obtaining the ratio of
the estimated children to be served in each school.
3. Determination of Acreage Allotment. Final determination of
such acreage allotment may be made by the Board of Trustees
based upon the demographic information submitted to the Village
Board by the affected school districts.
C. Accompanying Documentation Required. The preliminary plan of subdivision
shall be accompanied by:
1. Annexation Statement. A statement that the proposed subdivision
(where contiguous) is or is not to be annexed to the Village.
2. Preliminary Plan for Sewer and Water. Either a preliminary
engineering plan for sewer, water and storm sewers or a written
statement setting forth general plans for such improvements and
indicating the method to be employed to overcome particular
problems that may be encountered with the development of the
proposed subdivision.
3. Soils Analysis. A soils analysis for each proposed subdivision shall
be completed by an engineer registered in the State of Illinois and
shall be of sufficient scope to point out potential ground absorption,
runoff, flooding deficiencies, the presence of unstable soils or of
soils of such low bearing capacity as to constitute problems for
26
(
conventional construction, or the presence of subsurface rock that
would affect the installation of underground improvements on the
provisions of aboveground improvements. If the subdivision
contains questionable soil and, in the opinion of the Village
Engineer, additional soil investigations, borings or other soil tests are
necessary to determine the nature and extent of such questionable
material, the owner or developer shall retain or cause to L)c retained
the services of a competent testing laboratory to perform the needed
investigations.
a. Copies of the completed reports prepared by the testing
laboratory shall be filed with the Village Engineer and Plan
Commission.
b. Neither the Village Engineer nor the Village shall be liable
for costs connected with the tests, borings or interpretations
of results of such work.
4. Protective Covenants. Draft of protective covenants, whereby the
subdivider proposes to regulate land use in the subdivisions and
otherwise protect the proposed development.
D. Drawings and Data Required. The preliminary plan and required accompanying
maps shall be drawn on reproducible medium in a manner that clear and legible
prints can be made therefrom, and shall be at a scale of not more than two hundred
feet to the inch (l" = 200'), it shall show all existing conditions required below and
shall show all proposals including the following:
1. Identification and Description. Identification and Description shall
be as follows:
a. Name of the Subdivision: not a duplication of a name of any
plat heretofore recorded in the Village or in Livingston
County, Illinois.
b. Location of the Subdivision: location by section, township,
and range, or by other approved legal description, including
present tract designation according to official county records.
c. Survey of the Subdivision: boundary line survey on an
accompanying map which is prepared and certified by a
registered land surveyor.
d. Designer of the Subdivision: name and address of the site
planner and/or engineer.
e. Owner of the Subdivision: name and address of the owner
and/ or subdivider.
27
2. Existing Conditions. Data required as a basis for the preliminary plan
shall include existing conditions as follows, except when otherwise
specified by the Plan Connnission.
a. Boundary Lines: In accordance with 1 c above.
b. Total Acreage: within the boundary lines.
c. Existing Zoning Districts: both in proposed subdivision and
adjacent tracts.
d. Existing Improvements: location, widths, and names of all
existing or previously platted streets or other rights-of-way
showing type of improvement (if any), railroad and utility
rights-of-way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent
buildings and structures and their street address numbers,
easements, and section and corporate lines within the tract and
to a distance of one hundred (100) feet beyond the tract.
e. Utilities on and Adjacent to the Tract: location and size of
existing sewer lines, water mains, culverts, or other underground
facilities within the tract and to a distance of one
hundred (100) feet beyond the tract - also indicating such data
as locations and surface and invert grade elevations of catchbasins,
manholes, and fire hydrants. If water mains and
sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract, indicate the
direction and distance to, and the size of nearest usable facilities.
f. Location Map: drawn at a scale of not less than one inch
equals one thousand feet (1" = 1,000') or larger, showing
boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided land
within an area bounded by nearest arterial streets or other
natural boundaries, but not less than five hundred (500') feet
beyond the subdivisions located beyond the Village limits,
identifying type of use and ownership of surrounding land and
showing alignments of existing streets.
g. Topographic Data: data including existing contours at
vertical intervals of not more than two (2) feet, except in
unusual topographical conditions, such vertical intervals may
be required to be altered as determined by the Village
Engineer, (topographic data shall refer to United States
Geodetic Survey or adjusted Village of Dwight Datum).
28
(
\
(
(
h. Other Conditions on the Tract: water courses, marshed,
rock outcrop, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one (1)
foot or more in caliper at one (1 ) foot above ground level,
houses, barns, shacks, and other significant features.
i. Reference to Monuments: locations of or reference to
locations of existing monuments or survey markers used in
preparation of survey and grade elevation of each bench
mark.
j. Proposed Public Improvements: highway or other major
improvements planned by public authorities for future
construction on or near the tract.
k. Easements: location, width, and purpose.
I. Other Conditions on Adjacent Land: approximate direction
and gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or
retaining walls, character and location of buildings, railroads,
power lines, towers, and other nearby non-residential land
uses or adverse influences; and owner of adjacent unplatted
land (for adjacent platted land refer to subdivision plat by
name, recording date, and number and show approximate
percent built-up, typical lot size and dwelling type.)
m. Drainage area that goes through the property being subdivided
from the outside of the developed land.
3. Subdivision Design Features. Subdivision design features shall be as
follows:
a. Accord With Comprehensive Plan: The preliminary plan
shall be in accord with the Comprehensive Plan as amended
from time to time.
b. Proposed Zoning Changes: The Village of Dwight zoning
districts proposed for the subdivision shall be shown.
c. Layout of Streets: showing right-of-way widths and street
names (not duplication the name of any street heretofore used
in the Village or its environs unless such street is an extension
of or in line with an already named street in which event that
name shall be used) and showing proposed through streets
extended to the boundaries of the subdivision and approximate ·
grades and gradients. The street numbering system as
adopted by the Village shall be adhered to.
29
d. Other Rights-of-Way: location of width of pedestrian
ways, and utility easements.
e. Location of Utilities: if not shown on other exhibits.
f. Lotting: layout: total number of lots, and dimensions
on the lot containing the minimum width and depth and
on the lot containing the maximum width and depth, lot
numbers and block numbers.
g. Sites to be Reserved or Dedicated: sites, if any, to be
reserved or dedicated for schools, parks, playgrounds or
other public uses. Such sites shall be designated by
letter or number.
h. Setback Lines: minimum front and side street building
lines indicating dimensions.
i. Sewers and Drainage: proposed location of sewer lines
and storm water drains and proposed method of sewage
and waste disposal including sufficient information to
show the intent of surface drainage and detention and/or
retention facilities conforming to minimum standards of
the Village of Dwight.
Such layout shall show the storm and sanitary sewers,
stubs, valves, line hydrants and water mains including
size, capacity and location. Included with this shall be
specifications for the storm and sanitary sewers and
water mains, and a written statement by the subdivider
or his engineer describing the adequacy of these
proposed facilities as well as the effect they will have on
existing or future facilities.
j. Drainage Plan: Proposed location and direction of flow
for lot drainage systems within blocks where natural
drainage must be maintained. If deemed necessary by
the Planning Commission, detailed grading plans of
blocks and lots will be required as part of the
construction plans for the subdivision.
k. Land Use Intent: sites, if any, for multi-family
dwellings, shopping centers, churches, industry, or
other non~public uses exclusive of single family
dwellings.
30
(
\
'(
(
8.04 - PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS
A. Construction Plans Required. After the approval of the preliminary plan and
prior to filing an application for approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall
submit to the Village Clerk three (3) complete sets of construction plans and
specifications for the land improvements required by this ordinance along with a
single estimate of the cost of the proposed improvements. Said plans and
specifications shall bear the seal of the design engineer and shall incluife the
following documents:
1. Topograghic Map. A topographic map of the proposed subdivision at a
minimum scale of one inch equals two hundred (1" = 200') feet, the
limits of which shall extend at least one hundred (100) feet beyond the
limits of the proposed development or a grading plan of the subdivision
showing the existing grades, the flood grade of the proposed structures,
the direction of flow of surface runoff, the finished grade of all corners
of a lot, etc.
2. Construction Drawings-. Construction drawings with a minimum
horizontal scale of one inch equals fifty feet (l" = 50') and a vertical
scale of one inch equals five feet (l" = 5' ). Existing and proposed
construction are to be shown on these drawings.
3. Detail Sheets. Detail sheets of the Village of Dwight showing the
various standards for streets, manholes, catch basins, valve boxes, sewer
and water services, shall be attached to and made a part of the
subdivider' s construction drawings.
4. Specifications. Complete set of specifications covering the work to be
done.
B. Construction Plans Approval. The Village Clerk shall forward two (2)
complete sets of such copies of construction plans and specifications for land
improvements and grading plans to the Village Engineer.
1. Review by Village Engineer. The Village Engineer and other public
officials having jurisdiction shall approve such engineering and
specifications or set forth the revisions necessary for approval. Based
upon the conditions of approval of the plans and specifications the
subdivider shall have prepared, by a registered engineer, final plans and
specifications covering such required land improvements. Such plans
and specifications shall be approved by the Village Engineer and other
public officials having jurisdiction and such approval shail be certified on
the final plat.
31
8.05 - CONSTRUCTION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
A. Installation Required . After approval of the preliminary plan by the Village
Board, and after approval of the plans and specifications for required improvements
by the Village Engineer, and Board of Trustees, the subdivider shall install street
and utility improvements, and other improvements indicated on the plan, in
accordance with specifications hereinafter provided. If such improvements are not
installed as required at the time the final plat is submitted for approval, the
subdivider shall, before the recording of his plat, enter into a contract with the
Village of Dwight agreeing to install the required improvements. Such contract
shall be in such form as required by Section 8.06 of this ordinance.
B. Deeding of Improvements. All underground public improvements up to the
property line shall be deeded over to the Village of Dwight and become the property
of the Village after approval by the Village Engineer and when accepted by
resolution of the Village Board. All labor and material for installing underground
public improvements shall be furnished by the subdivider. All testing required for
acceptance shall be done by the subdivider under the supervision of the Village
Engineer.
8.06 - AGREEMENTS AND GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENTS
The requirements of this section shall be complied with prior to the approval and recording of
a final plat of subdivision.
A. Action by the Subdivider. Prior to the filing of an application for a final plat, the
subdivider shall submit the following to the Village Clerk:
1. Statement of Agreement. A statement of agreement that:
a. The land improvements, required by this ordinance, shall be
completed by the owner or subdivider in accordance with the
plans and specifications approved by the Village Engineer.
b. Four (4) sets of as built plans, as required by Section 10.00
herein, shall be submitted by the owner or subdivider.
c. If payment of in lieu funds is to be made on an installment basis,
the subdivider shall inform the Building Department in writing,
within five (5) days of any such initial occupancy of a family unit
and also submit any such payment concurrent therewith to the
Village Collector for ultimate payment to the appropriate school
district.
d. All improvements, and the as built plans of said improvement,
shall be completed by the owner or subdivider within two (2)
years following approval of the final plat by the President and
Board of Trustees.
32
(
(
(
e. That no home in any block shall be occupied for longer than nine
(9) months without all sidewalks, curb and gutter, and roadway°
base and surfacing being completed for the entire block by the
owner or subdivider, or whenever at least seventy five (7 5)
percent of a designated block has completed homes on it, then the
owner or subdivider shall have completed constructing all of the
sidewalks, curb, gutter and street pavements in that block.
2. Letter of Credit. An irrevocable Letter of Credit naming the Village of
Dwight as beneficiary thereto. Said letter of Credit shall be from a
sound and reputable banking or financial institution authorized to do
business in the State of Illinois. Said Letter of Credit shall be in effect
for the length of time required to complete the public improvements and
in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of all land improvements as
required by ordinance. Said Letter of Credit shall be reviewed by the
Village Attorney and meet the approval of the President and Board of
Trustees.
B. Action by the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall not certify the approval of
the President and the Board of Trustees on the final plat until the requirements of
this section have been completed.
c. Guarantee of Completed Improvements. Upon completion of the improvements
covered by the Letter of Credit, the subdivider shall notify the President and Board
of Trustees in writing and request inspection of the complete improvements. The
subdivder shall submit, with the request for inspection, an as built plan covering the
improvements to be accepted. Said as built plan shall I meet the requirements of
Section 1 0.00 herein. After the improvements have been inspected by the Village
and found to be complete, but before acceptance by the Village Board, the
subdivider shall furnish a Letter of Credit, guaranteeing the improvements against
faulty workmanship and/or materials for a period of one (1) year after acceptance.
Said Letter of Credit shall be of an amount equal to at least ten (10) percent of the
total cost of the improvements to be accepted.
33
Since a Letter of Credit is already on file guaranteeing completion of the same
improvements, the subdivider need not furnish the Letter of Credit before
acceptance by the Village Board. However, said acceptance by the President and
Board of Trustees shall release an amount equal to not more than ninety (90)
percent of the original Letter of Credit to enable the subdivider to furnish a new
Letter of Credit equal to ten (10) percent of the cost of the improvements for one (1)
year after acceptance.
D. Letter of Credit Required.
1 . The Letter of Credit shall be substantially in the same form as shown herein:
LETTER OF CREDIT
THE BANK OF __________ _
(Name)
DATE: ______ _
The Village of Dwight, Illinois
Gentlemen:
We hereby authorize you to draw at sight on the (Name of bank) of~up
to an aggregate amount of /100 United States Dollars, for account of: __
(Name of Developer)
This Letter of Credit is available against presentation of your draft accompanied by: a
signed statement by the Village Engineer of the Village of Dwight, Illinois, that <Name of
Develo er has
failed to complete the required construction of street and off-site improvements for -
Subdivision, in accordance with Village Specifications and the Letter Agreement, dated
________ , by the Village of Dwight, Illinois, and
This credit is subject to the "Uniform Customs and Practice for Documentary Credits,
(1962 Revision), International Chamber of Commerce Brochure No. 222."
We hereby agree to honor each draft drawn under and in compliance with the terms of this
credit, if duly presented (together with the documents as specified) at this office in Illinois,
on or before --------
Drafts under this credit should bear upon their face the words: "Drawn Under the __ _
(Name of
------------ of~------- , Credit No,_,. _____ _
Bank)
dated __________ _ "
34
(
(
(
8.07 ACCEPTANCE OF REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS
A.
B.
Acceptance of Improvements by Resolution. Upon the completion of construction
of any public improvements required by this ordinance, in conformance with
approved engineering plans and specifications, the subdivider shall prepare and
submit to the Village Clerk four (4) sets of as built plans and certification by the
Village Engineer that such public improvements have been satisfactorily completed
in accordance with the approved engineering plans and specifications. The Village
Board will enact a resolution accepting said improvements.
Final Plat Approval Not Acceptance of Improvements. If any final plat of
subdivision contains public streets or thoroughfares which are therein dedicated as
such, whether located within the corporate limits of the Village, or all or in part
outside thereof, or contains existing streets located outside of said corporate limits,
the approval of the final plat by the Board of Trustees or the subsequent annexation
of the property to the Village shall not constitute an acceptance thereon or therein,
irrespective of any act or acts by an officer, agent, or employee of the Village with
respect to such streets or improvements. The acceptance of such streets or
thoroughfares shall be made only by the adoption of a resolution by the Board of
Trustees, after there has been filed with the Village Clerk a certificate by the
Village Engineer certifying that all improvements required to be constructed or
installed in or upon such streets or thoroughfares, in connection with the approval
of the plat of subdivision by the Board of Trustees, have been fully completed and
the construction or Installation thereof has been approved by him.
8.08 - PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT
A. Action by the Subdivider
1. Application to Village Clerk. Application for approval of the
final plat including all engineering drawings, shall be submitted
in writing to the Village Clerk and shall be accompanied by the
fee and engineering review as required in these regulations. The
application shall be submitted at least ten (10) days prior to the
regular meeting of the Plan Commission for its review and
recommendations for approval or disapproval.
2. Conformance with Preliminary Plan. The final plat shall
conform substantially to the preliminary plan as approved and, if
desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of
the approved preliminary plan which he proposes to record and
develop at the time; provided, however, that such portion
conforms to all requirements of these regulations.
35
B. Action by the Plan Commission. Within two (2) months after its meeting, at which
the application for approval of the final plat is reviewed, the Plan Commission shall
recommend approval or disapproval to the Village Board. If the Plan Commission
recommends approval, it shall affix upon the plat the certifying signature of its
Chairman. If it recommends disapproval, it shall set forth its reasons in its own
records and provide the applicant with a copy.
C. Action by the Board of Trustees.
1. Plat Submitted to Board of Trustees. After the Plan Commission
makes its recommendation concerning the final plat to the Village Board
and the fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations, one (1)
tracing of the final plat of the subdivision, drawn in ink or tracing cloth
or mylar drafting film not to exceed thirty-six inches by forty-eight
inches (36" x 48 ") in size, shall be submitted to the Village Board of
Trustees for approval or disapproval.
2. Action by Board of Trustees. Action must be taken by the Village
Board of Trustees within two (2) months after the meeting at which the
final plat and all drawings, maps and other documents required have
been submitted for its final determination. The applicant and the Village
Board of Trustees may mutually agree to extend the two (2) month
period.
3. Approved Plat Copies. Upon approval by the Board of Trustees, the
Village Clerk shall receive from the subdivider one (1) cloth or my lar
reproducible print and three (3) contact prints of the approved supporting
documents. The cost of such prints and copies of documents shall be
paid by the subdivider.
a. One (1) contact print of the final Plat, when applicable. one (1 )
copy of the accompanying protective covenants and one (1) copy
of the supporting documents shall be delivered to the Plan
Commission;
b. One (1) contact print and all specifications, drawings, and
estimates shall be delivered to the Village Engineer; and
c. One (1) transparency print and one (1) contact print and all other
supporting documents shall be retained by the Village Clerk.
D. Filing of Final Plat
1. Filing with County. Upon approval by the Village Board of Trustees, the
Developer shall record the plat with the Livingston County Recorder within
three (3) months. If construction does not begin within five (5) years from
approval. such plat shall be null and void.
36
(
E.
(
I
(
\
2. Filing for Local Record. The final plat in exact form as approved by
the Board of Trustees, and as filed with the Livingston County Recorder,
shall be filed for local record by the Village Clerk. Such local file copy
shall bear the appropriate documentation number as assigned by the
Livingston County Recorder.
Drawings and Data for Final Approval. The final plat shall be accurately drawn
in ink on tracing cloth or mylar drafting film, in a manner that clear and legible
transparent or contact prints or photostatic copies can be made. The final plat shall be
at a scale of one hundred feet to the inch (l" = 100') on sheets not to exceed thirty-six
by forty eight inches (36" x 48"). Where necessary, the plat may be drawn on several
sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. For large
subdivisions, the final plat may be submitted for approval progressively in contiguous
sections satisfactory to the Plan Commission. The final plat shall show the following:
1. General Information. General information shall be as follows:
a. Boundary Lines: in accordance with Item D of Subsection 8.03.
b. Layout of Streets: showing right-of-way widths and street names
(not duplicating the name of any street heretofore used in the
Village or its environs unless such street is an extension of, or in
line with, an already named street in which event that name shall
be used) and showing proposed through streets extended to the
boundaries of the subdivision.
c. Other Rights-of-Way: location and width of alleys, pedestrian
ways, and utility easements.
d. Sites to be Reserved or Dedicated: sites to be reserved or dedicate
a for schools, parks, playgrounds or other public uses, or for
the exclusive use of property owners within the subdivision.
Such areas shall be designated by letter or number and by legal
description.
e. Accurate Dimensions: accurate angular and lineal dimensions for
all lines, angles, radii, and arcs used to describe all boundaries
including perimeter survey of tract, streets, easements, areas to
be reserved or dedicated for public use, and other 'important
features. Error of closure of boundary line surveys shall not
exceed one in ten thousand (one (1) foot for each ten thousand
(10,000) feet of perimeter survey). Angular error shall not
exceed plus or minus twenty (20) seconds. Lot lines to show
dimensions in feet and hundredths, and when angle occurs in any
lot line between lot corners, the measurement of the angle shall
be shown in degrees, minutes, and seconds. The final plat shall
37
show accurately the location of ail permanent lot markers as
actually installed.
f. Control Points: true angles and distances to the nearest
established street lines and official monuments (not less than three
(3)), which shall be accurately described in the plat by location,
size and elevation, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings, and
similar data on the plat shall be referred.
g. Identification System: an identification system of all blocks and
lots using consecutive numbers for lots within a block and, where
applicable, a street address number in accord with current Village
policies.
h. Correlation with Existing Boundaries: municipal, township, or
section lines accurately correlated to the lines of the subdivision
by distances and angles.
i. Location of Monuments: accurate location of all monuments
which shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, and at
intermediate points as shall be required by the Village Engineer,
and installed in such a manner that they may be located by a
licensed surveyor. All U.S.G.S., State, County, Village, or
other official bench marks, monuments, or triangulation stations
in or adjacent to the property shall be preserved in precise
position.
j. Covenants: protective covenants, or filed as an accompanying
document in form for recording.
k. Setback Lines: proposed building setback lines on all lots and
other sites.
I. Name of Subdivision.
m. Location: by section, township, and range.
n. Title, Scale, North Arrow, Date.
o. Certification: certification by a registered land surveyor
certifying to the accuracy of the survey and plat.
p. Other Data: such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or
dedications as may be required by the Plan Commission in the
enforcement of these regulations.
38
(
(
2. Certification Required. The application for approval of the final
plat shall I not be deemed completed until the following certificates,
other than the Village Clerk Certificate, have been duly executed:
OWNER'S CERTIFICATE*
a.
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF LIVINGSTON)
SS
This is to certify that the undersigned is the owner of the land described in the annexed
plat, and has caused the same to be surveyed and subdivided, as indicated thereon, for
the uses and purposes therein set forth, and does hereby acknowledge and adopt the
same under the style and title thereon indicated.
The undersigned hereby dedicates for public use the lands show thoroughfares, streets,
alleys, and public services, and hereby also reserve for the Illinois Telephone
Company and the Public Service Company, _,,CN,_,_,,am"""e,_) ___ _
the easement provisions which are stated on their standard form which is attached
hereto.
Title
Address
Dated this ____ day of _______ _
* Corporate owner's certificate should be accompanied by a corporate form of
acknowledgment.
NOTARY CERTIFICATE
b.
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF LIVINGSTON )
SS
I, , a Notary Public in and for said County, in the
State aforesaid, do hereby certify that , personally known
to me to be the same persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument
as such owners, appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged that they
39
signed the annexed plat as their own free and voluntary act for the uses and purposes
therein set forth.
Given under my hand and Notarial Seal this _____ , day of. ______ _
Notary Public
SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE
c.
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF LIVINGSTON ) SS
This is to certify that I, , Registered Illinois Land Surveyor
No. , have surveyed and subdivided the following described property:
as shown by the annexed plat which is a correct representation of said survey and subdivision.
All distances are shown in feet and decimals thereof. I further certify that all
regulations enacted by the Board of Trustees relative to plats and subdivisions have
been complied with in the preparation of this plat.
I further certify that no portion of said subdivision lies within five hundred (500) feet of
watercourse tributary to six hundred and forty (640) acres or more.
Given under my hand and seal at ________ , Illinois, this~-- day
of ___ _
Surveyor
40
:(
\
(
(
VILLAGE ENGINEER
d.
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF LIVINGSTON) SS
I , , Village Engineer of the Village of Dwight, Illinois, hereby
certify that the land Improvements described in the annexed plat and the plans and
specifications therefor, meet the minimum requirements of said Village and have been
approved by all public authorities having jurisdiction thereof.
Dated at Dwight, Livingston County, Illinois this __ day of ______ _
Village Engineer
COUNTY CLERK CERTIFICATE
e.
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF LIVINGSTON) SS
I, , County Clerk of Livingston County, Illinois, do hereby
certify that there are no delinquent general taxes, no unpaid forfeited taxes, and no
redeemable tax sales against any of the land included in the annexed plat.
Given under my hand and seal at Pontiac, Livingston County, Illinois, this day of
County Clerk
41
\
PLAN COMMISSION CERTIFICATE
f.
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF LIVINGSTON) SS
This is to certify that the members of the Plan Commission have reviewed and approve
the annexed plat.
Dated at Dwight, Livingston County, Illinois, this. _ day of~-----
Chairman
Secretary
CERTIFICATE AS TO SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
g.
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF LIVINGSTON )
SS
I, . , Village Treasurer of the Village of Dwight, do hereby
certify that there are no delinquent or unpaid current or forfeited special assessments or
any deferred installments thereof that have been apportioned against the tract of land
included in the plat.
Dated at Dwight, Livingston County, Illinois, this ___ , day of _____ _
Village Treasurer
42
I
\
(
(
PLAT CERTIFICATE
h.
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF LIVINGSTON ) SS
Approved by the Board of Supervisors of Livingston County, Illinois,. this_~-
day of ___________ _
Plat Officer
VILLAGE CLERK'S CERTIFICATE
i.
STATE OF ILLINOIS )
COUNTY OF LIVINGSTON )
SS
I , , Village Clerk of the Village of Dwight, Illinois,
hereby certify that the annexed plat was presented to and by resolution duly approved
by the Board of Trustees of said Village at is meeting held on,_______ _ __
and that the required bond or other guarantee has been posted for the completion of the
improvements required by the regulations of said Village. ·
In witness whereof, I have hereto set my hand and seal of the Village of Dwight,
Illinois, this , day of ______ ~----
Village Clerk
43
3. Subdivisions Outside Corporate Limits. Except as otherwise required by statute,
certification on final plats of subdivision located in the unincorporated areas within
one and one-half (l 1h) miles beyond the Village limits shall be those required by the
Village of Dwight Subdivision Regulations and the applicable certifications
contained herein shall also be required.
44
(
(
(
SECTION 9.00 - PLANNING STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION
The subdivision of land - including the arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and
location of all streets, cross-walks, easements, sites for parks, playgrounds, and schools or
other land to be dedicated for public use - shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan and
Official Map of the Village of Dwight, and approval of design standards shall be considered on
the basis of their relation to existing and platted streets, reasonable circulation of traffic within
the subdivision and adjacent land, topographic conditions, runoff of storm water, public
convenience and safety, and appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the area to be served.
9.01 - STREET STANDARDS
A. Street Arrangement. Where such is .not shown on the Comprehensive Plan, and/or
Official Map, the arrangement of streets within a subdivision shall either:
B.
1. Continuity. Provide for the continuation or projection of existing
principal streets in adjacent areas: or
2. Conformity with Plan. Conform to a plan for the area or neighborhood
approved or adopted by the Plan Commission to ineet a particular
situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or
conformance to existing streets hnpracticable.
Street Design. All required street right-of -way widths, and pavement widths, curves,
gradients and site distances shall be as shown in the accompanying Table of Minimum
Standards for Street Design and in accordance with the following:
1 . Street Logs. Street logs with center line offsets of less than
one hundred twenty - five (125) feet shall be avoided.
2. Intersections. It must be evidenced that all street intersections and
confluences encourage safe and efficient traffic flow and, in general, be
at or near right angles and in no case shall a street intersect any other
street at less than sixty (60) degrees. An intersection of more than two
(2) streets shall not be permitted.
3. Cul-de-sac Street's. A cul-de-sac street, in single family residential
districts, shall not be more than five hundred (500) feet in length,
measured along its center line from the point of origin to the end of its
right-of-way. In multiple family residential areas, cul-de-sac streets shall
not be permitted. Each cul-de-sac street shall have a terminus of nearly
circular shape with a minimum right-of-way diameter of one hundred
(100) feet and a pavement outside diameter of not less than eighty (80)
feet.
45
4. Median Strips. Median strips other than raised center curb separating
lanes of traffic within a single right-of-way shall not be allowed. However,
where a parkway exists on a new street which is an extension of
the existing street, a median strip may be constructed not more than five
hundred (500) feet in length to provide the transition to no median strip.
All such median strips as described above shall have barrier curbs with
gutter.
5. Access From Major Streets. Provisions shall I be made for vehicular
and pedestrian access to residential property abutting a major street
either by providing: a) a marginal access road, orb) by backing lots to
the thoroughfare and providing access by a collector, minor, or cul-desac
street one (1) lot depth removed and with a no access strip at least
twelve (12) feet wide along the rear lot line. These standards are
established for the purpose of providing protection for the residential
properties and to provide for traffic safety and the efficient use of the
major street for its intended function of accommodating through traffic.
6. Frontage Roads. Where a subdivision borders on or contain a railroad
or highway, the Plan Commission may require a street approximately
parallel to and on each side of such railroad or highway, at a distance
suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park
purposes, in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial
purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be
determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and
future grade separations.
7. Reserve Strips; Reserve strips controlling access to public utilities,
streets or alleys. shall be prohibited.
8. Street Levels. Street levels shall provide proper relation between the
street and the elevation of the houses to assure positive drainage from the
building to the street. The top of the foundation of homes must be at
least six (6) inches above the level of the street.
C. Alleys
1. In commercial, business and industrial districts, definite and assured
provisions shall be made for service access such as off-street loading,
unloading, and parking consistent and adequate for the uses proposed .
. If, in the opinion of the Plan Commission such facilities are not
adequate, the Plan Commission may permit or require the dedication and
improvement of a public alley.
2. Alleys in residential areas shall not be permitted, except where deemed
necessary and on the recommendation of the. Plan Commission.
46
{
3. The width of an alley where permitted or required, shall be twenty (20)
feet in residential areas and thirty (30) feet in commercial, business and
industrial districts.
4. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alley alignment shall be
avoided.
5. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable,
they shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the deadend,
as determined by the Plan Commission.
D. Private Access Streets
1. Planned Developments
a. Design Approval. The complete design for access streets,
including specifications and designation of traffic ways, driving
lanes, paving widths, thickness, materials, etc., shall be
submitted to the Plan Commission for review and approval prior
to the issuance of building permits or the sale or lease of
buildings or land in "Planned Developments" as defined in this
ordinance. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces
shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance of the Village of Dwight. Where more than one (1)
owner or lessee are to use the same private marginal access road
or parking lot, a trust indenture shall be recorded before approval
of the multi-family, commercial or industrial subdivision as
defined herein.
b. Ingress and Egress. A minimum distance may be recommended
by the Plan Commission and may be required by the Village
Board where deemed necessary between points of ingress and
egress where all property to be subdivided is under one (1)
ownership on the effective date of this ordinance. Where
property has frontage on a State or Federal highway, the spacing
and design of the points of ingress and egress to the major highway
shall be subject to approval of the Illinois Division of
Highways.
2. Conventional Development. A paved access way from the property line
to the street shall be provided as wide as the driveway for the dwelling to
be served, except that no access driveway shall exceed twenty-five (25)
feet in width. In the case of property zoned for other than single family .
dwelling units, the requirements for access driveways shall conform as
closely as possible therewith. Pavement shall be of concrete.
47
E. Public Sidewalks and Pedestrian Ways
1. Sidewalks Required. Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of ail
streets located wholly within a subdivision and on the interior side of any
existing street or street right-of-way bordering a subdivision in
accordance with the following:
a. Sidewalks located along minor, cul-de-sac, loop or margjnal
access streets or on streets with current average daily traffic
counts of under one thousand (1,000) vehicles may be located next
to, but not abutting the curb. Such sidewalks shall not be less
than four (4) feet wide.
b. Sidewalks located along expressways, major or collector type or
designated streets shall be located so that a parkway separates the
curb from the sidewalk. Such sidewalks shall not be less than
four ( 4) feet wide. .
2. Pedestrian Ways Required- Pedestrian ways or crosswalks, not less than
ten (10) feet in right-of-way with a paved walkway in accordance with
Subsection 11.05 of this ordinance, shall be provided near the center of
any block in excess of one thousand (1,000) feet in length or in any other
block as recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the
Village Board.
9.02 - EASEMENTS
A. Easement Location. Utility distribution or transmission Installations serving the
subdivision, and when required, storm water drainage ways shall be located in
easements as designated on the subdivision plat of record. Such easements shall be
located along the rear lot lines or side lot lines at locations and extensions of utility
installation between blocks, or continuity of drainage way. They shall occupy not less
than the rear ten (10) feet of lot depth or ten (10) feet of lot width adjoining the
applicable side lot line, or may be of greater width if recommended by the Village
Engineer and approved by the Board of Trustees. Additional easements at other
locations may be recommended for specific conditions by the Village Engineer and
required by the Board of Trustees.
B. Continuity of Easements. Easements shall be designed to provide continuity from
block to block.
C. Drainage Right-of-Way. Where a subdivision is traversed by a natural drainage way,
channel, or stream, there shall be provided a drainage right-of-way, conforming
substantially with the areas bordering such water course that are subject to flooding.
The right-of -way width shall be determined by the Village Engineer.
48
(
(
9.03 - BLOCKS
A. Configuration of Blocks. The shape of blocks shall be determined by topographical
features, the basic street system and traffic pattern, lot depths, and areas designated for
public and other non-residential land uses. In addition to these, the lengths, widths,
and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to:
1. Site Adequacy. Provision of adequate building sites suitable . to the
special needs of the type of use contemplated.
2. Zoning. Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions within the
corporate limits of the Village of Dwight.
3. Convenience. Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and
safety of street traffic.
B. Length of Blocks
c.
1. Residential. In residential subdivisions, the maximum length of blocks
shall not exceed twelve hundred (1,200) lineal feet. No blocks shall be
less than three hundred (300) lineal feet in length unless recommended
by the Plan Commission and approved by the Board of Trustees.
2. Non-Residential. In manufacturing and business subdivisions, maximum
length of blocks shall be as recommended by the Plan Commission and
approved by the Board of Trustees.
Non-Residential Blocks. Blocks or portions thereof intended for commercial or
industrial use shall be designated as such, and the plan shall show adequate offstreet
areas to provide for parking, loading docks, and other such facilities.
9.04- LOTS
A. Configuration of Lots. The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation shall be
appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and
use contemplated and, in general, lots should be as nearly rectangular in shape as
practicable.
1. Conformance with Zoning Regulations. Width and area of lots shall
conform with lot width and area requirements set forth in the Zoning
Ordinance of the Village of Dwight or that of Livingston County iu the
unincorporated areas beyond the Village limits. Corner lots shall be
increased in width by twenty (20 % ) percent over the width of typical
interior lots, except that corner lots need not exceed ninety (90) feet in
width if the ninety (90) feet in width is greater than the width of the
49
typical lot, except the Board of Trustees may require, when
recommended by the Plan Commission,.a greater lot width to provide for
the proper development of intersection design and traffic safety.
2. Non-Residential Lots. Width, area, and depth of lots in a manufacturing
or business subdivision shall be as recommended by the Plan Commission
and approved by the Board of Trustees.
3. Side Lot Lines. Side lot lines of lots shall be at right angles or radial to
the street line, or substantially so.
B. Access to Lots. Each lot within the subdivision must have access to a public street
unless otherwise provided by local ordinance.
C. Separation from Major Streets. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be
avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development
from major streets or highways or to overcome specific disadvantages of
topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten (10) feet,
and across which there shall be no right of vehicular access, shall be provided along
the rear lot lines of lots abutting such highways and major thoroughfares.
D. Double Frontage Lots. Double frontage lots are not permitted, except where lots
back upon a major street, upon a body of water in separate or undivided ownership,
or in manufacturing and business subdivisions when specifically recommended by
the Plan Commission and approved by the Board of Trustees.
E. Lots Abutting a Water Course. Lots abutting upon a water course, drainage way,
channel, or stream shall have an additional depth or width as recommended by the
Plan Commission and approved by the Board of Trustees in order to provide
acceptable building sites.
F. Preservation of Natural Features. In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall
be given to the preservation of natural features, such as trees, watei: courses,
historical landmarks, and similar community assets, which, if preserved, would add
to the attractiveness and value of the subdivision, neighborhood or the community
as a whole. The Plan Commission shall include in its report Its conclusions as to
compliance herewith.
9.05 - BUILDING SETBACK LINES
Building setback lines in all new subdivisions shall conform to the front yard provisions of the
Dwight Zoning Ordinance.
50
9.06 - PARKS, SCHOOL SITES, AND PUBLIC AREAS
Whenever required by this ordinance or any other ordinance of the Village of Dwight, parks,
school sites, and/or other public areas shall be shown on all plans and plats and shall be of
such configuration as to be acceptable to the Plan Commission, Village Board, and concerned ·
public agency ..
51
~ ~
! SEE 'ITP!CAL FIRE H_YDRANT INSTALLATION DETAIL
6D' ROW (MIN.)
~ I 4' I ~ '~-:~-~: .. ) I 3D' 8-B (MIN.) I 1D.5' (MIN.) I 4'
1/4"/FT.
~
4/1 SLOPE TO
EXISTING GRADE
(BOTH SIDES) \~1 [;
4 - - -- - -SIDEWALK
(TYP.)
Tl I
3' . ,
I
WATER MAIN (TYP.)
1/4"/FT. 1/4"/FT. I
T 3· 3· l (J._ o--sANITARY SE R (TYP.)
~~STORM SEWER (TYP.)
COMB. CONC.
L__ 5• (MJN.l P.C.C. PAVEMENT
2· (MIN. AGGREGATE BASE COURSE. TY. 8
OR 3" (MIN.) ASHPALT PAVEMENT
10" (MJN.) AGGREGATE BASE COURSE, TY_- 8
CURB & GUTIER,
TY. 8 6.18
TYPICAL STREET CROSS SECTION
~~~~1~G4fJ' 2.~. ~~A~PECIFJCA llONS
4'" P.C.C. SIDEWALK
1:1ll,!!!!.=1: :::'=4=.: Jil----~l!.J
INSTALL LAYER OF FILTER FABRIC~FOR DEPTH OF BURY SEE PLANS
OVER DRAIN FIELD AND SPECIFICATIONS
!'.•,, ,, .• .,.,, ~.--:.-.-~·"'·'
PROVIDE CONCRETE
BASE & BLOCKING
AGAINST UNDISTURBED
EARTH
H'l'DRANT DRAIN OPENINGS
FURNISH TRANSITION GASKETS
TO RECEIVE PIPES
PRECAST CONCRETE BLOCK
~Rl!:L ~g~c~cJBKB~§~ i~~-rllb'l:'f<\Wb~A'NlfRIAL
DRAIN.
HYDRANT INSTALLATION
N.T.S.
N.T.S.
4 i/B • t
_@_ - -2"R Tzf 4 .-/ ~21
,_ ___ 24" ]+~
(j) DEPRESS AT DRIVEWAYS
® SLOPE 3/4 IN/FT EXCEPT AT INTERSECTIONS
(j) X=B" OR DEPTH OF PAVEMENT WHEN ADJACENT TO P.C.C. PAVEMENT, WHICHEVER IS GREATER.
X-=8" 'M-lEN ADJACENT TO P.C.C., AGGREGATE, BITUMINOUS OR BRICK BASE COURSE.
@ 30~ LONG #4 REBARS AT JOR SPACING (USED ONLY WHEN ADJACENT TO P.C.C. PAVEMENT
OR P.C.C. BASE)
~ 2-#4 REBARS SHALL BE PLACED LONGITUOINALL Y ONLY WHEN CROSSING UTILITY TRENCHES.
COMBINATION CONCRETE CURB AND GUTTER
TYPE B6.18
N.T.S.
'iSKm
VILLAGE OF DWIGHT
TYPICAL SUBDIVISION
STANDARD DETAILS
"'i?t-1~ -- -- I BDK ru ~ ~B-0-527
-·~-~
(
\
(
---j I
---1 ---
' ---
- -·--
-~-
--.--
--,
--,
-·
/ .
DESIGN STANDARDS
--+--
--: -
----
---l.--
----
----
_ .__
-+--
" --!--
' _ _:. .. --t-·-t !
- ---1"-, ' >--
-_/' ' _..I :-\ _._' · _ _,
--t--- --+-
SI DE LOT LillES SHALL BE AT
RIGHT ANGLES TO STRAIGHT
STREET LINES OR RADIAL TO
CURVED STREET LINES ON
lVHICll THE LOTS FACE.
< ·y /
'y' /
·'
/
ELEMENTARY
SCHOOi.. SITE
NEIGH BORHOOO
-~~·: PARK
7· ·, ; : I . ~,~
.,,,, \ ' i : : : r-. . . . • I ' j(• o ' • l ~· .... :.~:i··
' '
. . ~......---.- . .- ..,.---. ,
' : . ' ; ; . ~ . : . . : .
' . ! : : : ~ . . . . ·. ...t-·-----·-·-- ---------~---..l---
,.r-· : : : ; ; : ; ; : : : ; . ; . :
53
STREETS SHALL INTERSECT
EACH OTHER .•T AS :-!EARLY
RIGHT ,\~GLES AS TOPOGRAPllY
.;~o OTHER LillITING
f,\C70RS OF GOOD DESIGN
PERllIT.
COR:-!ER LOTS Sl!,\LL HAVE AN
EXTR,\ ·HD'l'\I 'i'll1>T !~ ADEl
qt:ATE TO PERJ!l'!' !ll'!L!J!NG SETBACKS FRO.Ii ~lllE oTll~ETS.
--'+- --+' -
0
0
--+---,
--+---l
MAJOR
--•r -
' -+-
--T--
--+--
-+--
----+---
DESIGN STANDARDS
STREET
.
-+-
--+--
•
--1---
__ (.' _ _
--+.- -
---!---
--+' --
'
z
:;
0
0
2
_l'
IJOUULE FROl'TAGE ANO REVF.RSE FRONTAGE
LOTS SHALL IJE PROllIIJITED EXCEPT WHERE
NECESSARY TO PROVIDE SEPARATION OF
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPllENT FROll THROUGH
TRAFFIC OR TO OVERCOllE SPECIFIC DISADVANTAGES
OF TOPOGRAPHY AND ORIENTATION.
THE NU:.IBER OF INTERSECTIONS ALONG. llA~--
HF==:.:___j JOR STREETS SHALL IJE HF.LD TO A 'llINIlllll>
I. WHEREVER PRACTICABLE THE DIS- >-
<
3:
:r
"'
TANCE BETWEEN SUCH INTERSECTIONS
SllALL NOT IJE LESS THAN l. 000 FEET .
---!---
-+- :r PEDESTRIANWAYS OR CROSSWALKS, NOT
LESS THAN 10 FEET IN WIDTH, SHALL BE
!;:::.::=1---!===+::.=:f-F~~f---+-J==--j PROVIDED NEAR THE CENTER AND E.'ITIRELY
- --!--- -
•(0(111••• ..
---+---
--+--
--+-- --1' --
-----+--- _ _j---
--t' --
--\ ' ' ·1-+-r--+-+- ' t I I '
b.. COLLECTOR
I • I I
--r--+'
-
--+--
STREET
0:::
.0.. ,
<
::!:
54
ACROSS ANY BLOCK l, 000 FT OR llORE IN
LENGTH WHERE DEEllED ESSENTIAL.
IJLOCK LENGTHS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS
SHALL BE NOT LESS THAN l, 000 ·FT IN
LENGTH NOR llORE THAN 1,800 FEET IN
LENGTH.
STREET JOGS SHALL BE NOT LESS THAN
125 FEET CENTER LINE TO CENTER LINE
PROPOSED SUBDIVISIONS ADJACENT TO llAJOR
STREETS SHALL PROVIDE FOR ADEQUATE
PROTECTION OF RESIDE1'TIAL PROPERTIES,
CONTROL OF ACCESS. AND THE SEPARATION
OF THROUGH AND LOCAL TRAFFIC BY (~)
llARG!.NAL ACCESS STREET OR (h) REVERSED
FRONTAGE WITH SCREEN PLANTING.
CUL-DE-SAC.STREETS DESIGNED TO llAVE
ONE END PER.llANEl>TLY CLOSED SHALL llOT
EXCEED 500 FEET IN LENGTH,
{
\
CLASSIFICATION OF STREETS
- ' I . i f
MAJOR STREETS should carry through traffic
past residential areas.
. .
COLLECTOR STREETS should serve to carry traffic
from local areas to the arterial system.
:.tINOR (LOCAL) STREETS should only serve abutting
land.
:.tARGINAL ACCESS STREETS provide access to properties
which would otherwise have to abut a
maJor street or other right-of-way in an undesirable
manner.
SS
INTERSECTION CESIGN
Bad Better
II II 4-way intersection
16 col I is ion points
3-wqy intersection
Only 3 collision points
56
II I
Jog intersection
Dangerous traffic pattern
•
(
r(
SECTION 10.00 - MATERIALS AND METHODS CONSTRUCTION REQUIRED
UNDERGROUND IMPROVEMENTS
The owner or subdivider shall install storm and sanitary sewers, water supply system, street
grading and pavement, alleys, cross-walkways, public utilities, street lighting, in accordance
with applicable ordinances and standards of construction of the Village of Dwight.
No subdivision of land shall be approved without receiving a statement signed by the Village
Engineer, certifying that the improvements described in the subdivider' s plans and specifications,
together with agreements, meet the minimum requirements of all ordinances of the Village.
10.01- SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
A. Sewer Service Required
1. Sanitary sewers and sanitary sewer service shall be installed to service all
properties being developed within the municipality, including all subdivisions
and developments to be annexed to the Village of Dwight after completion, and
the expense of such installation and/or extension by any such person, persons, ·
corporations, or others installing or desiring the installation of sanitary sewer
extensions shall be at the expense of such person, persons, corporations, or
others, and prior to such installation and/or extension, consent shall be obtained
from the Village Board and in compliance with the following:
a. The Village must approve all plans and specifications for any extensions and
new developments.
b. Before any extensions and new developments are installed, the plans and
specifications must be reviewed and approved by the State of Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.
c. The ownership, right-of-way, and title to new developments and extensions
after the installation of such new developments and extensions and after
inspection and approval of such new developments and extensions by the
Village or its agent, must be conveyed to the Village prior to or contemporaneously
with the acceptance of such extensions, subdivision, or other
new development. The Village will maintain the mains thereafter.
d. No extension or new development will be permitted if, in the opinion of the
Village Board, the system does not have the necessary capacity to serve the
proposed extension or new development.
B. Approval for Construction.
1. All sanitary sewer systems shall be constructed in accordance with
57
standards approved by the Environmental Protection Agency of the State
of Illinois; and the Village of Dwight, or such other utility corporation,
public or private, whose service may be required. All sewer designs,
plans, and specifications shall be submitted to the above agencies for
approval and filing.
2. Size and Construction Details. The size of the sewer to be built shall
be determined by the Village Board, but in no case shall it be less than 8
inches in diameter. All extensions to the public sewer shall be made
with Vitrified Clay Pipe conforming to ASTM C-700 Extra Strength
with ASTM C-425 joints with solvent or mechanical seal type joints or
Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pipe ASTM D3034, Type PSM with standard
dimension ratio of 35 with solvent welded joints ASTM D2855 or
flexible elastomeric seals ASTM D3212. Manholes shall be constructed
at each change in direction (horizontal and/or vertical) and not more than
400 feet apart on straight sewers. Construction methods shall be in
accordance with the "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois" (latest edition) adopted by the Village Board and
on file in the office of the superintendent. All construction shall be
subject to the inspection of the superintendent or other designated
representatives. All PVC pipe shall be bedded in a 6-inch thick
approved granular base and PVC pipe shall be backfilled with approved
compacted granular material to a point 8 inches above the top of the
pipe. Building service shall be provided for all lots and shall be
extended from the main to the street property line.
3. The building sewer shall be constructed of one of the following:
Cast Iron Soil Pipe ASTM A74 with rubber or neoprenejoints Vitrified
Clay Pipe ASTM C-700 with C-425 flexible gasket joints Polyvinyl
Chloride (PVC) Pipe ASTM D3034, Type PSM with standard dimension
ratio of 35 with solvent welded joints ASTM D2855 or flexible
elastomeric seal ASTM D3212.
If more than one type of sewer pipe is used, it shall be connected by tight
and waterproof adapters especially designed for such joining and
approved by the superintendent. All joints shall be water tight.
Size-and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of
the superintendent but, in no event, shall the diameter be less than 6
inches and slope less than 118 inch per foot.
4. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at
an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means
which is approved and discharged to the building sewer.
58
,{
\
1(
(
5. All excavations required for the installation of the building sewer shall
be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the superintendent.
All construction shall be in accordance with the Standard Specifications
for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois, except that no
backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. All
excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in the manner satisfactory to the
superintendent. PVC pipe shall be laid on a 6-inch bed of approved
granular material and shall be backfilled to a point 8 inches above the top
with approved granular material.
6. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made
at the "Y" or "T" branch, if such branch is available at a suitable
location. If no properly located "Y" or "T" branch is available, the
owner shall at his expense install a "Y" or "T" branch in the public
sewer at the location specified by the superintendent. Special fittings
may be used for the connection only when approved by the
superintendent. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify
the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the superintendent or his representative.
7. During the time of excavation and as long as an excavated area remains
open so as to act as a catch basin, any sewer tile or drainage outlet
designed to service the excavated area shall at all times be either capped
or furnished with a sufficient standpipe so as to eliminate the possibility
of any rain or Sl\rface water collecting or draining into the excavated area
and hence into the outlets and accordingly into the sewer system of the
Village.
8. No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which, in turn, is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
9. Foundation Drains. Where foundation drains are installed to serve a
building, they discharge to a sump which is equipped with a sump pump
of proper size and capacity. The sump pump discharge shall terminate
on the ground surface a minimum distance of ten (10) feet from the
property line. The sump pump may be discharged to a road ditch, storm
sewer, or field tile, if one is available to the property, in a manner
approved by the superintendent.
59
C. Larger Capacity Sometimes Required.
1. Where sanitary sewer mains of larger capacity than necessary are
required, as directed by the Board of Trustees to serve the subdivision as
delineated in the preliminary plan, the subdivider shall be required to pay
for the proportionate benefit of the installation to his subdivision, as
established by the Board of Trustees.
D. Payment for Inspection and Consultation by Village Consulting Engineers.
Whenever an inspection and/or consultation is made by the Village Consulting
Engineers of plans, improvements, and/or construction for or within a
subdivision prior to acceptance by the Village of Dwight of such subdivision
and/or such improvements within such subdivision, and whether such
inspections and/or consultations are made pursuant to a request by the
subdivider, the Village of Dwight, and/or whether such inspection and/or
consultation is required by an Ordinance of the Village of Dwight, and/or the
Village Board of Trustees, the fees charged by the Village Consulting
Engineers for any such inspection and/or consultation shall be paid by the
subdivider, and such payment shall be made directly to the Village of Dwight,
and shall be paid in full by the subdivider prior to acceptance of such
subdivision and/or improvements therein. Fees charged by the Village
Consulting Engineers shall include, but not be limited to, charges for office
review of subdivision plans, field inspections, correspondence, travel time,
out of pocket expenses, and all such similar charges with regard to any such
subdivision. ·
10.02 - STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM REQUIRED
A. An adequate system of storm water drainage shall be constructed and installed,
consisting of natural water courses, storm sewers, drain tile, and other
necessary facilities which will drain the subdivision, protect roadway
pavements, and prevent storm/ground water discharge into the sanitary sewer
system.
B. Storm Drainage Computations
1. Storm sewers shall be constructed throughout the entire area contemplated
for development. Such storm sewer shall be connected to adequate outfall.
Intercepting storm water structure shall be provided at intervals
approximately seven hundred (700) feet as measured along the center line
or as determined by the kind of character and runoff as approved by the
Village Engineer.
2. Storm sewer and sanitary sewer shall be separate and independent systems.
60
'(
(
3. Storm sewer shall generally be constructed of concrete pipe with sufficient
strength to develop the structural requirements necessary for the type of
storm sewer to be constructed.
4. Storm sewer capacity shall be determined by the use of the rational
formula, unless the use of another formula is approved or requested by the
Village Engineer. The intensity (i) factor used shall be a return frequency
of not less than ten (10) years, for calculating post develop runoff, and not
more than one (1) year for calculating pre develop runoff. The runoff
coefficient (C) factor shall be determined by the character of the land to be
drained. Storm water detention shall be required for the calculated
difference in the pre-developed and post-developed runoff volume. At the
discretion of the Village, the subdivider may contribute funds equivalent to
the value of the constructed detention area for the Village's use in
constructing future consolidated detention areas.
5. All street grades, lot and block drainage shall be established so as to permit
positive drainage.
6. Preventions of Flooding. In areas where runoff from storms of greater
intensity than those which the storm sewers are designed for will cause
flooding of adjacent property, one of the following alternate procedures
shall be instituted to preclude the possibility of flooding:
a. Design storm sewers to provide runoff capacity for maximum
storm of record.
b. Change contours of land by grading to assure positive drainage.
7. Construction of Detention Ponds. Construction of detention ponds shall
be in accordance with the Village Engineer and the Village of Dwight
requirements (Section 11.13).
A dry flow drainage shall be provided in detention areas.
Detention areas only must be capable of total drainage in not over seventy
two (72) hours.
Total area of parks with detention ponds shall be not less than three (3)
acres.
8. Drain Tiles. Drain tile shall be constructed throughout the entire area
contemplated for development. Such drain tile shall be connected to the
storm sewer system or adequate stomi water outfall. The drain tile layout
plan shall provide access to drain tile from all proposed lots. In general,
drain tile shall be located along all rear lot lines. The drain tile shall be
61
type N-12 non-perforated, double wall, smooth wall interior, corrugated
wall exterior high-density polyethylene pipe with compatible fittings and
gaskets, as manufactured by Advanced Drainage Systems, or approved
equal, with a minimum nominal diameter of 8 inches. All sump pumps,
footing tiles, and other sources of groundwater or storm water shall be
connected to the drain tile. The drain tile system shall be designed to
drain via gravity - lift stations will not be allowed.
The design standards are hereby amended by adding thereto the "standard
details" as Exhibit A.
62
(
10.03 - MANHOLES AND DRAINAGE APPURTENANCES
Manholes and drainage appurtenances as outlined below shall be constructed in
accordance with the requirements of the Village of Dwight.
A. Manholes. Manholes shall be constructed of the type, style and size as set forth
within the ordinances and standards of the Village.
B. Catch Basins and Inlets. Catch basins, inlets and other drainage stnictures shall
be constructed of the type, style and size as set forth within standards of the
Village.
C. Frames and Grates. Frames, grates and covers shall be constructed of the type,
style and size set forth within the ordinances and standards of the Village.
10.04 - WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
A. Water, Supply and Distribution System Required. Water distribution facilities,
including piping, fittings, hydrants, valves, valve basins, water services, and all
other needful appurtenances adequate for fire and domestic needs, shall be installed
to serve ail properties within the subdivision.
B. Approval for Construction. All water distribution systems constructed to or
within a subdivision shall be constructed in accordance with standards approved by
the State of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the Village of Dwight
water and sewer department. All distribution system plans and specifications shall
be submitted to the above agencies for approval and file.
C. Larger Capacity Sometimes Required. Where water mains of larger capacity are
required, as directed by the Board of Trustees to serve the future growth in the
vicinity of the subdivision, the subdivider shall be required to pay for the
proportionate benefit of the installation to his subdivision, as established by the
Board of Trustees.
D. Water Mains.
E.
1. A minimum of six (6) inches in interior diameter or larger as the
development needs dictate.
2. Main shall be ductile iron pipe Class 150, with a minimum depth
of cover of five and one-half (5V2) feet.
Valves and Vaults. Valves shall be Mueller No. A-2370-20 Resilient Seal (or
approved equal) non-rising stem valves with operating nut, designed to take full
63
10.03 - MANHOLES AND DRAINAGE APPURTENANCES
Manholes and drainage appurtenances as outlined below shall be constructed in
accordance with the requirements of the Village of Dwight.
A. Manholes. Manholes shall be constructed of the type, style and size as set forth
within the ordinances and standards of the Village.
B. Catch Basins and Inlets. Catch basins, inlets and other drainage structures shall
be constructed of the type, style and size as set forth within standards of the
Village.
C. Frames and Grates. Frames, grates and covers shall be constructed of the type,
style and size set forth within the ordinances and standards of the Village.
10.04 - WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
A. Water, Supply and Distribution System Reguired. Water distribution facilities,
including piping, fittings, hydrants, valves, valve basins, water services, and all
other needful appurtenances adequate for fire and domestic needs, shall be installed
to serve ail properties within the subdivision.
B. Approval for Construction. All water distribution systems constructed to or
within a subdivision shall be constructed in accordance with standards approved by
the State of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the Village of Dwight
water and sewer department. All distribution system plans and specifications shall
be submitted to the above agencies for approval and file.
C. Larger Capacity Sometimes Reguired. Where water mains of larger capacity are
required, as directed by the Board of Trustees to serve the future growth in the
vicinity of the subdivision, the subdivider shall be required to pay for the
proportionate benefit of the installation to his subdivision, as established by the
Board of Trustees.
D. Water Mains.
1. A minimum of six (6) inches in interior diameter or larger as the
development needs dictate.
2. Main shall be ductile iron pipe Class 150, with a minimum depth
of cover of five and one-half (5 1h) feet.
E. Valves and Vaults. Valves shall be Mueller No. A-2370-20 Resilient Seal (or
approved equal) non-rising stem valves with operating nut, designed to take full
63
(
I{
\
(
F.
pressure on either face, manufactured in compliance with ANSI/ A WW A C500
Standards. All valves shall open by turning to the left. Valves shall operate at a
working pressure of one hundred fifty (150) psi and a test pressure of three hundred
(300) psi. All valves shall be installed complete with a valve box and mechanically
restrained joints of a type approved by the Village's Department of Public Works.
Installation of valves shall be placed outside of paved surfaces. Valves shall be
located a maximum of five hundred (500) feet apart, in all zoning districts, and a
maximum of eight hundred (800) feet in residential districts. Valve vault, sidewall
and base construction shall conform to that required for catch basins.·
Hydrants
1. Hydrants shall be of the comparison or gate type conforming to A WW A
C502 and shall be of a make that has been adopted by the Village as
standard. Hydrants shall be designed for a three hundred (300) pound
test pressure and a one hundred fifty (150) pound working pressure.
2. Hydrants shall be furnished with two (2), two and one-half (21h) inch
hose nozzle and one (1), four (4) inch steamer nozzle. Threads on
nozzles and caps, and operating nuts, shall be National Standard
Threads. Hydrants shall open by turning to the left and shall be so
marked.
3. Hydrants shall have a six (6) inch pipe connection, a five (5) inch valve
opening and shall be equipped with auxiliary valves. Auxiliary valve
shall be attached to hydrant with one hundred twenty-five (125) pound
standard flanges. Joint for joining the auxiliary valve shall be of the
same type as specified for the piping system.
4. Hydrants shall not be spaced more than four hundred (400) feet apart in
single-family residence areas and two hundred and fifty (250) feet in
multiple-family, business and commercial areas.
G. Water Services. All water services shall be constructed of Type K copper pipe,
having a minimum internal diameter of three-quarter (3/4) inch. Such services
shall be equipped with corporation cock, curb stops and other necessary fittings
in accordance with current Village standards.
64
SECTION 11.00 - STREET IMPROVEMENTS
All streets within all subdivisions, whether to be dedicated for public use or for private.access
to Planned Developments as herein defined, shall be Improved with a durable hard surfaced
roadway in accordance with the following-.
A. Base Course and Surface Course. Base courses and surface courses shall conform to
the requirements set forth on the Village of Dwight Standard Detail Sl).eet.
B. Standards for Construction. Materials and methods of construction shall be in
compliance with the Illinois Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,
latest edition.
When a street shall cross a creek, the crossing shall be constructed with reinforced
concrete or multi-plate arch structure and the size shall be determined by the Village
Engineer.
The ends of said structure shall have a headwall and wingwalls. The slope from
the street right-of-way to the end of the headwall shall be a two to one (2: 1 ) ratio. ·
There shall be a guardrail placed at each crossing, and landscaped.
C. Street Improvements
1. The full width of the right-of-way shall be graded to the required section.
2. All unsuitable sub-base material shall be removed and shall be replaced
with stable, compacted material in conformance with generally accepted
engineering practices.
3. The center line grade shall be not less than .4 percent, and shall not
exceed five (5) percent on major and collector streets and ten (10)
percent on minor streets and cul-de-sac streets.
4. Vertical curves shall be used whenever a change in center line gradient
occurs, except where the algebraic difference in gradients is one (1 % )
percent or less. The length of vertical curve on minor streets shall be
forty ( 40) feet for each one (1 % ) percent of algebraic difference of
grade, but in no case shall such length be less than forty (40) feet. The
length of vertical curve on collector streets shall be fifty (50) feet for
each one (1 % ) percent of algebraic difference of grade, but in no case
shall such length be less than fifty (50) feet.
65
(
5. All pavements shall be designed in accordance with the "Manual of
Instructions for the Structural Design of Bituminous Pavements" or the
"Manual for the Structural Design of Portland Cement Concrete
Pavements," in Illinois, by the Illinois Division of Highways, latest
edition.
The minimum thickness shall be as hereinafter set forth. Design data
shall be submitted to the Village with !BR tests and shall provide
structural numbers as set forth in the aforementioned manuals as follows:
Frontage Roads
Minor Connecting Roads
Major Connecting Roads
Business and Commercial
Streets
Industrial Streets
11.01- CURB AND GUTTER
:t 'Y
D/
'
D,
D,
Minimum
2.0)
2.5
3.5 ·- 7 ''
A. Combination curb and gutter shall be constructed on all streets using the type, style
and size as set forth within the Ordinance and Standards of the Village. All
driveways from the' street to the property line shall be constructed of concrete or
asphalt according to the structural requirements for frontage roads as set forth in
Section 11.00 (C) (5) of the Dwight Subdivision Ordinance.
11.02 - FRONTAGE ROADS
The complete design for frontage roads, including specifications and designation of trafficways
driving widths, thickness, materials, etc., shall be submitted to the Plan Commission for review
and approval prior to the issuance of building permits or the sale or lease of buildings or land in
Planned Developments as defined in this ordinance. The minimum number of off -street parking
spaces shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance of the Village of
Dwight. Frontage roads and parking areas shall be designed in accordance with Section 11 :00 C 5.
When a frontage road is to be dedicated to public use, the specifications shall be in accordance with
the minimum width, thickness and standards of the Village of Dwight. Where more than one owner
or lessee are to use the same private frontage road or parking lot, a trust indenture shall be recorded
before approval of the multi-family, commercial or industrial subdivision as defined herein.
66
A minimum distance may be required by the Commission where deemed necessary between
points of ingress and egress where all property to be subdivided is under one ownership on the
effective date of this ordinance. Where property has frontage on a State or Federal highway,
the spacing and design of the points of ingress and egress to the major highway shall be subject
to approval of the Illinois Department of Transportation.
11.03 -PARKWAYS
Parkways shall be required on both sides of a street to the sidewalk line.
11.04 - ALLEYS
Alley pavement shall conform with frontage and specifications in Section 11.00 C. 5 herein.
11.05 - SIDEWALKS
Sidewalks shall be constructed of Portland Cement concrete ,to a thickness of four (4) inches.
Concrete for such sidewalks shall have a minimum twenty-eight (28) day compressive strength
of four thousand (4,000) pounds, and shall contain not less than three (3%) percent nor more
than six (6 % ) percent entrained air. Slump shall be not less than two (2) inches nor more than
four (4) inches. -,,~u. 'I f.<.A-
11.06- CROSS-WALKWAYS
Cross-walkways shall be constructed of Portland Cement concrete conforming to the
requirements set forth under Subsection 11.05 herein.
11.07 - STREET LIGHTING IMPROVEMENTS
Street lighting Improvements shall be installed to service all property to be developed. Each
corner of a street intersection and cul-de-sac shall be improved with a light standard with a
maximum spacing of three hundred and fifty (350) feet.
11.08 - FILING OF ENGINEERING PLANS AND REVIBW FEE
A. Four (4) complete sets of engineering plans and specifications of required land
improvement as regulated by Section 8.08 A-1, together with an estimate of the cost
of improvements, said plans and specifications to bear the seal of an Illinois
registered professional engineer along with his signed statement that such plans and
specifications have been prepared in compliance with this ordinance and with good
engineering practice. Said plans shall be drawn to a minimum horizontal scale of
fifty (50) feet to the inch and minimum vertical scale of five (5) feet to the inch.
Plans shall show profiles of all utility and street improvements, with elevations
referred to United States Geological Survey datum.
67
11.09 - ACCEPTANCE OF REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS
Upon the completion of construction of all public improvements required by this ordinance, in
conformance with approved engineering plans and specifications, the Design Engineer engaged
by the subdivider, builder or land developer shall prepare and submit to the Village Clerk four
(4) sets of as-built of plans and certification by Village Engineer that all public improvements
have been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the approved engineering plans and
specifications. The Village Board will enact a resolution accepting said improvements. . .
11.10 - LANDSCAPING
A. Prohibited Trees. The planting of the following varieties of trees within public
rights-of-way shall be prohibited:
B.
Soft Maple (Acer disycarpum) In variety
Poplar (Populus) All varieties
Willow (Salix) All varieties
Box Elder (Acer negundo) All varieties
Catalpa (Catalpa) All varieties
Tree of Heaven (Ailanthus) All varieties
Mountain Ash (Sorbus) All varieties
Mulberry (Marus Alba) In variety
Chines Elm (Ulmis Parvifulia) All varieties
Screen Planting Required. Protective screen planting may be required to secure a
reasonably diverse effective physical barrier between residential properties and
ajoining uses to minimize a conditions of sight and sound. The screen Planting plan
shall meet the approval of the Plan Commission and corner lots must follow 4.06-6
of the Village Zoning Ordinance for set back clearance.
11.11 - BLASTING
· No blasting shall take place in connection with any work in a subdivision until appropriate
Village authorities have been notified and the applicable Village ordinances complied with.
11.12 - MARKERS
Iron pipe or steel bars not less than one-half (1h) inch in diameter and twenty-four (24) inches
long shall be set at all corners of lots and ail street point of tangents and point of curve.
Markers shall be set level with the finished grade. The subdivider shall replace all or verify
the existence of the iron pipes at ail lot corners and all bends in property in property lines after
the completion of all construction and before final acceptance of the subdivision by the Village
Board of Trustees. ·
68
11.13 - WATER RETENTION OR DETENTION FACILITIES
Retention ponds or reservoirs may be constructed. Such retention facilities shall be designed
to retain a certain water level at all times and may, in addition to serving as part of the storm
water drainage system of the Village of Dwight, be used for scenic and recreation purposes.
Detailed engineering plans and specifications for retention or detention facilities shall be
prepared by the design engineer for review by the Village Engineer and Plan Commission and
approved by the Village Board. The design of retention or detention facilities shall be in
accordance with the following guidelines: ·
A. There must not be any pollution of any kind entering the water area during or after
construction.
B. Access. No less than two (2) access drives into area from opposite directions,
paved from curb to sidewalk.
C. An emergency overflow shall be constructed at all ponds.
D. When possible, a mechanical drain shall be constructed with the outlet pipe at the
lowest possible elevation and connected to the storm sewer.
E. A mechanical control gate shall be used at the outlet pipe.
F. The ends of all incoming storm sewer lines shall be above the normal pool elevation
and shall be set in a concrete headwall or end section.
G. Retention ponds of less than three (3) acres at normal water elevation are not
permitted.
H. Depth of pool at normal elevation shall be not less than ten (10) feet over a
minimum of thirty (30) percent of the pool.
I. The bottom slope of the pool shall be four (4) to one (1) from the maximum flood
stage elevation to a point twenty (20) feet out from the normal pool elevation.
J. The entire area shall be graded and seeded and the soil shall be stable enough to
support mowing equipment and landscaped. Minimum five (5) trees per acre of two
and one-half inch (2112) diameter.
K. The distance from the normal pool elevation to the near less than one hundred (100)
feet.
L. At flood stage, the water shall be not closer than fifty (50) feet to the nearest lot
line.
69
{
'\
M. Areas shall be under the direction of the Park and Recreation Committee after .
approval by the Village of the units in which they are constructed. Storm drainage
control shall be retained by the Village.
N. ·nams and Constructed Walls. All dams and constructed walls shall be designed
by a registered engineer and, if of earth, shall have a maximum slope of 2.5 to 1,
be constructed of compacted clean earth fill, and have an interior core wall of
concrete on sheet steel.
0. Embankments. Shaped earth embankments shall have a maximum slope of 3 to 1
and shall be compacted to remove all voids exposed by cutting and shall be cleared
of all extraneous material and foliage below the designed water line.
P. Depth. Retention facilities shall maintain a minimum constant water depth of ten·
(10) feet over thirty (30) percent of the surface water area, in addition to the depth
of occasional water detained in the facility in storm situations.
Q. Area. Retention facilities smaller in area than three (3) acres shall not be
permitted. Such area shall be measured of the constant water level.
R. Overflow Outlets. Overflow outlets shall be provided as necessary to keep the
water level within a retention facility within its design limits. Materials and
methods of construction for overflow piping shall be the same as for storm sewer
construction as shown in Subsection 10.02 of this ordinance. Maximum overflow
rate shall be designed in accordance with Subsection 10.02 of this ordinance.
Overflow spillways shall be of concrete and so constructed that no erosion of the
dam or outfall shall occur.
S. Overflow Outfalls. Overflow outfalls shall be as specified in Subsection 10.02 of
this ordinance for storm drainage outfalls.
T. Bank Stabilization and Landscaping. All cut embankments, earth dams, or other
earth surfaces shall be seeded or sodded, in accordance with Subsection 11.10 of
this ordinance, to the designed occasional water level of the retention facility. From
this point to the constant water level, sand or gravel may be used. Stabilization
with stone, concrete, or other material may be used if specifically approved by the
Village Board. Trees shall not be planted on or within twenty (20) feet of any earth
dam.
11.14 - INSPECTION OF SURFACE IMPROVEMENTS
A. Inspection Required. All grading, paving, landscaping, or other surface
improvements as required by this ordinance shall be inspected during the course of
construction and upon completion by the Village Engineer and by the Public Works
Department of the Village of Dwight.
70
B. Notification Required. During the course of construction of the improvements, the
subdivider shall notify the Village forty-eight (48) hours before any required
inspection.
71
(
'\
SECTION 12.00 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
12.01 - ORGANIZATION
The following offices of the government of the Village of Dwight are concerned with the
administration of this ordinance.
A. The Village Board. The Village Board is vested with the following responsibilities
in regard to subdivision control:
B.
1. Plans and Plats. Approval or disapproval of all preliminary plans and
final plats referred to it by the Plan Commission.
2. Variations. Approval or disapproval of all variations and exceptions
after recommendation by the Plan Commission.
3. Amendments. Amendment of the regulations of this ordinance when
found necessary and desirable after review by the Plan Commission.
4. Enforcement. Initiation of appropriate proceedings to enforce the
provisions of this ordinance.
The Village Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall have the following duties:
1. Maintain Ordinance. Maintain permanent and current records of this
ordinance, including amendments thereto.
2. File Plans and Plats. Receive and file ail preliminary plans and final
plats (together with applications).
3. Liaison with Concerned Agencies. Forward copies of the preliminary
plan to other appropriate offices and agencies for their recommendations
and report.
4. Liaison with Village Board. Forward with recommendations to the
Village Board all preliminary plans.
5. File all Checked Plats. Receive and file all final plats, and check their
compliance with the preliminary plan.
6. Forward Plats to Village Board. Forward with recommendations to the
Village Board all final plats.
7. Other Determinations. Make all other determinations required by the
regulations herein.
72
C. The Village Engineer
1. Review of Plans. The Village Engineer shall review all preliminary
subdivision plans and make determinations in the areas of design
standards and engineering specifications, as stipulated herein.
2. Inspection of Work. The Village Engineer shall inspect all improvements
required by this ordinance both during construction and after completion
to insure compliance with this ordinance and with good
construction practice.
3. Conflict of Interest. The Village Engineer may not be retained by a
subdivider to perform engineering work in any subdivision without the
express approval of the Village Board of Trustees.
12.02 - ENFORCEMENT
A. President and Board of Trustees to Administer Ordinances. It shall be the duty
of the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Dwight to administer this
ordinance and to bring violations or lack of compliance herewith to the attention of
the Village Attorney.
B. Compliance Required Before Sale of Lots or Issuance of Building Permits. No
owner, or agent of the owner, of any part of land located in a proposed subdivision
shall transfer or sell such parcel, nor shall any public official issue a building permit
for the construction of buildings or structures within a proposed subdivision, before
the final plat of said subdivision has been approved by the Village Board, in
accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, and filed with the Recorder of
Deeds of Livingston County, Illinois.
C. Use of Metes and Bounds Measure Prohibited. The subdivision of any lot or any
parcel of land of metes and bounds for the purpose of sale, transfer, or lease with
the intent of evading this ordinance will not be permitted. All such described
subdivisions shall be subject to all of the requirements and regulations contained in
this ordinance.
D. Compliance Required Before Plat Approval. No final plat of subdivision shall be
approved which does not comply with all the provisions of this ordinance.
12.03 - VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
A. Hardships. Where the Plan Commission finds that extraordinary hardships or
particular difficulties regarding the physical development of land may result from
strict compliance with these regulations, it may recommend variations or exceptions
to the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest
73
(
(
B.
secured, provided that such variation or exception shall not have the effect of .
nullifying the intent and purpose of this ordinance; and further provided the Plan
Commission shall not recommend variations or exceptions to the regulations of this
ordinance unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in
each specific case that:
1. Public Welfare Protected. The granting of the variation will not be
detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare or injurious to 9ther
property or improve-ments in the neighborhood in which the property is
located;
2. Unique Conditions. The conditions upon which the request for a
variation is based are unique to the property for which the variation is
sought and are not applicable, generally, to other property;
3. Particular Physical Conditions. Because of the particular physical
surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property
involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result, as
distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the
regulations were carried out.
Conditions. In recommending variations and exceptions, the Plan Commission
may require such conditions as will, in its judgment secure substantially the
objectives of the standards or requirements of this ordinance.
C. Procedure. A petition for any such variance shall be submitted in writing by the
subdivider at the time the preliminary plan is filed for consideration by the Plan
Commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application and all of
the facts relied upon by the petitioner.
D. Recommendations. Such variations and exceptions as may be recommended by the
Plan Commission shall be forwarded to the Village Board in writing, substantiating
the recommended variations and/or exceptions. The Village Board may approve
such variations or exceptions from the requirements of this ordinance in specific
cases as listed on the final plat, which in its opinion do not adversely affect the
adopted Comprehensive Plan or the intent and purpose of this ordinance.
12.04 - RECORD OF PLATS
All of such plats of subdivisions, after the same have been submitted and approved as provided
in this ordinance, shall be copied upon a book of plats of said Village of Dwight and shall be
filed and kept by the Village of Dwight.
12.05 - VALIDITY
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is adjudged to be void,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance.
74
12.06 - REPEAL
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are to the
extent that such conflict exists, hereby repealed.
12.07 - AMENDMENTS
For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, and general welfare, the Village Board
may from time to time amend the regulations imposed by this ordinance. The Plan
Commission shall hold a public hearing on proposed amendments and make recommendations
thereon to the Village Board. ·
1. Authority. The regulations imposed under the authority of this ordinance
may be amended from time to time, by ordinance in accordance with the
applicable statutes of the State of Illinois. An amendment shall be granted
or denied by the Village Board of Trustees only after public hearing
before the Plan Commission and a report of its findings and recommendations
has been submitted to the Village Board of Trustees.
2. Initiation of Amendment. Amendments may be proposed by the Village
Board, by the Plan Commission, other governmental bodies, or by any
resident of or owner of property within the jurisdictional limits of this
ordinance.
3. Processin!!. An application for an amendment shall be filed with the
Village Board and thereafter Introduced to the Village Board of Trustees.
Such application shall be forwarded from the Village Board to the Plan
Commission with a request to hold a public hearing. Notice shall be
given of the time and place of hearing, not more than thirty (30) nor iess
than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, by publishing a notice thereof
at least once in o.ne or more newspapers with a general circulation within
Dwight.
4. Decisions. The Village Board, upon report of the Plan Commission and.
without further public hearing, may grant or deny any proposed amendment
in accordance with the applicable statutes of the State of Illinois, or
it may refer it back to the Plan Commission for further consideration.
12.08 - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Any person, firm, or corporation who fails to comply with, or violates, any of the provisions
of this ordinance, shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty-five ($25 .00) dollars and not
more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars, and each day the violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
75
(
Whoever shall sell or offer for sale, lease or offer for lease, while this ordinance is in effect
any lot or lots or block or blocks, within the incorporated limits of the Village of Dwight, or
any resu bdivision of any lot or block therein, or within contiguous territory and not more than
one and one-half (1 1/2) miles beyond the incorporated boundary of the Village of Dwight,
before a final plat of subdivision has been approved by the Plan Commission and the Village
Board of Trustees as required by this ordinance, shall be fined not less than twenty-five
($25.00) dollars nor more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars for each lot, block, or part
thereof so disposed of, offered for sale or leased.
12.09 - FEES
A. Conditions. In order to cover the administrative cost of approval of a subdivision,
the subdivider shall pay a fee of $500. 00 at the time of application for approval of a
preliminary plan.
B. Recording Fees. The subdivider shall also bear the cost of recording the plat.
12.10 - ADOPTION
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publications as required by law.
12.11 - PUBLICATION
This ordinance shall be published in book or pamphlet form as provided by the Illinois
Municipal Code.
76
(
12.12 - EFFECT
The ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and publication
according to law.
Passed by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Dwight, Livingston County,
Illinois, this, ___ day o~-------- ~--
Approved this, ____ , day of~----~- ~--
ATTEST:
Village Clerk
PASSED:
SIGNED:
AYES:
NAYS:
ABSENT:
77
President, Board of Trustees
Village of Dwight
Livingston County, Illinois
/~ ~ ~.
t t
! SEE li'PICAL FIRE HYDRANT INSTALLATION DETAIL
6D' ROW (MIN.)
I
1/4"/FT.
~ 4' ~ 1D.5' (MIN.) 1 • 3D' B-B (MIN.) I 10.5' (MIN.) I 4'. -· I I 0 1/4"/FT.
p:-
4/1 SLOPE ro.J I EXISTING GRADE
(BOTH SIOES)
4" P.C.C. SIDEWALK
E 0 6"1 4'
1/4"/FT. - 1/4"/FT. ~- L--J I
\~ -
3' y 3'
0---SANITARY SEW R (TYP.)
WATER MAIN (TYP.) °"'-STORM SEWER (TYP.) J
COMB. CONC. I 4" P.C. CONC. CURB & GUTTER,
1'
SIDEWALK (TYP.) TY. B 6.18
6" (MIN.l P.C.C. PA\l'EMENT
2" (MIN, AGGREGATE BASE COURSE, TY. B
OR 3" (MIN.) ASHPALT PAVEMENT
10" (MIN.) AGGREGATE BASE COURSE, TY. 8
TYPICAL STREET CROSS SECTION
N.T.S.
4 7t/8 • ~ 3" 4 ,,-. ;'··~ ~21
i----- 24" 5 ' rx·
MUELLER A-423 OR EQUAL
CONFORMING TO A.W.W.A. SPEC\FICA110NS
INSTALL LAYER OF F1LTER FABR!C~FOR DEPTH OF BURY SEE PLANS
OVER DRAIN FIELD AND SPECIFICATIONS
'·,•,,. "·' ·~· ~' .. -,:,._"t,. ....
GJ DEPRESS AT DRIVEWAYS
(2J SLOPE 3/4 IN/FT EXCEPT AT INTERSECTIONS
OJ X=B" OR DEPTH OF PAVEMENT WHEN ADJACENT TO P.C.C. PAVEMENT, WHICHEVER IS GREATER.
PROVIDE CONCRETE
BASE & BLOCKING
AGAINST UNDISTURBED
EARTH
HYDRANT DRAIN OPENINGS
FURNISH TRANSITION GASKETS
TO RECEIVE PIPES
PRECAST CONCRETE BLOCK
~~IR ~~~c~w;KB~~~ tM~~b~o/\Wb~fNlfRIAL
DRAIN.
HYDRANT INSTALLATION
N.T.S.
X=B" WHEN ADJACENT TO P.C.C., AGGREGATE, BITUMINOUS OR BRICK BASE COURSE.
@} 30" LONG #4 REBARS AT 30" SPACING (USED ONLY 'M-iEN ADJACENT TO P.C.C. PAVEMENT
OR P.c.c. BASE)
@ 2-#4 REBARS SHALL BE PLACED LONGITUDINALLY ONLY WHEN CROSSING UTILITY TRENCHES.
COMBINATION CONCRETE CURB AND GUTTER
TYPE B6.18
N.T.S.
VILLAGE OF DWIGHT
TYPICAL SUBDIVISION
STANDARD DETAILS
IW.W!lil'I' flL.l:llO.
BOK • 8-0-527 9~-~7 _ ~?1 -~* ;;: GJO l Yti:>i____ I 1 Cf' 1

(
(
(
DESIGN STANDARDS
--1 I -·j
--1
---
--+---
--: -
-~-
--+-
-,'' -
--' '' --,-- ---::.;-:.;:::i_..+=-~==-=.~-:::;:::-~
-~- --''
_ ,__
--j.--·
.. -r--- --
-'.
ELEMENTARY
SCHOOL SITE
' --,-
NEIGH60AHOOO
~~' PARK
/;
·?. \ ' ;' : ~ : f. .. . ' ' .... ' .
' . ~,--..,...,- . . - ..
\ . . . ; : . ~ . : . . : .
' ' . : . . . - - .
·. ,..,._ . ...:..-. - . .;.... ·---- -~------·-·-.. ..l...--
.... ",;·'{' ::.;.•, ...
:y. : : :' ; ; : ~ ; : ~ : ~ . ; . : ·'
/
53
r
BLOCKS SHALL HAVE SUFFICIENT
WIDTH TO PROVIDE
FOR TWO TIERS OF LOTS OF
APPROPRIATE DEPTH EXCEPT
'NHERE CYrllERWISE REQUIRED
TO SEPARATE RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOP)tENT FRO\! TllROUGH
TRAFFIC.
SIDE LOT LillES SHALL 13E AT
RIGHT ANGLES TO STRAIGHT
STREET LINES OR RADIAL TO
CURVED STREET LINF.S ON
WHICH THE LOTS FACE.
STREETS SHALL INTERSECT
EACH OTHER AT AS !'!EARLY
RIGHT A!'IGLES AS TOPOGRAPllY
.-\ND OTHER Lil!ITING
FAC70RS OF GOOD DESIGN
?ER.l!IT.
CORNER LOTS SHALL HAVE AN
EXTR,\ ·HDTll THAT IS ADEl
q~ATE TO PERlffc Ol"lL!lING
SETBACKS FnOll ~WE ST!l ~ETS.

(
(
--~. - --+-
'*0
0
--+---,
--+---!
---+--
---1--
---1---
•
---+--
'
MAJOR
---.r -
-+-
-+-
--i---
--1--
--!--
--1' ---
--1--
_:_j---
--c~
-+. -
--\ ' ·1·¥1--+·+· I I f I
b.. COLLECTOR
I I . , I I
DESIGN STANDARDS
STREET
.
--!.- -
--1--
• --1.- -
--1. --
---.! --
--!--
• --+--- • -+-
--r--
-+-
--+---
·-~-1r-'
I '
STREET
I
I
IJOUULE rnONTAGE ANO REVF.RSE FRONTAGE
LCYl'S SHALL BE PROHIOITED EXCEPT WHERE
l/ECESSARY TO PROVIDE SEPARATION OF
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT FROll THROUGH
TRAFFIC OR TO OVERCOllE SPECIFIC DISADVANTAGES
OF TOPOGRAPHY AND ORIENTATION
•
g TllE NUMBER OF INTERSECTIONS ALONG. llAo
---+-f::::::._j JOH STREETS SHALL BE HF.LO TO A "llINIa::
0.. ,
<(
::i;
l!UM. WHEREVER PRACTICABLE THE DISTANCE
BETWEEN SUCH INTERSECTIONS
SHALL l/CYI' BE LESS THAN l.000 FEET .
BLOCK LENGTHS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS
SHALL BE l/CYI' LESS THAN 1, 000 ·FT IN
LEl/GTfl NOR llORE THAN 1,800 FEET IN
LENGTH.
STREET JOGS SHALL BE NCYI' LESS THAN
125 FEET CENTER LINE TO CENTER LINE
PROPOSED SUBDIVISIONS ADJACENT TO llAJOR
STREETS SHALL PROVIDE FOR ADEQUATE
PRCYl'ECTION OF RESIDEJ;TIAL PROPERTIES,
CONTROL OF ACCESS. AND TllE SEPARATION
OF THROUGH ANO LOCAL TRAFFIC BY (a)
l!ARGINAL ACCESS STREET OR (b) REVERSED
FRONTAGE WITH SCREEN PLANTING.
CUL-OE-SAC STREETS DESIGNED TO HAVE
ONE END PERllAllENTLY CLOSED SHALL NCYI'
EXCEED 500 FEET IN LENGTH.
-!.Of-
I I
54

(
(
. (
CLASSIFICATION OF STREETS
- I I .
i
MAJOR STREETS should carry through traffic
past residential areas. . .
COLLECTOR STREETS should serve to carry traffic
from local areas to the arterial system.
"rt.
~IINOR (LOCAL) STREETS should only serve abutting
land.
~IARGINAL ACCESS STREETS provide access to properties
which would otherwise have to abut a
maJor street or other right-of-way in an undesirable
manner .
55

(
INTERSECTION CESIGN
Bad
·/·',. - .......
4-way i ntersectian
16 collision paints
3-way intersection
Only 3 collision points
56
Better
II
Jog intersection
Dangerous traffic pattern
