CHAPTER 01
COMPILATION AND INTERPRETATION
1. TITLE. This ordinance shall be known as the "City Code of Decatur."
2. CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS. Unless the context requires otherwise, the words
and phrases shall have and include the several meanings here given:
"City" - City of Decatur, Illinois.
"Code" - City Code of Decatur and amendments thereto.
"Council" - Council of the City of Decatur.
"Person" - Any firm, corporation or association of any kind, as well as persons of either
sex.
"Street" - Any public street or way and any sidewalk or alley or public area in the City of
Decatur.
"Seal" - Seal of the City of Decatur.
"Mayor" - The Mayor of the City of Decatur and Local Liquor Control Commissioner, as
the case may be.
"Manager" - The City Manager of the City of Decatur.
"In the City" and "Within the City" - All territory over which the City now has or shall
hereafter acquire jurisdiction for any lawful purpose.
"Year" - A calendar year unless otherwise expressed.
The words "person, firm or corporation" shall be deemed to include any association or
organization of any kind.
The words "This ordinance" wherever used in this Code shall be held and taken to mean
the entire Code, including each section thereof.
The words "written" or "in writing" may include printing.
In all cases where the words "wholesale" or "wholesale dealer" are used in this
ordinance, unless otherwise specifically defined, they shall be understood to relate to the sale of
goods, merchandise, articles, or things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of
resale, as distinguished from a retail dealer who sells in smaller quantities direct to the consumer.
Masculine gender shall include feminine gender and vice versa.
Present tense shall include the future tense.
Reference by number to any Chapter and Section hereof shall be deemed to include the
penalty section of said Chapter for violation, if any, and if none, the general penalty section set out
in this Chapter.
These rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this ordinance which
contains any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content
may be repugnant thereto.
All general words, provisions, terms and phrases herein contained shall be liberally
construed in order that the true intent of the City Council may be carried out. Each section of this
Code shall be considered separable. The section captions or headings in this Code are intended
for convenience only and are not to be deemed in any manner to modify, explain, enlarge or
restrict any of the provisions hereof.
3. AMENDMENTS. Any addition or amendment to this Code, when passed in such form
as to indicate the intention of the Council to make the same a part of this Code, shall be deemed to
be incorporated herein so that a reference to the City Code of Decatur shall be understood to
include such amendment or addition.
In case of amendment of any section of this ordinance containing the provisions for which a
penalty is provided in another section, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held
to relate to the section so amended or the amending section, whether re-enacted in the amendatory
ordinance or not, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein.
4. REVISIONS. The City Clerk shall prepare and publish revised sheets of each loose
leaf page in need of revision by reason of amendment or repeal at intervals not exceeding one
Chapter 01
year, upon direction of the Council. Immediately following each revised section shall be given the
date of the last amendment of that section.
5. CLERK'S COPIES. The Clerk shall keep at least one loose leaf copy of this Code in
addition to the record required by law to be kept, and shall keep said loose leaf copy up to date by
substituting for the original sheets all revised sheets.
6. DISTRIBUTION. All of the printed copies of the Code belonging to the City shall be
deposited with the Clerk. The Clerk shall deliver an adequate number of copies thereof to the
Legal Department, one copy thereof to the City Manager and the Director of each Department of
the City, one copy thereof to each member of the Council, and to such other persons as the Council
may direct. The City Manager shall have the power to extend or reciprocate courtesies of other
municipalities by presenting to them a copy of this Code at the expense of the City as may seem
suitable.
7. CITATION. The City Code of Decatur shall be cited by Chapter number and by
section number.
8. REPEALS - EXCLUSIONS. All general ordinances or parts of general ordinances of
the City not included in this Code are hereby expressly repealed, except such ordinances as are
referred to therein as being still in force, or are by necessary implication herein reserved from
repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following section), from which are excluded
the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
Tax Levy and Abatement Ordinances.
Appropriation Ordinances.
Ordinances Relating to Boundaries, including disconnections and annexations of territory
from and to the City.
Chapter 01
Franchise or other ordinances granting special privileges to any person, firm or
corporation.
Contract Ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance
of warrants.
Salary and Wage Ordinances.
Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys, easements or public places.
Local Improvement Ordinances, including ordinances establishing special assessment
districts.
Ordinances for Bond Issues.
Ordinances relating to elections and precincts.
Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the City.
Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of personal property by or from the City.
Ordinances relating to Civil Defense, Mutual Aid and Operations.
The Zoning Ordinance and amendments thereto including zonings.
Ordinance Establishing Fire Limits.
Ordinances relating to personnel rules and regulations, but not including the Personnel
Ordinance, Ordinance #78-28.
Ordinances, Resolutions and schedules establishing parking meter zones, through streets,
one-way streets, loading zones, parking limitations, stop signs, ingress and egress to and from
streets and alleys, and yield signs or other traffic and parking regulations.
Ordinances relating to the Motor Fuel Tax and Municipal Retailers Occupation Tax.
Ordinances relating to or granting powers to park districts or sanitary districts.
Ordinances relating to the discharge of sanitary sewage or industrial wastes on public
highways or into storm water sewers.
Ordinances relating to awards for suggestions of employees.
Ordinances granting variances and special permits.
Ordinances relating to fiscal policies of the City, including accounting, separation of funds,
restrictions on funds, investment of funds and the authorized depositories of the City.
Ordinances relating to settlement of claims against the City.
Chapter 01
Right-Of-Way Encroachment Ordinances.
Ordinances relating to the Decatur Housing Authority.
Ordinances authorizing public improvements and approving plans and specifications.
All special ordinances.
Ordinance imposing a Municipal Service Occupation Tax.
Construction ordinances, regulations and specifications.
9. PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES. No ordinances relating to railroads or railroad
crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service, or rates of
public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the passage of this ordinance or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as this Code may contain provision for such matters, in which case
this ordinance shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in the respect of
such provisions only.
10. EFFECT OF REPEALS. Whenever an ordinance or part of this Code shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance, or part of this Code, or portion
thereof repealed or modified shall continue in force until the effective date of such subsequent
ordinance following the publication or posting of same when such publication or posting is
required by law.
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance or part of this
Code, whether such former ordinance or part of this Code is expressly repealed or not, as to any
offense committed against the former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any
way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture,
or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claims arising before the new ordinance takes
Chapter 01
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance or portion of this
Code in force at the time of such proceedings, as far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such provision may, by consent of
the City, be applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether
the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the same subject or any other
ordinance.
Nothing contained in this or the two preceding sections shall be construed as abating any
action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein repealed; or as
discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under any section or
provision of ordinances existing at the time of passage of this ordinance.
11. PENALTIES. Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act or duty is
declared to be a breach of any ordinance of the City, or unlawful or is prohibited, and there shall
be no fine or penalty prescribed for such breach, any person who shall be convicted of such
breach shall be adjudged to pay a fine of not more than Two Hundred Dollars ($200) for each
offense, and whenever a minimum but no maximum fine or penalty is imposed, the Court may, in
its discretion, adjudge the offender or offenders to pay any sum of money exceeding the minimum
fine or penalty fixed, but not exceeding the sum of Two Hundred Dollars ($200).
12. ELECTION BY PROSECUTING OFFICER. In any case where the same offense
is made punishable or is created by different chapters of this Code, or sections or clauses in
sections, the Legal Department may elect the section under which to proceed, but no more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense, provided that revocation of a
Chapter 01
license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar enforcement in
addition to any other penalty imposed.
13. INVALIDITY. The validity of any section or chapter hereof shall not in any way
affect the validity of any other section or chapter.
14. REVIVAL. When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be subsequently repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance,
clause or provision.
Chapter 01
CHAPTER 02
CORPORATE SEAL
1. DESCRIPTION-FACSIMILE. The corporate seal of the City shall be circular in
form, and shall be so constructed as to impress the same upon paper by pressure. There shall be
an inner circle one-fourth of an inch from the outer circle and between said circles at the top shall
be the words "City of Decatur, Illinois." In the interior or center of the circle shall be the figure
of Stephen Decatur in the uniform of Commodore of the United States Navy, the figure standing
upon its right foot and its left foot resting upon a box of ammunition or powder, and in the background
at the left of the seal shall be the outline of a wooden ship mast, metal bound at intervals,
and at the right of the seal shall be the butt of a muzzle loading cannon, together with a lanyard
leading therefrom, and beneath the figure shall be the words "Stephen Decatur" in letters smaller
than the words "City of Decatur, Illinois." A facsimile of said seal showing the words and figures
thereof is as follows:
2. USE AND CUSTODY. The seal shall be and remain in the custody of the City
Clerk to be used by the Clerk in all cases provided for by the laws of the United States, the State
of Illinois, the Ordinances of the City of Decatur and in all such cases whereby the laws or customs
of nations the use of the corporate seal of the City becomes necessary.
CHAPTER 03
CITY DATUM
1. ESTABLISHED. The base, or vertical datum for the City of Decatur shall be that as
established by the United States Geological Survey as the vertical distance in feet above mean sea
level.
2. CONSTRUCTION TO GRADE. All elevations for construction work for plans
prepared by the City of Decatur shall be based on vertical datum, referred to above.
CHAPTER 04
FISCAL YEAR AND MUNICIPAL YEAR
1. FISCAL YEAR. The fiscal year of the City shall commence on January 1 of each year.
(Amended, Ordinance 2013-26, April 15, 2013)
2. MUNICIPAL YEAR. The municipal year of the City shall commence on May 1 of each
year.
04/2013
CHAPTER 05
OFFICIAL TIME
1. TIME. Central Standard Time shall be the official time within the City for the transaction
of all City business; except that from two o'clock (2:00) a.m., on the second (2nd) Sunday of
March of each year, official time for the City shall be advanced one hour and at two o'clock
(2:00) a.m., on the first Sunday of November of each year, by the retarding of one hour, official
time shall be returned to Central Standard Time; and all proceedings of the Council and all
business of the City shall be regulated thereby; and when by ordinance, resolution, or action of
any City officer or body, an act must be performed at or within a prescribed time, it shall be
performed according to such official time. (AMENDED, Ordinance 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
2. CLOCKS. All clocks or other timepieces in or upon public buildings or other premises
maintained at the expense of the City shall be set and run according to the official time as
provided herein; and it is hereby made the duty of the officer or other person having control and
charge of such building or buildings and premises to see that the clocks or other timepieces are
set and run in accordance with the official time as provided for herein.
Revised 05/09
CHAPTER 06
CITY COUNCIL
1. MEMBERSHIP. The City Council shall consist of the Mayor and six Councilmen
each elected for a term of four years and until their respective successors are elected and
qualified, which said term shall commence upon their respective inaugurations at the first regular
or special meeting of the Council in the month of May next following the regular municipal
election at which such officers were elected.
2. MEETINGS. Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the first, third and
any fifth Monday of each month, at the hour of 5:30 P.M. in the Council Chambers in Decatur,
Illinois, located on the third floor of the Decatur Civic Center, said Civic Center being located at
One Gary K. Anderson Plaza, Decatur, Illinois; provided that, if any regular meeting shall fall
upon a holiday, then such meeting shall be held upon the first business day following.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-83, September 16, 2002)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-29, May 1, 2000)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 94-54, July 18, 1994)
3. SPECIAL MEETINGS. Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or any two
Councilmen upon twenty-four hours notice to every member of the Council; provided that, the
requirement of a notice shall not be binding in any special meeting at which all of the members
of the Council are present as provided by Statute.
Such notice may be served by any person in the City, and it shall be the duty of the City
Clerk, when given copies of such notice, to serve the same or cause the same to be served
immediately.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 90-35, March 19, 1990)
Revised 01/2016
Chapter 06
4. PRESIDING OFFICER. The Mayor shall preside at all regular and special meetings
of the City Council; provided that, in the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall
preside. The Mayor Pro Tem shall be selected by the City Council by ordinance.
5. ORDER OF BUSINESS. The following shall be the Order of Business for the
regular meetings of the Council:
(a) Call to Order
(b) Roll Call
(c) Appearance of Citizens
(d) Minutes of Previous Meetings
(e) Unfinished Business
(f) New Business
(g) Other Business
(h) Adjournment
The order of business may be changed or varied upon the vote of a majority of the
Councilmen present. (Amended, Ordinance 2016-01, January 19, 2016, Amended, Ordinance
2009-39, May 18, 2009)
6. EXECUTIVE SESSION CONFIDENTIALITY. Any subject matter
committed to executive session shall be confidential. No public disclosure of the corporate
authority’s discussions held or any decisions made in executive session shall be made until the
matter is made public by announcement, publication or official action by or at the direction of
the corporate authorities or the City Manager. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-02, January 21, 2014)
Chapter 06
7. ADDRESSING MEETING. It shall be unlawful for any person other than the City
Manager to address or attempt to address any regular or special meeting of the Council except
with the consent of a majority of the Councilmen present.
8. DISTURBING MEETING. It shall be unlawful to disturb or interrupt any regular or
special meeting of the Council. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be fined
not less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars
($500.00) for each offense, and may be summarily ejected from the Council Room and the
premises where it is situated. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-66, October 31, 2011)
9. QUORUM. Four (4) members of the Council shall constitute a quorum.
10. VOTING. The affirmative vote of four (4) members of the Council is required to
adopt a resolution or to pass an ordinance unless a greater number is otherwise required by an
applicable ordinance. The affirmative vote of five (5) members of the Council is required to
adopt a resolution or pass an ordinance which:
(a) Makes an emergency appropriation;
(b) Grants a zoning variance not approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals;
(c) Amends the Zoning Ordinance or a zoning district where there is on file a protest
conforming with the applicable provisions of the Municipal Code;
(d) Authorizes a contract pertaining to a public improvement involving an outlay of
Twenty Thousand Dollars ($20,000) or more without bidding; or,
(e) Reverses a decision of the Electrical Commission which revoked or suspended a
license.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 93-01, January 4, 1993); (Amended, Ordinance No. 2012-54)
Chapter 06
11. MAYOR PRO TEM. That, in addition to the authority and duty to preside at
meetings of the Council in the absence of the Mayor therefrom, if a temporary absence or
disability of the Mayor incapacitates him from the performance of his duties but does not create a
vacancy in such office, then the Mayor Pro Tem, during such absence or disability, shall perform
the duties and possess all the rights and powers of the Mayor.
12. ABSENCE OF MAYOR AND MAYOR PRO TEM. That, if temporary absence
or disability of both the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tem incapacitates each of them from the
performance of the duties of the Mayor but does not create a vacancy in such offices, then the
City Manager, during such absences or disabilities shall perform the duties and possess all the
rights and powers of the Mayor, except that said City Manager shall exercise no legislative
power or duties, and the Council shall by majority vote of those present thereat designate some
member to preside at any Council meeting.
13. SUBMITTING ITEMS TO COUNCIL. Ordinances, resolutions and motions put
before the Council shall be in writing, and a copy of each ordinance and each resolution shall be
given each Council member called upon to vote thereon before the vote is taken. Ordinances and
resolutions shall be put before the Council by the announcement of the title thereof by the City
Clerk. Only upon the express request of a Council member shall the full text of an ordinance or
resolution be read aloud.
14. SALARIES. For those Council members whose terms begin on or after May 1,
2001, the annual salary shall be: Mayor: $8,000.00; City Councilman: $4,000.00.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-07, February 21, 2000)
15. RESPONSIBLE BIDDER (Repealed, Ordinance No. 2009-58, August 17, 2009)
CHAPTER 07
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
1. EFFECT OF CHAPTER. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply alike to all
officers and employees of the City, regardless of the time of the creation of the office or of the
time of the appointment of the officers, including officers and members of the Police and Fire
Departments of the City.
2. APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL. The City Manager shall have the power and
authority to appoint and remove at will the Deputy City Manager, all directors of departments,
all deputy and assistant department directors, fire marshals, battalion chiefs, police personnel
above the rank of sergeant, division managers and supervisors, administrative secretaries,
executive assistant, administrative assistant, members of the Legal Department, Personnel
Specialists, Systems Administrators, Senior Systems Analyst, Systems Analysts, Budget and
Revenue Officer, Risk Management Assistant, Civil Engineer I, Civil Engineer II, Assistant City
Engineer, GIS Specialist, Fleet Supervisor, Water Production Maintenance Supervisor, Water
Production Operations Supervisor, Supervisor of Technical Services, Police Records Supervisor,
Water Distribution Supervisor, Water Metering Supervisor, City Forestry and Property
Supervisor, Foreman, Economic Development Officer, Senior Planner, Planners, Planning and
Development Manager, Development and Revitalization Specialist, Senior Crime Analyst, Crime
Analyst, Neighborhood Programs Specialist, Mass Transit Administrator, Grants and
Procurement Manager, Community Liaison Officer, Comptroller, Clerical Support Supervisor,
Neighborhood Programs Manager and temporary and seasonal employees.
Revised 12/2/2019
Chapter 07
(Amended, Ordinance 2017-06, February 6, 2017) (Amended, Ordinance 2016-37, June 20,
2016) (Amended, Ordinance 2016-18, April 4, 2016) (Amended, Ordinance 2015-03, January
20, 2015) (Amended, Ordinance 2014-74, December 15, 2014) (Amended, Ordinance 2014-68,
December 1, 2014) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-99, December 2, 2013) (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2013-77, September 16, 2013) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-55, July 20,
2009) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-50, July 6, 2009) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39,
May 18, 2009) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2006-59, June 19, 2006) (Amended, Ordinance No.
2006-40, May 1, 2006) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2006-05, February 6, 2006) (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2005-23, March 21, 2005) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-102, December 20,
2004) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2003-12, March 3, 2003) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-98,
November 4, 2002) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-52, June 19, 2000) (Amended, Ordinance
No. 2000-08, February 21, 2000) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2019-235, December 2, 2019)
3. OATH. Every officer of the City and every member of a Board or Commission of the
City, shall, before entering upon his duties, take the oath prescribed by law.
4. MONEY RECEIVED. Every officer or employee of the City, or other person who
receives money on behalf of the City, shall turn the same over to the City Treasurer at the end of
the day in which the same is received. Such officers or employees shall keep a true and accurate
account of such receipts with the name of the party paying same, the amount thereof, date of
payment, and the purpose or reason for payment. Such officers or employees shall, on the first
day of each month, render a report under oath to the Director of the Department to which they
are assigned, of all such receipts.
5. BOND. Every officer and employee shall, if required by statute or ordinance, upon
entering upon the duties of the office, give a bond in such amount and with such sureties as may
be provided by ordinance, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the office
or position.
6. SALARIES. All officers and employees of the City shall receive such salaries as may
be provided from time to time by ordinance, unless otherwise fixed by law, and shall be paid at
such periods as directed by the City Manager.
7. PAY PLAN.
Chapter 07
A. Classified employees other than those designated as management employees by the
City Manager shall be paid bi-weekly according to a pay plan established and modified from
time to time by the City Council and upon approval of payrolls submitted to the Council. Said
pay plan shall assign a grade or range to each position classification, and each employee shall be
paid according to the step in that grade or range said employee has achieved, beginning with
Step A at entry into grade unless otherwise directed by the City Manager.
B. Advancement from a lower step to a higher step within the pay plan established by the
Council shall be as authorized and directed by the City Manager, but such advancement shall not
be made more than once in any 6 month period as to steps A to B and B to C and not more than
once annually as to all other steps.
8. PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS.
A. On an employee's starting date, the employee shall supply the Finance Department
with the following information:
(1) A statement indicating the number of dependents to be used in computing the amount
required to be withheld from the employee's paycheck under state and federal tax laws;
(2) A statement authorizing deductions and designating beneficiaries for the appropriate
state pension fund; and,
(3) A statement of information as required for coverage under the City's employee
performance bond.
B. An employee may, at any time, make arrangements in writing with the Finance
Department regarding the following deductions, as approved by the City Manager: employee
insurance, credit union shares or loan repayment, union dues, United Way, Police Benevolent
Association or other similar purposes.
Chapter 07
9. VETERAN'S DAY. Veteran's Day shall be celebrated for all City purposes on the 11th
day of November of each year, as provided by administrative regulation and by collective
bargaining agreement.
10. VACATION. At the discretion of the City Manager, vacation time may be prorated
based on continuous service and granted to employees who resign in good standing.
11. PART TIME, TEMPORARY AND SEASONAL EMPLOYEES.
A. Permanent part-time employees who work at least 20 hours but fewer than 40 hours
per week shall accrue the following:
(1) After completion of one year continuous service uninterrupted by resignation or
discharge, one (1) week of vacation per year, which must be taken within twelve (12) months
from the date that the same accrues;
(2) One half (1/2) day of sick leave for each month of continuous and uninterrupted
service, to a maximum of sixty seven (67) days.
B. Temporary and seasonal full-time employees shall be paid for overtime at the same
rate as other employees in the same department that are not designated as management by the
City Manager.
12. ARRESTS. The members of the City Council, the City Manager, the members of the
Fire and Police Departments, the officers and employees designated as inspectors in the
Economic and Community Development Department, the Neighborhood Service Officers and
members of the Millikin University Police are hereby declared to be conservators of the peace
with such powers to make arrests as are given to the conservators of the peace by Statute.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03,
Chapter 07
February 1, 2010) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009) (Amended, Ordinance No.
94-70, September 19, 1994) (Amended, Ordinance 2014-38, August 4, 2014)
13. TERMINATION OF OFFICE. Every officer or employee of the City, upon the
termination of his office or employment, for any cause whatsoever, shall deliver to the Director
of his department all property, books, and records which may be the property of the City. Upon
such termination of the office of a Director of a department of the City, such property, books and
records shall be delivered to the City Manager.
14. IMPERSONATION. It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent
himself or herself to be an officer or employee of the City, or, without being duly authorized by
the City, exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of a City officer or
employee, or to wear in public any uniform, or any badge, patch, device or other insignia,
identical with or substantially similar in appearance to those worn by the officers or employees
of any department of the City as their official uniform or insignia. Any person violating this
section shall be fined not less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor more than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-66, October 31)
15. INTERFERENCE. It shall be unlawful to interfere with or hinder any officer or
employee of the City while he is engaged in the duties of his office or employment. Any person,
firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than Two
Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-66, October 31, 2011)
16. RETIREMENT AGE. The retirement age of all members of the Police and Fire
departments is hereby fixed at 63 years. Mandatory retirement for additional twelve-month
Chapter 07
periods may be extended by the City Manager where he deems the convenience and necessity of
the public service requires such additional service of an individual employee.
17. WORKER'S COMPENSATION. All officers and employees of the City, including
all members of the Police and Fire Departments of the City, shall be covered by the provisions of
the Acts of the General Assembly entitled, "The Workers' Compensation Act" and "Workers'
Occupational Diseases Act."
18. DEMOTION FOR CAUSE. In addition to the power and authority to discharge or
remove or suspend an officer or employee in the classified civil service of the City, the Civil
Service Commission shall be, and it is hereby, empowered and authorized to demote, except that
no officer or employee in such service who is appointed under the rules and after examination
may be demoted except for cause upon written charges and after an opportunity to be heard in
his own defense and otherwise in the same manner as is provided for discharge or removal or
suspension for a period of more than thirty days.
19. VOLUNTARY DEMOTION. In addition to the power and authority to demote for
cause as provided in Section 18 hereof, said Commission shall be, and it is hereby, empowered
and authorized to demote upon request of the officer or employee in the classified service
concurred in by the City Manager. Such request and concurrence shall be in writing filed with
the Commission and shall each specify the position to which demotion is requested and
concurred in. The request shall be supported by appearance before the Commission wherein the
same is personally acknowledged by such officer or employee.
20. PLACEMENT ON DEMOTION. Demotion, whether voluntary or involuntary as
provided herein, may be to any rank in the promotional order below the position demoted from,
if there is such an identifiable order. In the absence of such identifiable promotional order,
Chapter 07
demotion shall be to a position of suitable activity and responsibility as may be determined by
the Commission upon consultation with the City Manager, provided that no demotion shall result
in a transfer between departments except upon the concurrence in writing by the City Manager.
21. POSITION AVAILABILITY. If an employee or officer in the classified service is
demoted to a position wherein a vacancy exists in the authorized numbers of such position on the
effective date of such demotion, such vacancy shall be filled thereby before certification and
appointment from any eligibility register for such position. If such an employee or officer is
demoted to a position wherein no vacancy exists in the then authorized number thereof on the
effective date of such demotion, said authorized number shall be without further action increased
by one until the next succeeding vacancy occurs therein whereupon without further action said
authorized number shall be reduced by one, unless otherwise authorized by the City Manager.
22. PROMOTION TO UNCLASSIFIED POSITION.
A. An employee who has been appointed in accordance with the provisions of statute,
ordinance and rule to a position in the classified service and who, after expiration of the
probationary period attached to said position, if any, is subsequently appointed as authorized by
and pursuant to the provisions of law or ordinance to an unclassified position or office, except
Foreman, shall continue to occupy said classified position with the duties of said unclassified
position being substituted for those of such classified position. Such person shall remain a
member of, and said classified position shall continue to be classified in, the department, force or
service in which the same was classified at the time of such subsequent appointment. Seniority
and pension rights and civil service status shall not be affected by appointment to an unclassified
position and the time served therein shall constitute creditable service in said classified position.
In lieu of the compensation and benefits authorized for said classified position and attached
Chapter 07
thereto, the benefits of said unclassified position shall be substituted, whereupon the same shall
be considered to be authorized for and attached to that particular classified position continued
to be occupied as aforesaid. In the event of such an appointment, the authorized number of the
affected classified position, upon the direction of the City Manager, may be increased by one, in
which case the vacancy resulting therefrom shall be filled as provided by law or ordinance.
Upon resignation or removal from an unclassified position before the termination of occupancy
of a classified position the substitution of duties, and of compensation and benefits, shall cease.
If at the time such substitution of duties ceases there is a vacancy in the authorized number of the
affected classified position or if none is then existent upon the occurrence of the first vacancy
thereafter, at the direction of the City Manager the authorized number thereof may be reduced by
one and such vacancy eliminated without appointment from any eligibility register. During the
continuance of substitution of duties as aforesaid, said classified position may be modified,
eliminated or otherwise affected the same, and in the same manner, as if such substitution had
not occurred, and an employee or officer may be suspended, demoted, or removed or discharged
for cause from the classified service the same, and in the same manner, as if said substitution had
not occurred whether the basis thereof arises out of or is connected with the substituted duties or
otherwise. (Amended, Ordinance No. 94-70, September 19, 1994)
B. Subparagraph (A) hereof shall be inapplicable to any such employee who remains in an
unclassified position in excess of three (3) months, at which time such employee will no longer
be entitled to any rights or privileges specified therein nor to any rights arising out of civil
service law generally. (Amended, Ordinance No. 95-54, October 30, 1995)
23. APPOINTMENTS FROM ELIGIBLE REGISTERS.
Chapter 07
A. Department directors, as appointing officers, are authorized to appoint any candidate
for any non-promotional classified position with the City who is placed on the eligible register
for such position by the Civil Service Commission, without regard to the rank of said person on
such register. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-03, January 4, 2002) (Amended, Ordinance No.
2018-08, March 19, 2018)
24. COMMISSION RULES. Except as the provisions of Sections 18 through 23,
inclusive, are applicable to the City Manager, the power and authority of the Civil Service
Commission to make rules shall apply thereto to carry out the purpose and intent thereof, but no
rule contrary to or in conflict with said provisions shall be made.
25. DEFENSE AND INDEMNITY. Except for gross negligence, willful and wanton
conduct or criminal misconduct, if any claim or action is instituted against an officer, employee
or member of a board, commission or committee of the City, or a former officer, employee or
member, based upon an injury allegedly arising out of an act or omission occurring within the
performance of the duties on behalf of the City of such officer, employee or member, provided
notice of such claim or action is given to the City Clerk within a reasonable time, the City, at it's
option, shall do or cause to be done, one or more of the following:
(a) Appear and defend against said claim;
(b) Indemnify such officer, employee or member for the cost and expense of defending
against such claim or action;
(c) Pay any judgment, or indemnify such employee or member for any judgment, based on
such claim or action; or,
(d) Pay, or so indemnify for, the compromise or settlement of such claim or action.
Chapter 07
26. LINE ITEM AUTHORIZATION. The City Manager is authorized to expend
Forty Thousand Dollars ($40,000.00) or less for single items of personal property, parcels of real
property, contracts for professional, technical or expert services or construction contracts, or for
matters deemed in the best interests of the City as determined by the City Manager, without
further approval of Council, but only if specifically set forth as a line item and approved by
Council in the approved budget and there exists sufficient funds for said expenditures.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2003-47, July 21, 2003) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2012-13, April 2,
2012); (Amended, Ordinance No. 2019-120, September 3, 2019, Effective January 1, 2020)
27. AUTHORIZATION. The City Manager, and those employees designated by said
officer, are authorized to expend Twenty Thousand Dollars ($20,000.00) or less for single items
of personal property, parcels of real property, contracts for professional, technical or expert
services or construction contracts, or for matters deemed in the best interests of the City as
determined by the City Manager, without further approval of Council, but only if the Council has
appropriated sufficient funds for said expenditures. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2003-47, July 21,
2003) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2012-13, April 2, 2012); (Amended, Ordinance No. 2019-120,
September 3, 2019, Effective January 1, 2020)
CHAPTER 8
ETHICS
(Adopted, Ordinance No. 2004-44, May 17, 2004)
Effective May 19, 2004
1. ADOPTION. The regulations of Sections 5-15 (5 ILCS 430/5-15) and Article 10 (5
ILCS 430/10-10 through 10-40) of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, 5 ILCS 430/1-1 et.
seq., (hereinafter referred to as the "Act" in this Section) are hereby adopted by reference and made
applicable to the officers and employees of the City to the extent required by 5 ILCS 430/70-5.
2. GIFT ACCEPTANCE PROHIBITED. The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited
to be solicited or accepted under the Act, by any officer or any employee of the City, is hereby prohibited.
3. GIFT OFFERING PROHIBITED. The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be
offered or made to an officer or employee of the City under the Act, is hereby prohibited.
4. POLITICAL ACTIVITY PARTICIPATION PROHIBITED. The participation in
political activities prohibited under the Act, by any officer or employee of the City, is hereby prohibited.
5. DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this Chapter, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall be
defined as set forth in 5 ILCS 430/70-5 (c).
6. PENALTY. The penalties for violations of this Chapter shall be the same as those penalties
set forth in 5 ILCS 430/50-5 for similar violations of the Act.
7. OTHER CODE REGULATIONS. This Chapter does not repeal or otherwise amend or
modify any existing ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of City officers and employees.
To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less restrictive than this Chapter,
however, the provision of this Chapter shall prevail in accordance with provisions of 5 ILCS 430/70-5
(a).
8. AMENDMENTS. Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this Chapter shall be incorporated into this Chapter by reference and shall be applicable to the
solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any
amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated
into this Chapter by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the City.
9. ILLINOIS SUPREME COURT ACTION. (A) If the Illinois Supreme Court declares
the Act unconstitutional in its entirety, then this Chapter shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
Supreme Court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals or rehearings. This
Chapter shall be deemed repealed without further action by the Corporate Authorities of the City if the
Act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois Supreme Court.
(B) If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act unconstitutional but upholds the
constitutionality of the remainder of the Act, or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the
remainder of the Act as adopted by this Chapter shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part
of this Chapter relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without
further action by the Corporate Authorities of the City.
CHAPTER 9
DEPARTMENT OF WATER MANAGEMENT
(REPEALED, Ordinance No. 2017-08, February 6, 2017)
CHAPTER 10
CITY MANAGER
1. APPOINTMENT. The City Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term, and
shall be so appointed, or removed, by the Council by ordinance and shall take oath of office as
provided by law.
2. ABSENCE OF MANAGER. During the temporary absence of the City Manager
from the City, or the temporary inability of said manager to fulfill the duties of said office, the
same shall be performed by such administrative officer of the City as may be designated by said
manager.
3. AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY. The City Manager shall be the
administrative head of the municipal government and shall be responsible for the administration
of all departments thereof, and shall have and exercise all powers and duties of said office as
may be provided by law or ordinance, and shall cause the enforcement of all laws and ordinances
within the City, and otherwise administer the policies of the City as the same are determined by
the Council.
4. ORGANIZATION AND RULES. In order to implement and carry out the powers
and duties of said office, the City Manager may cause the various departments of the City to be
organized and administered as he may from time to time deem appropriate, and may promulgate
and cause to be enforced reasonable rules and regulations, not contrary to law or ordinance.
Revised 09/2019
Chapter 10
5. COUNCIL MEETINGS. The City Manager shall attend all meetings of the Council
and keep it informed as to the affairs of the City and recommend to it from time to time such
action as may be deemed necessary or desirable for the better welfare and interest of the City.
6. BUDGET AND APPROPRIATION. The City Manager shall annually cause a
budget to be prepared and submitted to the Council in time for consideration and enactment by
the Council as provided by law and City Code. Upon approval by the Council of said budget and
without further action by Council, the City Manager is authorized to approve expenditures in
accordance therewith, and also to approve transfers of funds within departments, provided that
such transfers do not result in any department or fund expending funds in excess of those
approved therefor by Council. (AMENDED BY ORDINANCE NO. 89-37, April 28, 1989)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2019-135, September 3, 2019)
7. LICENSES. Without prior approval or consent of the Council as to individual
licenses, the City Manager may cause the issuance of all City licenses authorized or required by
law or ordinance, except local liquor licenses, and except as otherwise provided in this Code or
other ordinance, if said manager is, in the manager's discretion, satisfied that such issuance
complies with the provisions of law, ordinance, regulation or rule applicable thereto.
8. ASSISTANT CITY MANAGERS. There is hereby created the office of Assistant
City Manager, the occupants whereof shall be appointed, and may be removed, by the City
Manager at will. The Assistant City Managers shall have such duties and responsibilities, and
direct and administer such departments, as are assigned by the City Manager and this Code.
Effective June 1, 2017, the office of Assistant City Manager shall be eliminated, and the office of
Deputy City Manager shall be created, the occupant whereof shall be appointed, and may be
removed, by the City Manager at will. The Deputy City Manager shall have such duties and
Chapter 10
responsibilities, and direct and administer such departments, as are assigned by the City Manager
and this Code.
(AMENDED, Ordinance 2017-06, February 6, 2017)
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2000-08, February 21, 2000)
9. CITY CLERK. There is hereby created the office of City Clerk, the occupant
whereof shall be appointed, and may be removed, by the Mayor with the approval of Council.
The City Manager shall make reasonable rules, regulations and directives not in conflict with law
or ordinance to govern, administer and supervise the activities of the City Clerk.
(AMENDED, Ordinance 2017-06, February 6, 2017)
10. DUTIES OF CITY CLERK. The City Clerk shall act as Clerk of the Council and
the Local Liquor Control Commission and shall be keeper of the City seal and of the code,
ordinances, resolutions, minutes and other records and documents of the City, except those by
law or ordinance required to be kept by others, all of which shall be indexed so as to be readily
accessible, and shall perform such other duties and functions as may be assigned by the Council
or the City Manager. The City Clerk may also appoint, and remove, one or more persons as
Deputy City Clerk, to perform such duties and have such rights and responsibilities as are
provided by statute.
(Amended, Ordinance 2017-06, February 6, 2017)
CHAPTER 11
ECONOMIC AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
1. ESTABLISHED. There is hereby created and established the Economic and
Community Development Department which shall be so organized and administered as the City
Manager shall from time to time direct, and which shall consist of the Director of Economic and
Community Development and such other officers and employees as the City Manager may from
time to time authorize. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
2. DIRECTOR. There is hereby created the office of Director of Economic and
Community Development, the occupant whereof shall be appointed, and may be removed, by the
City Manager at will. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
3. APPOINTMENTS AND RULES. The Director of Economic and Community
Development shall be the appointing officer of the occupants of all classified positions assigned
to said Department and may make reasonable rules, regulations and directives not in conflict
with law or ordinance to govern and administer the activities and carry out the duties and
responsibilities thereof, subject to the direction and control of the City Manager. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
4. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The Economic and Community
Development Department shall perform such functions and duties, and with such divisions, as
may be assigned from time to time by the City Manager. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07,
February 6, 2017) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2019-139, September 16, 2019)
Revised 09/2019
CHAPTER 12
HUMAN RESOURCES DEPARTMENT
1. ESTABLISHED. There is hereby created and established the Human Resources
Department which shall be so organized and administered as the City Manager shall from time to
time direct, and which shall consist of the Director of Human Resources and such other officers
and employees as the Council may from time to time authorize.
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2017-06, February 6, 2017)
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
2. DIRECTOR. There is hereby created position of Director of Human Resources, the
occupant whereof shall be appointed, and may be removed, by the City Manager at will. The
Director shall report to the City Manager.
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2017-06, February 6, 2017)
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2000-08, February 21, 2000)
3. APPOINTMENTS AND RULES. The Director of Human Resources shall be the
appointing officer of the occupants of all classified positions assigned to said Department and
may make reasonable rules, regulations and directives not in conflict with law or ordinance to
govern and administer the activities and carry out the duties and responsibilities thereof, subject
to the direction and control of the City Manager.
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2017-06, February 6, 2017)
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2000-08, February 21, 2000)
Revised 02/2017
Chapter 12
4. DIVISIONS. The Human Resources Department shall consist of the office of Human
Resources and such other divisions as may be established by the City Manager. The Human
Resources Director shall be the Equal Opportunity Officer for the City, subject to the direction of
the City Manager.
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2017-06, February 6, 2017)
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
5. DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT. The Human Resources Department shall,
under the direction and control of the City Manager, have the following duties and
responsibilities:
(a) To recruit suitable persons for employment by the City in municipal service;
(b) To assist the Civil Service Commission in testing candidates for appointment to, or
promotion in, the classified service;
(c) To administer and enforce the general personnel rules and policies of the City, and to
assist the Civil Service Commission in the administration and enforcement of the rules of said
Commission.
(d) To develop, plan and execute training programs for employees;
(e) To develop and execute programs to serve and make effective the policy of the City
concerning employment, housing, human recognitions, social and environmental betterment and
other human relationships and sociological concern;
(f) To support and assist the programs and operations of the Human Relations
Commission, as directed by the City Manager.
(g) To develop procedures, prepare and monitor the implementation of the annual
budget, including performance measures as well as the fiscal compliance measures established
by the Finance Department;
Chapter 12
(h) To perform such other duties and functions as may be assigned from time to time by
the City Manager.
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2017-06, February 6, 2017)
CHAPTER 14
FIRE DEPARTMENT
1. ESTABLISHED. There is hereby created and established the Fire Department which
shall be so organized and administered as the City Manager shall from time to time direct, and
which shall consist of the Fire Chief and such other officers and employees as the Council may
from time to time authorize.
2. CHIEF. There is hereby created the office of Fire Chief, the occupant whereof shall
be appointed, and may be removed, by the City Manager at will.
3. APPOINTMENTS AND RULES. The Fire Chief shall be the appointing officer of
the occupants of all classified positions assigned to said department, and may make reasonable
rules, regulations and directives not in conflict with law or ordinance to govern and administer
the activities and carry out the duties and responsibilities thereof, subject to the direction and
control of the City Manager.
4. DEPARTMENT DUTIES. The Fire Department is designated the primary
department having jurisdiction of and responsibility for fire suppression, fire prevention, fire
cause or origin determination, arson detection and investigation, rescue of persons, and special
services including, but not limited to, emergency medical service and the encouragement of the
prevention of fire.
5. USE OF EQUIPMENT; PENALTY. No person shall use any motor vehicle,
equipment, appurtenance, tool or apparatus of the City assigned to the Fire Department for any
Revised 10/11
Chapter 14
private purpose, or tamper with, remove, damage, or deface the same, or interfere with the use of
the same by members of the Department or others authorized so to do. Any person who violates
any provisions of this Section shall be fined not less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00)
nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-66, October 31, 2011)
CHAPTER 15
LEGAL DEPARTMENT
1. ESTABLISHED. There is hereby created and established the Legal Department
which shall be so organized and administered as the City Manager shall from time to time direct,
and which shall consist of the Corporation Counsel, as director thereof, and such other officers
and employees as the Council may from time to time authorize.
2. CORPORATION COUNSEL. There is hereby created the office of Corporation
Counsel, the occupant whereof, and the members of said department, shall be appointed, and
may be removed, by the City Manager at will.
3. RULES. The Corporation Counsel may make reasonable rules, regulations and
directives not in conflict with law or ordinance to govern and administer the activities and carry
out the duties and responsibilities of said department, subject to the direction and control of the
City Manager, and shall be the general attorney, advocate and counselor for the City.
4. AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY. The Legal Department shall have the
following duties, responsibilities and authority:
(a) To prosecute, defend, compromise or settle all claims or actions of any nature by or
against the City, or in which it shall be a party in interest, and to enter appearance on behalf of
the City in any court with regard thereto;
(b) To enforce, collect, compromise or settle all judgments, orders or decrees entered in
favor of the City;
Revised 03/09
Chapter 15
(c) To from time to time retain attorneys other than members of the department when it
is deemed by it necessary or desirable so to do;
(d) To generally advise the Council, the City Manager, City officers and employees on
matters pertaining to City affairs;
(e) To prepare or approve all contracts, leases, land acquisition or disposal matters or
other legal documents on behalf of the City, including special assessments;
(f) To prosecute ordinance violations;
(g) To perform such other functions and duties as may be assigned from time to time by
the City Manager; and,
(h) A default in the payment of a fine or any installment of a fine may be collected by any
and all means authorized for the collection of monetary judgments. The Corporation Counsel
may retain attorneys and qualified private collection enterprises for the purpose of collecting any
default in payment of any fine or installment of that fine. Any fees or costs incurred by the city
or another governmental entity through an intergovernmental agreement in any such collection
by attorneys and qualified private collection enterprises retained by the Corporation Counsel or
by another governmental entity through an intergovernmental agreement for those purposes shall
be charged to the offender. (AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2009-09, March 2, 2009)
CHAPTER 16
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
1. ESTABLISHED. There is hereby created and established the Public Works
Department which shall be so organized and administered as the City Manager shall from time to
time direct, and which shall consist of the Public Works Director and such other officers and
employees as the Council may from time to time authorize.
2. DIRECTOR. There is hereby created the office of Public Works Director, the
occupant whereof shall be appointed, and may be removed, by the City Manager at will.
3. APPOINTMENTS AND RULES. The Public Works Director shall be the
appointing officer of the occupants of all classified positions assigned to said Department and
may make reasonable rules, regulations and directives not in conflict with law or ordinance to
govern and administer the activities and carry out the duties and responsibilities thereof, subject
to the direction and control of the City Manager.
4. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The Public Works Department shall perform
such functions and duties, and with such divisions, as may be assigned from time to time by the
City Manager.
5. BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS. In addition to the other duties of said
office, said Director shall act as engineer of and for the Board of Local Improvements.
Revised 10/2018
6. WATER FUND. All revenue or other moneys received by the Public Works
Department or any other Department of the City for the furnishing of water, whether from
service fees, connection fees or otherwise, and from any source whatsoever, shall be segregated
into and placed in a separate fund of the City, which fund shall be designated as the Water Fund
and which shall be expended only for purposes directly relating to the water works, and no
portion thereof shall be expended for the purpose of any other department or for any other
purpose of the City, except that those costs which should be reasonably and properly charged to
the water works may be expended from said Fund. (Amended, Ordinance 2017-08, February 6,
2017).
7. DISCRETIONARY REPAIRS. Within budget constraints determined by the City
Council, the City Public Works Director, or his/her designee, shall have discretionary authority
to select and adopt policies and plans for the care and maintenance of public infrastructure,
including but not limited to streets, parking lots, sidewalks, boulevards, trees, and vegetation,
public spaces, buildings, parks, sewers, and water infrastructure. In considering policies and/or
plans for City infrastructure maintenance, the Public Works Director is authorized to use
discretion in deciding whether and when to perform certain maintenance activities, and the
manner in which they shall be conducted, by balancing the competing needs of limited City
resources with varying degrees of need for maintenance, and shall use his/her best judgment as to
which of competing maintenance needs will best serve the competing interests, and the
general health, safety and welfare of the public. (Amended, Ordinance 2018-57, October 15,
2018).
CHAPTER 17
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEPARTMENT
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-06, February 6, 2017)
1. ESTABLISHED. There is hereby created and established the Information Technology
Department which shall be so organized and administered as the City Manager shall from time to
time direct, and which shall consist of the Director of Information Technology and such other
officers and employees as the Council may from time to time authorize.
2. DIRECTOR. There is hereby created the position of Director of Information Technology,
the occupant whereof shall be appointed, and may be removed, by the City Manager at will.
The Director shall report to the City Manager.
3. APPOINTMENTS AND RULES. The Director of Information Technology shall be
the appointing officer of the occupants of all classified positions assigned to said Department and
may make reasonable rules, regulations and directives not in conflict with law or ordinance to
govern and administer the activities and carry out the duties and responsibilities thereof, subject
to the direction and control of the City Manager.
4. DIVISIONS. The Information Technology Department shall consist of the office of
Technical Operations, the office of Software Support, and such other divisions as may be
established by the City Manager.
5. DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT. The Information Technology Department shall,
under the direction and control of the City Manager, have the following duties and
responsibilities:
Chapter 17
(a) To maintain a secure, reliable and scalable information technology infrastructure for
the organization, overseeing the City’s telecommunications and electronic data transmission systems,
including the City’s fiber optic network and virtual server environment;
(b) To evaluate the use of information technology and software in all areas of City
government, and create integrated computerized solutions needed by the organization, while
optimizing access to computer data;
(c) To enhance access to online City information resources for accomplishing City objectives
and providing easy citizen access;
(d) To develop policies, procedures, and practices that effectively manage information
technology assets and meet City information technology needs;
(e) To provide information technology education for efficient use of City information
technology resources; and
(f) To perform such other duties and functions as may be assigned from time to time by
the City Manager.
CHAPTER 18
FINANCE DEPARTMENT
1. ESTABLISHED. There is hereby created and established the Finance Department
which shall be organized and administered as the City Manager shall from time to time direct,
and which shall consist of the Director of Finance and such other officers and employees as the
Council shall from time to time authorize.
2. DIRECTOR. There is hereby created the Office of Director of Finance, the occupant
whereof shall be appointed, and may be removed, by the City Manager at will.
3. APPOINTMENTS AND RULES. The Director of Finance shall be the appointing
officer of the occupants of all the classified positions assigned to the Finance Department, and
may make reasonable rules, regulations and directives not in conflict with law or ordinance to
govern and administer the activities and carry out the duties and responsibilities thereof, subject
to the direction and control of the City Manager.
4. DEPARTMENT DUTIES. The Finance Department shall:
(a) Collect, receive, deposit, invest, pay out and account for all funds of the City, all in
accordance with generally accepted and established guidelines for good fiscal accounting and
auditing practices;
(b) Cause all accounts of the City to be audited annually by independent auditors and the
report thereof transmitted to the City Manager and the Council and to any other officer required
by law;
Revised 09/2019
Chapter 18
(c) Cause to be inventoried all property of the City of whatever nature and to keep
records of the acquisition, retention and disposition thereof;
(d) Cause the daily deposit of funds of the City in authorized depositories of the City;
(e) Collect, account for and apply special assessments or special taxes as provided by
law or ordinance and process delinquent payments thereof;
(f) Cause to be kept detailed registers and accounts of all City bonds;
(g) Perform and be responsible for such data processing and appurtenant services as shall
be approved or assigned by the City Manager;
(h) Purchase materials, equipment, and services in accordance with this City Code and
the procedures, rules and regulations of the Department, provided that funds have been budgeted
and are available for the purpose, and keep a record of all price quotations, bids and awards.
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2003-47, July 21, 2003) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2019-136,
September 3, 2019)
(i) Recommend insurance strategies and policies, and supervise ad administer the Risk
Management program for the City;
(j) Perform such other functions and duties as may be assigned from time to time by the
City Manager; and,
(k) A default in the payment of a fine or any installment of a fine may be collected by
any and all means authorized for the collection of monetary judgments. The Corporation
Counsel may retain attorneys and qualified private collection enterprises for the purpose of
collecting any default in payment of any fine or installment of that fine. Any fees or costs
incurred by the city or another governmental entity through an intergovernmental agreement in
any such collection by attorneys and qualified private collection enterprises retained by the
Chapter 18
Corporation Counsel or by another governmental entity through an intergovernmental agreement
for those purposes shall be charged to the offender. (AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2009-10,
March 2, 2009)
5. CITY TREASURER. There is hereby created the office of the City Treasurer, the
occupant whereof shall be appointed, and may be removed, by the Mayor with the approval of
the Council.
6. DUTIES OF CITY TREASURER. The City Treasurer shall be ex-officio City
Collector and shall perform such duties as may be prescribed by law or ordinance, and shall
collect, receive, have custody of and account for all money or funds paid into the City and shall
pay out the same only upon vouchers or orders duly authenticated, and shall perform such other
duties as may be prescribed by the Council or the City Manager, all under the supervision of the
Director of Finance.
7. ANNUAL REPORT. The City Treasurer shall annually publish a report of the
receipts and expenditures of City funds as required by law.
8. MONTHLY REPORT. A complete and detailed report of the financial status of the
City and its accounts shall be made to the Council monthly.
9. COMPTROLLER. There is hereby created the office of Comptroller, the occupant
whereof shall be appointed, and may be removed, by the City Manager at will.
10. VOUCHERS. Funds of the City shall be paid out only upon vouchers approved and
signed by the Comptroller and only by orders signed by the City Manager, the Comptroller and
City Treasurer which signatures may be affixed manually or by use of a facsimile.
CHAPTER 18.1
BUDGET
(Adopted by Ordinance No. 2019-119, September 3, 2019)
1. ADOPTION. The City adopts Sections 8-2-9.1 through 8-2-9.10 of the Illinois
Municipal Code with the exception of Section 8-2-9.5 (65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1-5/8-2-9.10) and except
as set forth otherwise in this City Code, and shall operate under the budget method provided for
therein as the procedure for appropriations. In the event of conflict between the Illinois Municipal
Code and this City Code, the provisions set forth in this City Code shall take precedence.
2. BUDGET OFFICER. The City Manager, or his designee, shall act as the budget
officer and shall take an oath to be filed with the City Clerk.
3. POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUDGET OFFICER. The budget officer shall have
all powers and duties as set forth in Section 8-2-9.2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-
2-9.2), City ordinances and policy including, but not limited to:
a. Permit and encourage and establish the use of efficient planning, budgeting, auditing,
reporting, accounting, and other fiscal management procedures in all municipal
departments, commissions, and boards.
b. Compile an annual budget in accordance with Section 8-2-9.3 of the Illinois Municipal
Code (65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.3) and City ordinances.
c. Examine all books and records of all municipal departments, commissions, and boards
which relate to monies received by the municipality, municipal departments, commissions,
and boards, and paid out by the municipality, municipal departments, commissions, and
boards, debts and accounts receivable, amounts owed by or to the municipality, municipal
departments, commissions, and boards.
d. Obtain such additional information from the municipality, municipal departments,
commissions, and boards as may be useful for purposes of compiling an annual budget,
such information to be furnished by the departments, commissions, and boards in the
manner and form required by the budget officer.
e. Establish and maintain such procedures as shall insure that no expenditures are made by
the municipality, municipal departments, commissions, and boards except as authorized by
the budget.
4. COMPILATION AND CONTENTS OF BUDGET. The budget officer shall compile
a budget with estimates of revenue available to the City for the fiscal year for which the budget is
drafted, together with recommended expenditures for the City, its departments, commissions, and
boards and shall present the budget in a manner which is in conformity with good fiscal
management practices. The budget shall contain actual or estimated revenues and expenditures
for the two (2) years immediately preceding the fiscal year for which the budget is prepared. Each
budget shall show the specific fund from which each anticipated expenditure shall be made.
5. PUBLIC INSPECTION, NOTICE, HEARING. The proposed budget shall be a
public record available for public inspection in the office of the City Clerk for at least ten (10) days
prior to the passage of the annual budget. A public hearing shall be held on the proposed budget
ordinance prior to the final approval thereof, notice of which shall be given by publication in a
newspaper having a general circulation in the City at least seven (7) days prior to the time of such
hearing. Following the public hearing, the proposed budget may be further revised and passed
without any further inspection, notice or hearing.
6. PASSAGE OF BUDGET. Passage of the annual budget shall be in lieu of passage of
an appropriation ordinance and shall be adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year to which
it applies. A certified copy of such budget along with an estimate of anticipated revenues to be
received shall be filed within thirty (30) days of said passage with the Macon County Clerk.
7. REVISION TO BUDGET. The budget officer may make revisions to the approved
budget within any department, commission or board by deleting, adding to, or changing approved
expenditures without Council approval, provided said revisions do not result in the deletion of an
activity or program and provided that said revisions do not cause total expenditures within said
budget to exceed revenue as set forth in the approved budget ordinance.
8. POLICY. A budget policy shall be adopted by the City Council and may be amended
by the affirmative vote of four (4) Council members.
9. CONTINGENCY FUNDS. The annual budget may contain money set aside for
contingency purposes.
Chapter 19
CHAPTER 19
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD
(ADOPTED BY ORDINANCE NO. 97-07, February 3, 1997)
1. ESTABLISHED. There is hereby established a Foreign Fire Insurance Board.
2. DEFINITIONS. For purposes of establishing a Foreign Fire Insurance Board, the following
definitions shall apply.
Board: The Foreign Fire Insurance Board.
Department: Decatur Fire Department.
Members of the Department: Any person currently employed by the Decatur Fire Department
in the following positions: Firefighter, Lieutenant, Inspector, Captain, Battalion Chief,
Fire Marshal, Chief.
Temporary Election Committee: Decatur Fire Department Election Committee.
3. ELECTION OF MEMBERS.
(1) The Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall consist of five (5) members with one (1) vote
each. The members of the Decatur Fire Department shall elect four (4) officers who shall serve
as the members of the Board. The fifth position shall be filled by the Chief of the Decatur Fire
Department.
(2) The members of the Board shall elect the following officers: (1) Chairman, (2) Vice-
Chairman, (3) Treasurer, and (4) Secretary.
(3) Elected members of the Board shall serve two-year terms and until their successors
are elected and installed. The first Board elected will consist of two (2) members elected for
Revised 9/2019
Chapter 19
two (2) years, and two (2) members elected for one (1) year, as follows: said initial terms shall
begin on February 1, 1997 and expire on April 30, 1998, and April 30, 1999. All subsequent
terms will begin on May 1.
(4) Vacancies shall be filled by election of the members of the Department for the balance
of the unexpired term, if more than three (3) months remain in the term of the member leaving
the Board; otherwise, such vacancies shall be filled by appointment of the City Manager
from among the members of the Department.
4. ELECTION PROCEDURE.
A. There is hereby established a Temporary Decatur Fire Department Election Committee.
The Temporary Election Committee shall consist of three (3) members: the Chief of the
Decatur Fire Department, the President of Local 505 of the International Association of Firefighters,
and one (1) other member to be appointed by the Chief and President from the members
of the Decatur Fire Department.
B. The Temporary Election Committee shall be responsible for organizing, conducting,
and supervising the initial election of Department members to serve on the Board. The Temporary
Election Committee shall establish election procedures consistent with this Chapter. Thereafter,
the elected Board shall establish its own election procedures consistent with this Chapter.
C. The Board shall develop a procedure for governing the nomination of members to
serve on the Board. The nominating procedure shall be established a minimum of thirty (30)
days prior to the expiration of the Board members' terms of office.
D. The Board shall develop a procedure for the final election of Department members on
the Board. The final election procedure shall be established a minimum of thirty (30) days prior
to the expiration of the Board members' terms of office.
Chapter 19
E. The Board may adopt rules and regulations governing the election of officers of the
Board. All rules and regulations with respect to the election process shall be posted throughout
the Department a minimum of thirty (30) days prior to the election.
5. FUND ESTABLISHED.
A. All funds received by the City from the foreign fire insurance gross receipts tax shall
be appropriated annually by the City, and paid, to the Board.
B. The Board Treasurer shall receive the appropriated money and shall pay out the same
upon the order of the Board for the maintenance, use and benefit of the Department.
C. No expenditure shall be made from said funds by the Treasurer without the majority
approval of the Board.
D. The Board Treasurer shall give sufficient bond to the City of Decatur, Illinois. This
bond shall be approved by the Mayor.
E. The funds paid to the Board by the City, as herein described, shall be included in the
annual audit of City funds to verify that the same are used for the maintenance, use and benefit
of the Department. The Board shall reimburse the City for the cost of the audit of said funds.
6. OFFICERS, QUORUM, SPECIAL MEETINGS.
A. The Board shall, in accordance with the Open Meetings Act, establish a regular time
and place for its meetings. The Chairman shall preside at the meetings. The Secretary shall keep
a record of all resolutions, proceedings, minutes and actions of the Board and these records shall
be open to the public.
B. Three (3) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of its
business. The affirmative vote of three (3) members of the Board shall constitute approval of
business before it.
Chapter 19
C. Special meetings may be called by the Chairman, or by no less than three (3) members
of the Board.
D. Members on duty at the time of any meeting of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall
be excused from duty to attend said meetings.
7. POWERS AND DUTIES.
A. The Board shall have the power to approve the expenditure of monies for the maintenance,
use and benefit of the Department.
B. The Board may adopt rules and regulations for governing the Board and the execution
of the duties of the Board, and provide for election of the Board and management of its funds.
C. The Board may amend or revoke rules and regulations so adopted.
D. The Board shall, in accordance with City budget procedures, annually prepare a
budget, which shall be reviewed by the City Council together with the Fire Department budget.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2019-137, September 3, 2019)
8. SEVERABILITY. The provisions and sections of this Chapter shall be deemed severable,
and the invalidity of any portion of this Chapter shall not affect the validity of the remainder.
CHAPTER 20
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
1. ESTABLISHED. There is hereby created a Board of Local Improvements in and for
the City of Decatur, Illinois, which shall consist of five residents of the City appointed by the
Mayor with the consent of the Council for terms of four years or until respective successors are
appointed and qualified. Said terms shall commence May 1 of odd numbered years, three in the
year in which the term of the Mayor commences and two in the next succeeding odd numbered
year. (AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2005-15, March 7, 2005)
2. OFFICERS. The said Board shall elect from its members a President, Vice President,
Secretary and an Assistant Secretary. It shall be the duty of said officers to perform all acts
and exercise all powers directed and conferred upon them respectively by the laws of this State
in relation to Local Improvements in the City, and to perform such other acts and duties as said
Board may require and direct in relation to such Local Improvements. The Secretary so elected,
and in the absence or inability to act of the Secretary, the Assistant Secretary, shall act as and
perform the duties of the Clerk of said Board.
3. MEETINGS. Meetings of the Board shall be held in the City Council Chambers, Decatur,
Illinois. Said meetings may be called by the President or any two members on 48 hours
notice to the members thereof. Public hearings on, or considerations of any other matter within
the jurisdiction of said Board, may be held at such other place and times as said Board may by
resolution, designate and provide. (AMENDED, Ordinance No. 94-62, August 15, 1994)
Revised 03/2005
Chapter 20
4. RECORD OF MEETINGS. The President, or in the President's absence, the Vice
President shall preside at all meetings of said Board, and the Secretary shall keep an accurate
record of the proceedings of all meetings of the Board in a book to be kept in the office of the
City Clerk for that purpose.
CHAPTER 21
PUBLIC LIBRARY
1. BOARD ESTABLISHED. A board of nine residents of the City, appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the Council, is hereby established for the public library, which board
is to be known and is designated the Board of Library Trustees of the City of Decatur, Illinois.
2. APPOINTMENT OF TRUSTEES. The term of appointment shall commence July 1
and shall be three years and until a successor is appointed and qualified. The respective terms of
each of three trustees shall expire each year. Appointment to fill a vacancy during a term shall be
for the unexpired remainder thereof. One or more members of the Council may be appointed to
the Board. No trustee shall receive compensation as such. A trustee may be removed by the Mayor
for misconduct or neglect of duty, but only with the approval of the Council. Those members of
the heretofore created Board incumbent on the effective date of this amended Chapter shall be
members of the Board established hereby for respective terms to expire as indicated at the time of
the respective last appointment of each.
3. OPERATION OF LIBRARY. Subject to the direction from time to time of the
Council said Board shall generally supervise and control the public library of the City and the
operation and maintenance thereof and shall have and exercise such powers and perform such
duties as may be from time to time provided by the Council by ordinance or by resolution, and in
addition thereto, except as the Council may otherwise direct, as may be provided by statute for
such boards in other cities in the State of Illinois.
4. BUDGET. Annually no later than October 1, the Board shall submit to the City
Revised 9/2019
Chapter 21
Manager a proposed budget of the anticipated library costs and expenses for the next ensuing
January 1, through December 31, fiscal year, in such form and detail as may be from time to time
requested by the City Manager. The City Manager shall submit the recommendations as to such
budget to the Council along with the suggested budget for other City functions. Annually along
with the budgeting of and for other funds of the City a fund which shall be known as the Library
Fund shall be budgeted for said costs and expenses in such amount as the Council deems proper
for said object and purpose and the Council may cause the same to be funded by the levy of such
tax or taxes, or otherwise, and in such amount or amounts as the Council may from time to time
provide. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2019-138, September 3, 2019)
5. CONTROL OF FUND. Subject to the direction of the Council, the Board shall
supervise and control the library fund and shall do so in such manner as to comply with the fiscal,
financial and accounting rules, regulations, practices, procedures and ordinances of the City.
6. ANNUAL REPORT. The Board shall annually report to the Council and to the Illinois
State Librarian as is prescribed by statute.
7. APPOINTMENT OF LIBRARIANS. Provisions of the law or ordinance to the
contrary notwithstanding, and until the further order of the Council, said Board is hereby
authorized to provide by resolution, either through application of the Civil Service Law for Cities
or otherwise, for the appointment, probation, continuance in position, demotion, removal or
discipline of professional librarians to or occupying positions as a supervisor of a service or as a
head of a department as such services or departments are or have been established by said Board
for the organization and operation of said Library.
CHAPTER 22
CITY PLAN COMMISSION
1. ESTABLISHED. There is hereby created the City Plan Commission which shall
consist of eleven residents of the City appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Council
for terms of three years, and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified, to
serve without compensation.
2. OFFICERS AND BY-LAWS. The Commission shall biannually elect a Chairman,
Vice-Chairman and Secretary and such other officers all from its own membership, and adopt
such by-laws regulating the time, place and manner of holding and conducting its meetings, as
may, in the judgment of the Commission, be proper and necessary to carry out the work of the
Commission.
3. DUTIES. The Commission shall exercise such powers and perform such functions as
from time to time may be provided by law or by ordinance, and shall hear and return recommendations
upon such matters as may be referred to it from time to time by the Council.
4. COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The Commission shall from time to time review and
hold hearings upon the Comprehensive Plan and recommend to Council such changes, including
adoption of a new or amended plan, as may in its judgment be in the best interest of the general
health, safety and welfare of the community.
5. RECORDS. The Commission shall keep written records of all its transactions and
meetings whether regular or special, which said records shall be public records.
6. AUTHENTICATION OF RECORDS. The records, reports, plats, plans, exhibits or
other documents of or filed with the Commission, or copies thereof, shall be deemed to be suffiChapter
22
ciently authenticated when certified over the signature of the Chairman and attested by the Secretary.
CHAPTER 23
DISABLED TRANSIT PASSENGER APPEALS BOARD
(Adopted, Ordinance No. 2005-16, March 7, 2005)
1. ESTABLISHED. There is hereby established a Disabled Transit Passenger Appeals
Board to hear appeals and to advise and make recommendations to the Decatur Public Transit
System consisting of five (5) residents of the City of Decatur appointed by the Mayor with the
consent of the Council for terms of three (3) years and who shall serve without compensation.
Vacancies shall be filled by the Mayor with the consent of the Council for the remainder of any
unexpired terms. Two (2) members of the Board shall at all times be members from the disabled
community, and one (1) member of the Board shall at all times be a professionally trained
medical professional; however, no action or decision of the Board shall be invalid for failure to
have on the Board, or in attendance at the meeting or hearing whereat the action or decision was
taken or made, any person meeting any of the criteria listed herein.
2. POWERS AND DUTIES. The Disabled Transit Passenger Appeals Board shall have
the following powers and duties:
(a) To aid in the development and amendment of appropriate policies, standards and
guidelines relative to determining eligibility of individuals with disabilities for paratransit
services reserved for those who are unable to use the bus system;
(b) To recommend changes in the application, review and approval procedures employed
by the Decatur Public Transit System in certifying an individual as having a disability which
qualifies that person for paratransit services reserved for those who are unable to use the bus
system;
Revised 02/2017
(c) To hear the appeals of persons who have been denied certification for paratransit
services, or who have been awarded only conditional or temporary certification, or who have had
their certification suspended, altered or terminated, and to make a final determination on all such
appeals;
(d) To consult with the Mass Transit Administrator and the General Manager of the
Decatur Public Transit System; and,
(e) To perform such other and further functions as may be, from time to time, provided
by the Council.
3. OFFICERS, RULES, MEETINGS AND HEARINGS. From among its members,
and by the concurrence of three (3) members thereof, the Board shall elect a Chairperson, Vice
Chairperson and a Secretary for terms of one (1) year, and provide rules for the conduct of its
business, among which rules shall be provisions for the time and place of regular meetings as
necessary to perform its duties, and the calling by the Chairperson, or on the concurrence of not
less than two (2) members, of special meetings. The Board shall, in every case, hold a hearing
on an appeal and reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Every decision
shall be in writing and shall be promptly filed in the office of the Mass Transit Administrator of
the Decatur Public Transit System. Three (3) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum
and all decisions shall require a majority vote of those present and voting.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-06, February 6, 2017)
4. APPEALS. An appeal may be taken within ten (10) days from the date of the
decision appealed from by filing with the City Clerk a notice in writing specifying the decision
appealed from and the grounds therefor. Upon receipt of such notice filed as required herein, the
City Clerk shall transmit the same to said Board and to the Mass Transit Administrator of the
Decatur Public Transit System and said Mass Transit Administrator shall transmit to the Board
all papers, documents or other instruments upon which the action appealed from was taken.
CHAPTER 25
ELECTRICAL COMMISSION, ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS
AND LICENSED ELECTRICIANS
1. BUILDING OFFICIAL AND INSPECTION DIVISION. Whenever the words
"Inspection Division" are used in this chapter, it shall refer to the Building Inspections Division
of the Economic and Community Development Department of the City of Decatur, Illinois.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-11, March 13, 2000)
2. DEFINITIONS. As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings set out herein:
A. ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR means any person engaged in the business of
installing, altering, or servicing of electrical equipment as herein defined, and has passed an
examination as required by this ordinance and licensed by the City of Decatur or any City in the
State of Illinois with a reciprocal agreement as herein defined. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-
65, September 8, 2009)
B. ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT means: Conductors and other equipment
installed for the utilization of electricity for lights, heat or power, but does not include radio
apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sound and signals, or apparatus, conductors or
other equipment installed for or by public utilities, including common carriers, which are under
the jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce Commission, for use in their operation as public
utilities.
Revised 02/2017
Chapter 25
C. COMMISSION means: The Electrical Commission of the City of Decatur, as
established by this Chapter.
D. RECIPROCITY means: Any person, firm, or corporation who is licensed for the
current year in any city, village, or town in the State of Illinois where requirements of licensing
are equal to or greater than the requirements of the City of Decatur may obtain a City of Decatur
Electrical Contractor’s license by filing an application, paying the $100.00 registration fee, and
providing a copy of their current license from the aforementioned city, village, or town.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-65, September 8, 2009)
3. LICENSE REQUIRED. (A) No corporation, partnership, or other person shall
install, alter or service electrical equipment in the City of Decatur, Illinois, without first having
obtained a license as an Electrical Contractor in the City of Decatur except that, any Electrical
Contractor who obtains a City of Decatur license through reciprocity may install, alter or service
electrical equipment in this City without securing an additional license so long as such
contractor complies with the rules and regulations and provisions of ordinance of this City.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-65, September 8, 2009)
. (B) The license requirements of subsection (A) hereof shall not apply:
(1) to persons working under the supervision of a person licensed under the provisions
of subsection (A); or, (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-65, September 8, 2009)
(2) to persons residing, or intending to reside, in a single family dwelling owned by
such person or persons and who install, alter or service electrical equipment therein - provided
that, said owner/occupant must submit to a minimum written test as prescribed by the Electrical
Commission and pass said test with a satisfactory score of 70% and such person or persons must
reside in said residence for not less than six (6) months after completion of such work, and that
such work is subject to all other requirements of applicable Code or ordinance.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 95-15, April 3, 1995)
Chapter 25
(3) to any corporation, partnership, municipal corporation, or other public or private
entity installing, altering or servicing electrical equipment owned by such entity, in the course of
normal or emergency maintenance; provided that, all such work is supervised or administered
by a licensed contractor employed by such entity. "Installing", as used herein, shall not apply to
the construction of a new building or to the remodeling of an existing building, the cost of which
remodeling exceeds 30% of the cost of a comparable new building.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-65, September 8, 2009)
4. APPLICATION FOR TESTING. Any individual desiring a license as an electrical
contractor in the City of Decatur shall make application on form provided by the Economic and
Community Development Department, Building Inspections Division. This application shall
then be presented to the City Electrical Commission to review.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-65, September 8, 2009)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-43, June 16, 2008)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-73, September 20, 2004)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-11, March 13, 2000)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 99-31, April 5, 1999)
5. QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANT. Each applicant shall be at least 21 years of
age and shall show proof of not less than four years practical experience in the field of electrical
construction for power, light, and heat under the direction of a licensed electrician, or related
work, or have satisfactorily completed an approved course in the particular subject in a
recognized school. Such course shall be a minimum of four (4) years. Either or both
qualifications shall be verified by the licensed contractor or school directly to the Electrical
Commission at least two (2) weeks prior to the examination.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-43, June 16, 2008)
6. EXAMINATION. Once approval is granted by the Electrical Commission the
applicant shall make arrangements on his own to take the “Standard Master Electrician” exam as
Chapter 25
prepared and administered by the International Code Council National Contractor Trades
Examination Program. Proof of a passing score will then be submitted to the Building
Inspections Division in order to obtain a license.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-43, June 16, 2008)
7. LICENSE FEE. Licenses shall be issued annually for the period of January 1
through December 31 of the next succeeding year with an annual fee of $100.00. Licenses fee
shall be received before the 1st day of February renewal. Renewal means any person, firm or
corporation having received a City of Decatur Electrical Contractor License as provided for in
this Chapter has the right, without examination, to have that license renewed annually upon
presentation of required documents and payment of license fee. If, however, the aforementioned
license has not been renewed for one year or more then that person, firm, or corporation will be
subject to requirements as provided in this Chapter for a new license applicant.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-65, September 8, 2009)
8. REVOCATION OF LICENSE(S). Licenses provided for herein may be suspended
or revoked by the Commission for cause and after public hearing held upon reasonable notice to
the licensee. Causes for revocation of license or suspension thereof include the following: (a)
Repeated failure of a licensee to comply with the provisions of this Chapter or any reasonable
direction of the Building Inspections Division; (b) repeated failures of the licensee to complete
permitted jobs in a workmanlike manner; (c) transferring or loaning license to an unlicensed
individual, that is, allowing an unlicensed individual to use license to obtain permits or perform
work without being employed by a licensee; or (d) other just cause. No electrician having had a
license revoked shall again be licensed except after re-examination and approval by the
Commission and with the consent of the City Manager. Decisions of the Commission revoking
Chapter 25
or suspending licenses may be appealed to the Decatur City Council, and such decision may only
be reversed by said Council by the affirmative vote of five (5) or more members of the Council.
Application for such appeal shall be submitted to the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the
Commission's final decision.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-80, October 20, 2008)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 99-31, April 5, 1999)
9. COMMISSION ESTABLISHED. There is hereby created the Electrical
Commission of the City of Decatur, Illinois which shall consist of seven (7) residents of the City
to be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. To the extent
practicably possible, the Commission shall include one (1) electrical contractor, one (1) licensed
electrician, one (1) officer of Local IBEW, one (1) licensed professional engineer, one
representative of an electrical utility, one (1) representative of an electrical product manufacturer
and the Chief of the Decatur Fire Department or his representative; however, no action or
decision of the Commission shall be invalid for failure to have on the Commission, or in
attendance at the meeting or hearing whereat the action or decision was taken or made, any
person meeting any of the criteria listed herein. Commission members shall serve for a term of
three years, said terms to commence the first day of December. Vacancies shall be filled by the
Mayor with advice and consent of the Council for the unexpired terms.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-15, March 7, 2005)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 99-31, April 5, 1999)
10. RULES AND REGULATIONS. The Commission shall meet and elect officers for
each calendar year. A Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and a Secretary shall be elected for a term
of one (1) year. The Commission shall meet on a regular basis as necessary to perform its duties,
with the Chairperson reporting to the Mayor for consultation and guidance. The Commission
Chapter 25
shall review all applicants for testing, write or approve examinations for licensing, review all
new Code changes, jointly with the Building Inspections Manager, prepare revisions to Chapter
69 (City Electrical Code) (excluding permit fees) and consult with the Building Inspections
Manager and Electrical Inspectors. The Commission shall promulgate and adopt such necessary
reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with statute, code or ordinance as may be
required to carry out the purposes and intent of this Chapter and its duties and responsibilities
under the provisions hereof and shall keep a record of such rules and regulations along with the
minutes of all its acts and doings.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 99-31, April 5, 1999)
11. SEVERABILITY. If any section, sub-section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this Chapter should be declared invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the
remaining portions of this Chapter which shall remain in full force and effect and to this end the
provisions of this Chapter are declared to be severable.
12. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
Chapter shall be fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense and every day that such violation continues may be
deemed to be a separate offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-66, October 31, 2011)
CHAPTER 26
HEATING, AIR CONDITIONING AND REFRIGERATION
COMMISSION AND CONTRACTORS
1. BUILDING OFFICIAL AND INSPECTION DIVISION. Whenever the words
"Inspection Division" are used in this chapter, it shall refer to the Building Inspections Division
of the Economic and Community Development Department of the City of Decatur, Illinois and
whenever the words "building official" are used herein the same refers to the Manager of
Building Inspections in said department.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-09, February 21, 2005)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-11, March 13, 2000)
2. DEFINITIONS. As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings set out herein:
A. Heating, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Contractor means:
1) Any corporation, partnership, or other person engaged in the business of
installing, altering or servicing of heating, air conditioning, ventilation or refrigeration systems.
2) Any private or municipally owned public utility if such public utility installs,
or alters, heating, air conditioning, ventilation, or refrigeration systems as herein defined, in
connection with or as a part of their business of supplying fuel used in such appliances or
equipment. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-77, October 1, 2007)
The term Heating, Air Conditioning, and Refrigeration Contractor does not include:
Revised 02/2017
Chapter 26
1) Any electrical contractor regulated or licensed as such under the provisions of
the Electrical Code of the City of Decatur, Illinois;
2) Any Heating, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Mechanic as defined in this
Code.
B. Heating, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Mechanic means: Any individual who
installs, services or alters heating, air conditioning or refrigeration systems as herein defined, or
who supervises same, and who has passed a written exam approved by the City of Decatur
Heating, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Commission.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-77, October 1, 2007)
C. Heating System means: To include but not limited to (1) Any heating unit intended to
warm the atmosphere of any building or rooms therein for human occupancy except heating units
that use electric elements to warm such atmosphere without ductwork; (2) Any heating unit,
except hot water heaters, designed to produce steam or hot water for purposes other than to warm
the atmosphere of a building or room.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-26, April 17, 2000)
D. Air Conditioning Systems means: Any air conditioning unit designed to cool the
atmosphere of any building or rooms therein used for human occupancy which has a rated heat
removal capacity in excess of 20,000 B.T.U.'s per hour; however, any unit regardless of size or
rating that is installed in such a manner that it projects from a building where pedestrian traffic
will pass below it shall also be included as an air conditioning system.
Chapter 26
E. Refrigeration System means: Any refrigeration unit, other than an air conditioning
system as defined in this section which is to be used in conjunction with or as an aid to any
commercial enterprises but not to include a refrigeration unit used for household purposes.
F. Ventilation System means: To include but not limited to (1) Any exhaust system
designed for the removal of odor or contaminants from a building or room, (2) Kitchen exhaust
system and make-up ventilation air for a commercial application only.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-32, April 17, 2000).
G. Commission means: The Heating, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Commission of
the City of Decatur, as established by this Chapter.
3. LICENSE REQUIRED. (A) No corporation, partnership, or other person shall
install, alter or service heating, air conditioning, ventilation or refrigeration systems in the City
of Decatur, Illinois, without first having obtained a license as a City of Decatur Heating, Air
Conditioning or Refrigeration Contractor. All Heating, Air Conditioning or Refrigeration
Contractors shall employ at least one (1) properly licensed Heating, Air Conditioning or
Refrigeration Mechanic in a supervisory or administrative capacity; and (2) said mechanic shall
be licensed in the city in which is located his or her principal place of business.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-77, October 1, 2007)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-26, April 17, 2000)
(B) No person shall install, alter or service heating, air conditioning or refrigeration
systems, or supervise same, in the City of Decatur without first having obtained a license as a
Heating, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Mechanic; provided, however that any Heating, Air
Conditioning or Refrigeration Mechanic properly licensed through testing comparable to the City
of Decatur in a municipality in the State of Illinois, may install, alter or service heating, air
conditioning and refrigeration systems in this City without securing an additional license so long
Chapter 26
as such Mechanic complies with the rules and regulations and provisions of ordinance of this
City and they are employed by, or licensed as, a City of Decatur Heating, Air Conditioning and
Refrigerator Contractor. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-77, October 1, 2007)
(C) The license requirements of subsections (A) and (B) hereof shall not apply to
persons working under the supervision of a person licensed under the provisions of subsection
(B).
4. APPLICATION FEE. Any partnership, corporation or individual desiring a license
as a Heating, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Contractor in the City of Decatur shall make
application for the same on an application prescribed and provided by the Economic and
Community Development Department Inspections Division. All licenses shall expire on
October 1 following the issuance thereof. Applicants shall provide to the City of Decatur
evidence of liability insurance in the amount of Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($500,000.00)
general aggregate.
Any individual desiring a license as a Heating, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration
Mechanic shall make application for the same on an application prescribed and provided by the
Economic and Community Development Department Inspections Division.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-77, October 1, 2007)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-09, February 21, 2005)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-26, April 17, 2000)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-11, March 13, 2000)
5. EXAMINATION. Before a license as a Heating, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration
Mechanic shall be issued to an applicant, he shall, successfully pass the “Standard Master
Mechanical Exam” administered by the International Code Council National Contractor Trades
Examination Program.
Chapter 26
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-77, October 1, 2007)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-09, February 21, 2005)
6. CONTENT OF EXAMINATION (MECHANIC). The content of the examination
is to be determined by the International Code Council’s Contractor Trades Examination
Program. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-77, October 1, 2007)
7. QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANT (MECHANIC). Each applicant shall be at
least 21 years of age and be a Registered Professional Engineer, or have had not less than four
years practical experience in the field of heating, air conditioning or refrigeration work, or have
satisfactorily completed a course in the particular subject in a recognized school accompanied by
one year of practical experience.
8. LICENSE FEE. Licenses shall be issued annually for the period of October 1
through September 30 of the next succeeding year with and annual fee of $100.00 for
Contractors License and $100.00 for a Mechanics License, which is in addition to the
examination fee provided for elsewhere herein. Any properly registered Mechanical Contractor,
who also qualifies for a Mechanics license, shall be granted both licenses for a single fee.
Mechanics licenses may be annually renewed without further examination provided that the
application for renewal and the payment of the annual fee is received by the Finance Department
before the 1st day of November next succeeding the expiration date of the license.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-77, October 1, 2007)
9. REVOCATION OF LICENSE(S). Licenses provided for herein are not transferable
and shall not be loaned. Such license may be suspended or revoked by the Commission for cause
and after hearing held upon reasonable notice to the licensee as the Commission may by rule
provide. Repeated failure of a licensee to comply with the provisions of this Chapter or any
reasonable direction of the Inspection Division shall constitute cause for revocation of license or
Chapter 26
suspension thereof. No licensee having had a license revoked shall again be licensed except after
re-examination and approval by the Commission and the approval by the Commission and with
the consent of the City Manager. Decisions of the Commission of revocation or suspension of
licenses may be appealed to the Decatur City Council and require a two-third (2/3) affirmative
vote for reversal of the Commission decision. Application for such appeal shall be submitted to
the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the Commission's final decision.
10. ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR. Notwithstanding any other provision hereof,
appliances and apparatus for the utilization of electricity for space heating without the use of
duct work may be installed, upon the requisite permit being issued therefor, by either licensed
heating, air conditioning and refrigeration mechanics, or by licensed electrical contractors.
Furnaces, appliances and apparatus for utilization of electricity for space heating by the use of
duct work may be installed by either contractor; however, any such duct work shall be done only
by licensed heating, air conditioning and refrigeration mechanics upon the requisite permit being
issued for such electrical work. Air conditioning units shall be installed only by licensed
heating, air conditioning and refrigeration mechanics. Through the wall combination heating and
air conditioning units may be installed by either a licensed electrical contractor or heating, air
conditioning and refrigeration mechanic. Furnaces, appliances and apparatus utilizing a source
of energy other than electricity shall be installed only by a licensed heating, air conditioning and
refrigeration mechanic, and all wiring and electrical connections and the like therewith shall be
done only by licensed electrical contractors.
11. COMMISSION ESTABLISHED. There is hereby created the Heating, Air
Conditioning and Refrigeration Commission of the City of Decatur, Illinois which shall consist
of seven residents of the City, whom shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
Chapter 26
consent of the Council. These members appointed by the Mayor shall be appointed for a term of
three years, said terms to commence the first day of September. Vacancies shall be filled by the
Mayor with advice and consent of the Council for the unexpired terms. One of those members
appointed by the Mayor shall be a Contractor or Mechanic with at least five years experience in
the installation of steam and hot water boilers and accessory equipment used for heating; one
such member shall be a Contractor or Mechanic with at least five years experience in the
installation and maintenance of coal, gas, oil or electrical supplied residential heating systems;
one such member shall be a Contractor or Mechanic with at least five years experience in the
installation and maintenance of refrigeration systems; and four such members shall have
qualifications other than those mentioned herein which the Mayor may deem appropriate for
service as such commissioners.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-15, March 7, 2005)
12. RULES AND REGULATIONS. The Commission shall promulgate and adopt such
necessary reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with statute, code or ordinance as
may be required to carry out the purposes and intent of this Chapter and its duties and
responsibilities under the provisions hereof and shall keep a record of such rules and regulations
along with the minutes of all its acts and doings.
13. SEVERABILITY. If any section, sub-section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this Chapter should be declared invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the
remaining portions of this Chapter which shall remain in full force and effect and to this end the
provisions of this Chapter are declared to be severable.
14. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
Chapter shall be fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than Five
Chapter 26
Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense and every day that such violation continues may be
deemed to be a separate offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-66, October 31, 2011)
CHAPTER 27
CONSTRUCTION AND HOUSING BOARD OF APPEALS
1. ESTABLISHED. There is hereby established a board of appeals to be known and
designated as the "Construction and Housing Board of Appeals" consisting of seven residents of
the City to be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the Council, for terms of four years,
and who shall serve without compensation. One member of the Board shall at all times be a
professionally trained person familiar with building structures; one member shall be the
Chairperson of the Electrical Commission; one member of the Board shall at all times be a
professionally trained person familiar with sanitation and health problems; and one member of
the Board shall at all times be trained in and familiar with electrical installations.
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2005-15, March 7, 2005)
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 99-32, April 5, 1999)
2. APPEALS. Any person aggrieved or any officer or department head of the City may
take an appeal to the Board of Appeals from any decision or notice given by any officer or
employee of the City pursuant to the Building, Housing or Fire Prevention Codes of the City.
3. TIME AND MANNER OF APPEAL. An appeal may be taken within ten days from
the date of the decision appealed from by filing with the City Clerk a notice in writing specifying
the decision appealed from and the grounds therefor together with a filing fee of $10.00. Upon
receipt of such notice filed as required herein, the City Clerk shall transmit the same to said
Board and to the Director of Economic and Community Development and said Director shall
Revised 02/2017
Chapter 27
transmit to the Board all papers, documents or other instruments upon which the action appealed
from was taken.
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2000-11, March 13, 2000)
4. HEARINGS. The Board of Appeals shall, in every case, hold a hearing and reach a
decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Every decision of the Board shall be in
writing and shall be promptly filed in the office of the Director of Economic and Community
Development. Four (4) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum, and all decisions shall
require a majority vote of those present and voting. A decision of the Board decided by a
majority of four (4) members, or fewer, may be appealed to the Council.
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2000-11, March 13, 2000)
5. VARIATIONS. The Board of Appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may
vary the application of any provision of the Building, Housing or Fire Prevention Codes to any
particular case when in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would unduly work a hardship and
be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this Code or public interest, or when, in its opinion, the
interpretation placed thereon should be modified or reversed.
6. CONTENT OF VARIANCE. A decision of the Board to vary the application of any
of the provisions of the Building, Housing or Fire Prevention Codes of the City, or to modify an
order given pursuant to such Codes, shall specify in what manner such variation or modification
is made, the conditions upon which it is made, and the reasons therefor.
CHAPTER 28
UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATION
ARTICLE 1. POLICY
SECTION 1-1. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Decatur in the exercise of its
home rule powers to prohibit unlawful discrimination as hereinafter defined.
ARTICLE 2. VIOLATIONS AND GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
SECTION 2-1. It shall be unlawful, and shall constitute a human rights violation, for any person
to discriminate against another person because of his or her race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex,
sexual orientation, marital status, disability or unfavorable discharge from military service.
SECTION 2-2. Unlawful discrimination is prohibited in employment practices, financial credit
practices, housing practices and unequal public places of accommodation practices.
SECTION 2-3. It is also a human rights violation for a person, or for two or more persons to
conspire to:
A. Retaliate against a person because he or she has opposed that which he or she reasonably
and in good faith believes to be unlawful discrimination, sexual harassment in employment,
discrimination based on citizenship status in employment, or because he or she has made a
charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in an investigation, proceeding, or
hearing under this Chapter;
B. Aid, abet, compel or coerce a person to commit any violation of this Chapter;
Willfully interfere with the performance of a duty or the exercise of a power by the Commission
or one of its members or representatives. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-32, July 7, 2014)
SECTION 2-4. For purposes of this Article, "sexual harassment" and "citizenship status" shall
have the same meaning as defined in Article 6 of this Chapter.
Revised 3/2015
SECTION 2-5. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context indicates or requires a different meaning:
(A) "Age" means the chronological age of a person who is at least 40 years old, except with
regard to any practice described in Article 6, insofar as that practice concerns training or apprenticeship
programs. In the case of training or apprenticeship programs, for the purposes of Article 6, "age" means
the chronological age of a person who is 18 but not yet 40 years old.
(B) "Charge" means an allegation filed with the Human Rights Commission by an aggrieved
party, pursuant to Article 4. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-32, July 7, 2014)
(C) "Commission" means the Human Relations Commission created by this Chapter.
(D) “Complainant” means a person who makes a complaint or files a charge.
(E) "Complaint" means the formal pleading filed with the Commission by an aggrieved party
pursuant to Article 4. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-32, July 7, 2014)
(F) “Disability” means a determinable physical or mental characteristic of a person, including,
but not limited to, a determinable physical characteristic which necessitates the person's use of a guide,
hearing or support dog, the history of such characteristic, or the perception of such characteristic by the
person complained against, which may result from disease, injury, congenital condition of birth or
functional disorder and which characteristic:
(1) For purposes of Article 6 is unrelated to the person's ability to perform the duties of a
particular job or position;
(2) For purposes of Article8, is unrelated to the person's ability to acquire, rent or
maintain a housing accommodation;
(3) For purposes of Article 9, is unrelated to a person's ability to utilize and benefit from
a place of public accommodation.
(G) "Human Rights Violation" includes and shall be limited to only those specific acts set forth
in Sections 2-1, 2-2, 2-3, 6-2, 8-2, 8-3, 8-4, 8-5, 8-6 and 9-2 of this Chapter.
(H) "Marital Status" means the legal status of being married, single, separated, divorced or
widowed.
(I) "National Origin" means the place in which a person or one of his or her ancestors was born.
(J) "Person" includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations or organizations, labor
organizations, labor unions, joint apprenticeship committees, or union labor associations, corporations,
political subdivisions, units of local government, legal representatives, trustees in bankruptcy or receivers.
(K) "Religion" includes all aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as belief, except
that with respect to employers, for the purposes of Article 6, "religion" has the meaning ascribed to it in
Section 6-1(I).
(L) “Respondent” means the person or organization against whom a charge or complaint has been
filed.
(M) “Sex” means the status of being male or female.
(N) "Sexual Orientation" means having or being perceived as having an emotional, physical, or
sexual attraction to another person without regard to the gender of that person; or having or being
perceived as having an orientation for such attraction; or having or being perceived as having a self-image
or identity not traditionally associated with one's biological maleness or femaleness. 'Sexual orientation'
does not include a physical or sexual attraction to a minor by an adult. (AMENDED, Ordinance No.
2002-85, October 7, 2002)
(O) "Unfavorable Military Discharge" includes discharges from the Armed Forces of the United
States, their Reserve components or any National Guard or Naval Militia which are classified as RE-3 or
the equivalent thereof, but does not include those characterized RE-4 or "Dishonorable".
(P) ”Unlawful Discrimination” means discrimination against a person because of his or her race,
color, religion, national origin, age, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, disability or unfavorable
discharge from military service.
ARTICLE 3. HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION.
SECTION 3-1. There is hereby created and established a commission which shall be known as
the Decatur Human Relations Commission, the members of which shall serve without compensation.
SECTION 3-2. The Human Relations Commission shall consist of nine (9) residents of the City
appointed by the Mayor with advice and consent of the City Council. In making appointments, the Mayor
shall strive to select citizens who broadly represent the community with regard to race, color, religion,
sex, national origin, disability and sexual orientation. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-32, July 7, 2014)
SECTION 3-3. The terms of members of the Human Relations Commission shall be for three
years. Vacancies shall be filled by the Mayor, with such successors being appointed with the consent of
the City Council. No member shall serve more than two complete successive terms.
SECTION 3-4. There shall be a chairperson of the Human Relations Commission elected by the
Commission from members of the Commission. The Commission shall also elect one of its members to
serve as vice chairperson and such additional officers as the Commission may, from time to time, elect to
carry out its functions. A majority of members duly appointed shall constitute a quorum. A majority vote
of the quorum shall constitute approval of business before it, except as otherwise expressly provided
herein. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson or by not less than four (4) members of the
Commission. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-32, July 7, 2014)
SECTION 3-5. A. The purpose of the Human Relations Commission shall be to further the
cause of mutual understanding and respect between all groups, ethnic, religious, and otherwise, in which
differences or problems regarding prejudice, intolerance, bigotry, discrimination, and disorder may arise;
to foster an adjustment by all people to social problems and opportunities; to encourage a spirit of
community harmony by creating channels for constructive communication between people and groups;
and to further the equal enjoyment of rights, privileges, and opportunities of each person of the
community.
B. The Commission may facilitate investigations in the field of human relations in accordance
with the ordinances of the City of Decatur. In performing this function, the Commission shall cooperate
with the Mayor, City Council, City Manager, departments and divisions of the City, or with any other
appropriate governmental agencies. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-32, July 7, 2014)
SECTION 3-6. The Commission shall at least annually report to the City Council its activities
and recommendations.
ARTICLE 4. INVESTIGATION AND CONCILIATION.
SECTION 4-1. Any individual who believes that he or she has been unlawfully discriminated
against may file a charge with the Human Relations Commission. Such charge must be filed within 180
days after the date that the human rights violation allegedly was committed. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-
32, July 7, 2014)
SECTION 4-2. Such charge shall be a written statement, under oath or affirmation, setting forth
facts alleging that a human rights violation has occurred in a manner sufficient to enable the Human
Relations Commission to identify the protected class of the complainant, the specific act of discrimination
alleged, and the identity of the respondent. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-32, July 7, 2014)
SECTION 4-3. Charges may be voluntarily withdrawn at the request of the complainant at any
time prior to the completion of the public hearing specified in Article 5.
SECTION 4-4. The Human Relations Commission shall itself or through other means as
provided by the City Council investigate allegations of discrimination set forth in any charge, and make a
determination in writing whether or not here is probable cause to believe that this Chapter has been
violated and on what facts such violation is based. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-32, July 7, 2014)
SECTION 4-5. If the investigation finds, with respect to any respondent, that the Commission
lacks jurisdiction or that probable cause does not exist, a written notice dismissing the charge and cause
shall be served on the appropriate parties by certified mail with return receipt requested. A request for
such review must be filed within forty (40) days of the mailing of the notice. (Amended, Ordinance
2014-32, July 7, 2014)
SECTION 4-6. A. If it is determined that there is probable cause, at any party’s request and
upon mutual agreement, an attempt shall be made to eliminate the alleged discriminatory practice with
informal methods of resolution such as conference, conciliation, and mediation. (Amended, Ordinance
2014-32, July 7, 2014)
B. Nothing said or done in the course of conciliation may be used as evidence in a subsequent
proceeding without the written consent of the persons concerned.
SECTION 4-7. If it is determined that probable cause does exist, a complaint shall be filed with
the Commission. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-32, July 7, 2014)
SECTION 4-8. At any time after a charge is filed, the Corporation Counsel, may petition the
Circuit Court for temporary relief, pending final determination of the proceedings under this Chapter,
including an order or judgment restraining the respondent from doing or causing any act which would
render ineffectual an order which the Commission may enter with respect to the complainant. (Amended,
Ordinance 2014-32, July 7, 2014)
ARTICLE 5. PUBLIC HEARING.
SECTION 5-1. In lieu of the Commission presiding over a public hearing and hearing evidence
in the matter, the City Manager of the City of Decatur, upon request of the commission, may appoint a
hearing officer for the purpose of presiding over a public hearing and hearing evidence in the matter.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-77, October 19, 2009) (Amended, Ordinance 2014-32, July 7, 2014)
SECTION 5-2. Within five (5) days after a complaint is filed by a complainant, the Commission
shall cause a copy of it to be served on the respondent together with a notice of hearing before the
Commission or a hearing officer designated thereby, at a time and place therein fixed. (Amended,
Ordinance 2014-32, July 7, 2014)
SECTION 5-3. The hearing shall be held not less than forty-five (45) nor more than ninety (90)
days after the service of the complaint provided that the Commission, or the hearing officer, may, for
good cause shown, extend the date of the hearing.
SECTION 5-4. A. A complaint may be amended under oath by leave of the Commission, or the
hearing officer, for good cause shown, upon reasonable notice to all interested parties at any time prior to
the commencement of the hearing thereon. Amendments to the complaint may encompass any unlawful
discrimination which is like or reasonably related to the charge and growing out of the allegations in such
charge, including, but not limited to, allegations of retaliation.
B. A motion that the complaint be amended to conform to the evidence made prior to the close of
the public hearing may be addressed orally on the record to the Commission, or the hearing officer
conducting the public hearing, and shall be granted for good and sufficient cause.
SECTION 5-5. A. The respondent shall file an answer under oath or affirmation to the original
or amended complaint within thirty (30) days of the date of service thereof, but the Commission, or the
hearing officer may, for good cause shown, grant further time for the filing of an answer.
B. When the respondent files a motion to dismiss the complaint within thirty (30) days and the
motion is denied by the Commission or the hearing officer, the time for filing the answer shall be within
fifteen (15) days of the date of denial of the motion.
C. Any allegation in the complaint which is not denied or admitted in the answer is deemed
admitted unless the respondent states in the answer that he is without sufficient knowledge or information
to form a belief with respect to such allegation.
D. The failure to file an answer is deemed to constitute an admission of the allegations contained
in the complaint.
E. The respondent has the right to amend his answer upon leave of the Commission or the
hearing officer, for good cause shown.
SECTION 5-6. For the purpose of compelling testimony or other evidence to be brought before
the Commission or the hearing officer at any hearing held pursuant to a complaint, the Commission or the
hearing officer may, at the written request of either party, issue a subpoena or a subpoena duces tecum.
SECTION 5-7. A. Both the complainant and the respondent may appear and be represented by
counsel at the hearing and examine and cross-examine witnesses.
B. The testimony taken at the hearing shall be under oath or affirmation and a transcript shall be
made and filed in the office of the Commission.
C. The testimony taken at the hearing is subject to the same rules of evidence that apply to courts
in this State in civil cases.
SECTION 5-8. A. If the hearing provided for hereby is conducted by a hearing officer, said
hearing officer shall submit a recommended decision and order to the Commission upon the completion
of said hearing, in a form substantially in compliance with Section 5-9 hereof. A copy of said
recommended decision and order shall be served on each of the parties.
B. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of service of a hearing officer's recommended decision and
order, a party may file with the Commission any written exceptions to any part of the decision and order.
Exceptions shall be supported by argument and served on all parties at the time they are filed.
SECTION 5-9. At the conclusion of any hearing, or upon receipt of a recommended order from a
hearing officer, the Commission shall render a decision as to whether or not the respondent has
committed a human rights violation or has otherwise violated the provisions of this chapter. If it is
determined that a respondent has not committed a human rights violation, the Commission shall issue,
and cause to be served on the respondent and the complainant, an order dismissing the case. If it is
determined that a respondent has committed a human rights violation, the Commission shall issue, and
cause to be served on such respondent, an order, accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions of law,
providing for any relief or penalty listed in this Article as, in the judgment of the Commission, will carry
out the purposes of this Chapter.
SECTION 5-10. In dismissing a case pursuant to Section 5-9, or in approving a dismissal of a
charge pursuant to Section 5-5, the Commission may award the payment to respondent by complainant of
respondent's reasonable attorney's fees as well as award payment to the City of Decatur or the
Commission by the complainant the costs of maintaining and conducting the public hearing including, but
not limited to the costs and fees of the hearing officer and court reporter if the Commission finds that the
charge or complaint was frivolous, unreasonable or groundless or that the complainant continued to
litigate after it became clearly so. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-77, October 19, 2009)
SECTION 5-11. Upon finding a human rights violation, the Commission may direct and order
the respondent to:
1) cease and desist from any violation of this Chapter;
2) pay actual damages, as reasonably determined by the Commission and supported by the
evidence, for injury or loss suffered by the complainant;
3) hire, reinstate or upgrade the complainant with or without back-pay or provide such fringe
benefits as the complainant may have been denied;
4) Admit or restore the complainant to labor organization membership, to a guidance program,
apprenticeship training program, on the job training program, or other occupational training or retraining
program;
5) Admit the complainant to a public accommodation;
6) Extend to the complainant the full and equal enjoyment of the goods, services, facilities,
privileges, advantages, or accommodations of the respondent;
7) Pay to the complainant all or a portion of the costs of maintaining the action, including
reasonable attorney fees and expert witness fees incurred in maintaining this action before the
Commission and in any judicial review and judicial enforcement proceedings; (Amended, Ordinance
2014-32, July 7, 2014)
8) Report as to the manner of compliance;
9) Post notices in a conspicuous place which the Commission may publish or cause to be
published setting forth requirements for compliance with this Chapter or other relevant information which
the Commission determines necessary to explain this Chapter;
10) Take such action as may be necessary to make the individual complainant whole, including,
but not limited to, awards of interest on the complainant's actual damages and back-pay from the date of
the human rights violation; and,
11) In the case of a violation of Article 8 of this Chapter, pay to the City of Decatur a fine of not
more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for the first such offense, and not more than One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00) for each subsequent offense. Each day of a continuing offense shall not be
considered a separate offense for the purposes hereof; and,
12) Pay to the City of Decatur or the Commission all or a portion of the costs of maintaining and
conducting the public hearing including, but not limited to the costs and fees of the investigation, the
hearing officer and court reporter. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-77, October 19, 2009) (Amended,
Ordinance 2014-32, July 7, 2014)
SECTION 5-12. If damage awards or fines ordered hereunder are not paid within thirty (30) days
after they are assessed, they shall be considered to be debts to the City of Decatur or the party to whom
they are owed under the terms of said order, and shall be collectible in the same manner provided by law
for the collection of all other debts.
ARTICLE 6. EMPLOYMENT.
SECTION 6-1. The following definitions are applicable only as said words or phrases are used in
this Article:
A. "Citizenship Status" means the status of being:
a) a born U.S. citizen;
b) a naturalized U.S. citizen;
c) a U.S. national; or,
d) a person born outside the United States and not a U.S. citizen who is not an
unauthorized alien and who is protected from discrimination under the provisions of Section 1324b of
Title 8 of the United States Code, as now or hereafter amended.
B. (1) "Employee" includes:
a) Any individual performing services for remuneration within this State for an
employer;
b) An apprentice;
c) An applicant for any apprenticeship.
(2) "Employee" does not include:
a) Domestic servants in private homes;
b) Individuals employed by persons who are not "employers" as defined by this Article;
c) Elected public officials or the members of their immediate personal staffs;
d) Principal administrative officers of the State or of any political subdivision, municipal
corporation or other governmental unit or agency;
e) A person in a vocational rehabilitation facility certified under federal law who has
been designated an evaluee, trainee, or work activity client; and,
f) Employees of the City of Decatur.
C. 1. "Employer" includes:
a) Any person employing one (1) or more employees within the City of Decatur;
b) Any political subdivision of the State or any municipal corporation or other
governmental unit or agency (except the State of Illinois and its agencies and departments); and
c) A joint apprenticeship or training committee.
2. "Employer" does not include the following:
a) the City of Decatur;
b) or any religious corporation, association, educational institution, society or non-profit
nursing institution conducted by and for those who rely upon treatment by prayer through spiritual means
in accordance with the tenets of a generally recognized church or religious denomination with respect to
the exclusive employment of individuals of their own respective religion to perform work connected with
the carrying on by such corporation, association, educational institution, society or non-profit nursing
institution of its activities.
D. "Employment Agency" includes both public and private employment agencies and any
person, labor organization, or labor union having a hiring hall or hiring office regularly undertaking, with
or without compensation, to procure opportunities to work, or procure, recruit or place employees.
E. "Labor Organization" includes any organization, labor union, craft union, or any voluntary
unincorporated association designed to further the cause of the rights of union labor which is constituted
for the purpose, in whole or in part, of collective bargaining or of dealing with employers concerning
grievances, terms or conditions of employment, or apprenticeships or applications for apprenticeships, or
of other mutual aid or protection in connection with employment, including apprenticeships or
applications for apprenticeships.
F. "Public Employee" means an employee of a unit of local government, school district,
instrumentality or political subdivision.
G. "Public Employer" means a unit of local government, school district, instrumentality or
political subdivision.
H. "Public Officer" means a person who is elected to office pursuant to a statute or ordinance, or
who is appointed to an office which is established, and the qualifications and duties of which are
prescribed, by a statute or ordinance, to discharge a public duty for a unit of local government, school
district, instrumentality or political subdivision.
I. "Religion" with respect to employers includes all aspects of religious observance and practice,
as well as belief, unless an employer demonstrates that he or she is unable to reasonably accommodate an
employee's or prospective employee's religious observance or practice without undue hardship on the
conduct of the employer's business.
J. "Sexual Harassment" means any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or
any conduct of a sexual nature when (1) submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly
a term or condition of an individual's employment, (2) submission to or rejection of such conduct by
an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual, or (3) such conduct
has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an
intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment.
SECTION 6-2. It is a human rights violation:
A. For any employer to refuse to hire, to segregate, or to act with respect to recruitment, hiring,
promotion, renewal of employment, selection for training or apprenticeship, discharge, discipline, tenure
or terms, privileges or conditions of employment on the basis of unlawful discrimination or citizenship
status.
B. For any employment agency to fail or refuse to classify properly, accept applications and
register for employment referral or apprenticeship referral, refer for employment, or refer for
apprenticeship on the basis of unlawful discrimination or citizenship status or to accept from any person
any job order, requisition or request for referral of applicants for employment or apprenticeship which
makes or has the effect of making unlawful discrimination or discrimination on the basis of citizenship
status as a condition of employment.
C. For any labor organization to limit, segregate or classify its membership, or to limit
employment opportunities, selection and training for apprenticeship in any trade or craft, or otherwise to
take, or fail to take, any action which affects adversely any person's status as an employee or as an
applicant for employment or as an apprentice, or as an applicant for apprenticeship, or wages, tenure,
hours of employment or apprenticeship conditions on the basis of unlawful discrimination or citizenship
status.
D. For any employer, employee, agent of any employer, employment agency or labor
organization to engage in sexual harassment; provided, that an employer shall be responsible for sexual
harassment of the employer's employees by nonemployees or nonmanagerial and nonsupervisory
employees only if the employer becomes aware of the conduct and fails to take reasonable corrective
measures.
E. For any public employer to refuse to permit a public employee under its jurisdiction who takes
time off from work in order to practice his or her religious beliefs to engage in work, during hours other
than such employee's regular working hours, consistent with the operational needs of the employer and in
order to compensate for work time lost for such religious reasons. Any employee who elects such
deferred work shall be compensated at the wage rate which he or she would have earned during the
originally scheduled work period. The employer may require that an employee who plans to take time off
from work in order to practice his or her religious beliefs provide the employer with a notice of his or her
intention to be absent from work not exceeding five (5) days prior to the date of absence.
F. For any employer, employment agency or labor organization to discriminate against a person
on the basis of age in the selection, referral for or conduct of apprenticeship or training programs.
G. For an employer to request for purposes of satisfying the requirements of Section 1324a(b) of
Title 8 of the United States Code, as now or hereafter amended, more or different documents than are
required under such Section or to refuse to honor documents tendered that on their face reasonably appear
to be genuine. It is not a human rights violation for an employer to take any action that is required by
Section 1324a of Title 8 of the United States Code, as now or hereafter amended.
H. Unless otherwise authorized by law, it is a human rights violation for any employer,
employment agency or labor organization to inquire into or to use arrest information or criminal history
record information ordered expunged, sealed or impounded under Section 5 of the Criminal Identification
Act as a basis to refuse to hire, to segregate, or to act with respect to recruitment, hiring, promotion,
renewal of employment, selection for training or apprenticeship, discharge, discipline, tenure or terms,
privileges or conditions of employment. This Section does not prohibit a State agency, unit of local
government or school district, or private organization from utilizing conviction information obtained from
the Department of State Police under the provisions of Section 3 of the Criminal Identification Act in
evaluating the qualifications and character of an employee or a prospective employee.
SECTION 6-3. Nothing contained in this Article shall prohibit an employer, employment agency
or labor organization from:
A. Hiring or selecting between persons for bona fide occupational qualifications or any reason
except those human rights violations specifically identified in this Article.
B. Giving preferential treatment to veterans and their relatives as required by the laws or
regulations of the United States or this State or a unit of local government.
C. Using unfavorable discharge from military service as a valid employment criterion when
authorized by federal law or regulation or when a position of employment involves the exercise of
fiduciary responsibilities.
D. Giving or acting upon the results of any professionally developed ability test provided that
such test, its administration, or action upon the results, is not used as a subterfuge for or does not have the
effect of unlawful discrimination.
E. Applying different standards of compensation, or different terms, conditions or privileges of
employment pursuant to a merit or retirement system provided that such system or its administration is
not used as a subterfuge for or does not have the effect of unlawful discrimination.
F. Effecting compulsory retirement of any employee who has attained 65 years of age and who,
for the two (2) year period immediately preceding retirement, is employed in a bona fide executive or a
high policymaking position, if such employee is entitled to an immediate nonforfeitable annual retirement
benefit from a pension, profit-sharing, savings, or deferred compensation plan, or any combination of
such plans of the employer of such employee, which equals, in the aggregate, at least $44,000. If any
such retirement benefit is in a form other than a straight life annuity (with no ancillary benefits) or if the
employees contribute to any such plan or make roll-over contributions, the retirement benefit shall be
adjusted so that the benefit is the equivalent of a straight life annuity (with no ancillary benefits) under a
plan to which employees do not contribute and under which no roll-over contributions are made.
G. Establishing an educational requirement as a prerequisite to selection for a training or
apprenticeship program provided such requirement does not operate to discriminate on the basis of any
prohibited classification except age.
H. Making legitimate distinctions based on citizenship status if specifically authorized or
required by State or federal law.
ARTICLE 7. FINANCIAL CREDIT.
SECTION 7-1. The following definitions are applicable only as said words or phrases are used in
this Article:
A. "Credit card" has the meaning set forth in Section 2.03 of the Illinois Credit Card Act.
B. "Financial institution" means any bank, credit union, insurance company, mortgage banking
company, savings and loan association, or other business engaged in the lending of funds which operates
or has a place of business in the City of Decatur.
C. "Loan" includes, but is not limited to, the providing of funds, for consideration, which are
sought for: (1) the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a housing
accommodation as that term is defined in Section 8-1(C); or (2) any commercial or industrial purposes.
D. "Varying terms" includes, but is not limited to, the following practices:
(1) Requiring a greater down payment than is usual for the particular type of a loan involved.
(2) Requiring a shorter period of amortization than is usual for the particular type of loan
involved.
(3) Charging a higher interest rate than is usual for the particular type of loan involved.
(4) An under appraisal of real estate or other item of property offered as security.
SECTION 7-2. It shall be a human rights violation for any financial institution, on the grounds of
unlawful discrimination, to:
A. Deny any person any of the services normally offered by such an institution.
B. Provide any person with any service which is different from, or provided in a different manner
than, that which is provided to other persons similarly situated.
C. Deny or vary the terms of a loan.
D. Deny or vary the terms of a loan on the basis that a specific parcel of real estate offered as
security is located in a specific geographical area.
E. Deny or vary the terms of a loan without having considered all of the regular and dependable
income of each person who would be liable for repayment of the loan.
F. Utilize lending standards that have no economic basis and which constitute unlawful
discrimination.
SECTION 7-3. It is a human rights violation for a person who offers credit cards to the public in
the City of Decatur:
A. To refuse to issue a credit card, upon proper application, on the basis of unlawful
discrimination.
B. To fail to inform an applicant for a credit card, upon request, of the reason that his or her
application for a credit card has been rejected.
SECTION 7-4. Nothing contained in this Article shall prohibit:
A. A financial institution from considering sound underwriting practices in contemplation of any
loan to any person. Such practices shall include:
(1) The willingness and financial ability of the borrower to repay the loan.
(2) The market value of any real estate or other item of property proposed as security for any
loan.
(3) Diversification of the financial institution's investment portfolio.
B. A financial institution or a person who offers credit cards from:
(1) Making an inquiry of the applicant's age, permanent residence, immigration status, or any
additional information if such inquiry is for the purposes of determining the amount and probable
continuance of income levels, credit history, or other pertinent element of credit-worthiness.
(2) Using any empirically derived credit system which considers age if such system is
demonstrably and statistically sound, except that in the operation of such system the age of an applicant
over the age of 62 years may not be assigned a negative factor or value.
C. A financial institution from refusing to extend credit when required to by or pursuant to any:
(1) credit assistance program expressly authorized by law for an economically disadvantaged
class of persons.
(2) credit assistance program administered by a nonprofit organization for its members of an
economically disadvantaged class of persons.
(3) special purpose credit program offered by a profit-making organization to meet special social
needs.
ARTICLE 8. REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS.
SECTION 8-1. The following definitions are applicable only as said words and phrases are used
in this Article:
A. "Real property" includes buildings, structures, real estate, lands, tenements, leaseholds,
interests in real estate cooperatives, condominiums, and hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal, or any
interest therein.
B. "Real estate transaction" includes the sale, exchange, rental or lease of real property. "Real
estate transaction" also includes the brokering or appraising of residential real property and the making or
purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance:
(1) for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling; or,
(2) secured by residential real estate.
C. "Housing accommodation" includes any improved or unimproved real property, or part
thereof, which is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as the
home or residence of one or more individuals.
D. "Real estate broker or salesman" means a person, whether licensed or not, who, for or with the
expectation of receiving a consideration, lists, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents or leases real property, or
who negotiates or attempts to negotiate any of these activities, or who holds himself or herself out as
engaged in these.
E. "Familial status" means one or more individuals (who have not attained the age of 18 years)
being domiciled with:
(1) a parent or person having legal custody of such individual or individuals; or,
(2) the designee of such parent or other person having such custody, with the written permission
of such parent or other person.
The protections afforded by this Article against discrimination on the basis of familial status
apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who
has not attained the age of 18 years.
F. As used in this Article "Covered multifamily dwellings" means:
(1) building consisting of four (4) or more units if such buildings have one or more elevators;
and,
(2) ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four (4) or more units.
SECTION 8-2. It is a human rights violation for an owner or any other person engaging in a real
estate transaction, or for a real estate broker or salesman, because of unlawful discrimination or familial
status, to:
A. Refuse to engage in a real estate transaction with a person or to discriminate in making
available such a transaction.
B. Alter the terms, conditions or privileges of a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of
facilities or services in connection therewith.
C. Refuse to receive or to fail to transmit a bona fide offer to engage in a real estate transaction
from a person.
D. Refuse to negotiate for a real estate transaction with a person.
E. Represent to a person that real property is not available for inspection, sale, rental, or lease
when in fact it is so available, or to fail to bring a property listing to his or her attention, or to refuse to
permit him or her to inspect real property.
F. Print, circulate, post, mail, publish or cause to be so published a written or oral statement,
advertisement or sign, or to use a form of application for a real estate transaction, or to make a record or
inquiry in connection with a prospective real estate transaction, which expresses any limitation founded
upon, or indicates, directly or indirectly, an intent to engage in unlawful discrimination.
G. Offer, solicit, accept, use or retain a listing of real property with knowledge that unlawful
discrimination or discrimination on the basis of familial status in a real estate transaction is intended.
SECTION 8-3. A. It is a human rights violation to refuse to sell or rent or to otherwise make
unavailable or deny a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a disability of that buyer or renter; a
disability of a person residing or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented or made
available or a disability of any person associated with the buyer or renter.
B. It is a human rights violation to alter the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a
dwelling or the provision of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling because of a person's
disability or a disability of any person residing or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold,
rented or made available, or a disability of any person associated with that person.
SECTION 8-4. It is a human rights violation:
A. To refuse to permit, at the expense of the disabled person, reasonable modifications of
existing premises occupied or to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to
afford such person full enjoyment of the premises; except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord may,
where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore
the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before modifications, reasonable wear and tear
excepted. The landlord may not increase for disabled persons any customarily required security deposit.
However, where it is necessary in order to ensure with reasonable certainty that funds will be available to
pay for the restorations at the end of the tenancy, the landlord may negotiate as part of such a restoration
agreement a provision requiring that the tenant pay into an interest bearing escrow account, over a
reasonable period, a reasonable amount of money not to exceed the cost of the restorations. The interest
in any such account shall accrue to the benefit of the tenant. A landlord may condition permission for a
modification on the renter providing a reasonable description of the proposed modifications as well as
reasonable assurances that the work will be done in a workmanlike manner and that any required building
permits will be obtained.
B. To refuse to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services, when
such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a
dwelling.
C. In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first
occupancy after January 1, 1994, to fail to design and construct those dwellings in such a manner that:
(1) the public use and common use portions of such dwellings are readily accessible to and
usable by disabled persons;
(2) all the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within such dwellings are
sufficiently wide to allow passage by disabled persons in wheelchairs; and,
(3) all premises within such dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design:
(i) an accessible route into and through the dwelling;
(ii) light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible
locations;
(iii) reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and,
(iv) usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about
the space.
Compliance with the appropriate standards of the Illinois Accessibility Code for adaptable
dwelling units suffices to satisfy the requirements of this subsection.
SECTION 8-5. It is a human rights violation for any person to:
A. Solicit for sale, lease, listing or purchase any residential real estate within the City of Decatur,
on the grounds of loss of value due to the present or prospective entry into the vicinity of the property
involved of any person or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex, marital
status, familial status, disability or sexual orientation.
B. Distribute or cause to be distributed, written material or statements designed to induce any
owner of residential real estate in the City of Decatur to sell or lease his or her property because of any
present or prospective changes in the race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex, marital status, familial
status, disability or sexual orientation of residents in the vicinity of the property involved.
C. Intentionally create alarm, among residents of any community, by transmitting
communications in any manner, including a telephone call whether or not conversation thereby ensues,
with a design to induce any owner of residential real estate in the City of Decatur to sell or lease his or her
property because of any present or prospective entry into the vicinity of the property involved of any
person or persons of any particular race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex, marital status, familial
status, disability or sexual orientation.
SECTION 8-6. It is a human rights violation for the owner or agent of any housing
accommodation to:
A. Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale
or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny property to any blind, hearing impaired or physically
disabled person because he has a guide, hearing or support dog.
B. Discriminate against any blind, hearing impaired or physically disabled person in the terms,
conditions or privileges of sale or rental property, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection
therewith, because he has a guide, hearing or support dog.
C. Require, because a blind, hearing impaired or physically disabled person has a guide, hearing
or support dog, an extra charge in a lease, rental agreement, or contract of purchase or sale, other than for
actual damage done to the premises by the dog.
SECTION 8-7. Nothing contained in this Article shall prohibit:
A. Any sale of a single family home by its owner so long as the following criteria are met:
(1) The owner does not own or have a beneficial interest in more than three (3) single family
homes at the time of the sale;
(2) The owner or a member of his or her family was the last current resident of the home;
(3) The home is sold without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or services of
any real estate broker or salesman, or of any employee or agent of any real estate broker or salesman; and,
(4) The home is sold without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any
advertisement or written notice in violation of Section 8-2(F).
B. Rental of a housing accommodation in a building which contains housing accommodations
for not more than five families living independently of each other, if the lessor or a member of his or her
family resides in one of the housing accommodations.
C. Rental of a room or rooms in a private home by an owner if he or she or a member of his or
her family resides therein or, while absent for a period of not more than twelve months, if he or she or a
member of his or her family intends to return to reside therein.
D. A religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization
operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or
society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of a dwelling which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, or national origin.
E. Restricting the rental of rooms in a housing accommodation to persons of one sex.
F. Conduct against a person because such person has been convicted by any court of competent
jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance as defined in Section 102
of the federal Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802).
G. Persons engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into
consideration factors other than those based on unlawful discrimination or familial status in furnishing
appraisals.
H. Housing for Older Persons. No provision in this section regarding familial status shall apply
with respect to housing for older persons.
(1) As used in this Section, "housing for older persons" means housing:
(a) provided under any State or Federal program that the Secretary of Housing and Urban
Development has determined to be specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons (as defined
in the State or Federal program); or
(b) intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or older; or
(c) intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit.
In determining whether housing qualifies as housing for older persons under this subsection, the
Commission shall develop regulations which require at least the following:
(i) the existence of significant facilities and services specifically designed to meet the physical or
social needs of older persons, or if the provision of such facilities and services is not practicable, that such
housing is necessary to provide important housing opportunities for older persons; and
(ii) that at least 80% of the units are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older per
unit; and,
(iii) the publication of, and adherence to, policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by
the owner or manager to provide housing for persons 55 years of age or older.
ARTICLE 9. PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS.
SECTION 9-1. The following definitions are applicable only as said words and phrases are used
in this Article:
A. (1) "Place of public accommodation" means a business, accommodation, refreshment,
entertainment, recreation, or transportation facility of any kind, whether licensed or not, whose goods,
services, facilities, privileges, advantages or accommodations are extended, offered, sold, or otherwise
made available to the public.
(2) By way of example, but not of limitation, "place of public accommodation" includes facilities
of the following types: inns, restaurants, eating establishments, hotels, taverns, barber shops, department
stores, clothing stores, hat stores, shoe stores, bathrooms, restrooms, theatres, skating rinks, public golf
courses, public golf driving ranges, concerts, cafes, bicycle rinks, elevators, ice cream establishments,
railroads, busses, taxicabs, airplanes, boats, funeral hearses, crematories, cemeteries, and public
conveyances of land, water, or air, public swimming pools and other places of public accommodation and
amusement.
B. "Operator" means any owner, lessee, proprietor, manager, superintendent, agent, or occupant
of a place of public accommodation or an employee of any such person or persons.
C. "Public official" means any officer or employee of state political subdivisions, municipal
corporations, park districts, forest preserve districts, educational institutions and schools.
SECTION 9-2. It is a human rights violation for any person, on the basis of unlawful
discrimination, to:
A. Deny or refuse to another the full and equal enjoyment of the facilities and services of any
public place of accommodation.
B. Directly or indirectly, as the operator of a place of accommodation, publish, circulate, display
or mail any written communication, except a private communication sent in response to a specific inquiry,
which the operator knows is to the effect that any of the facilities of the place of public accommodation
will be denied to any person or that any person is unwelcome, objectionable or unacceptable because of
unlawful discrimination.
C. Deny or refuse to another, as a public official, the full and equal enjoyment of the
accommodations, advantage, facilities or privileges of the official's office or services or of any property
under the official's care because of unlawful discrimination.
SECTION 9-3. Nothing in this Article shall apply to:
A. A private club, or other establishment not in fact open to the public, except to the extent that
the goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages, or accommodations of the establishment are made
available to the customers or patrons of another establishment that is a place of amusement.
B. Any facility, as to discrimination based on sex, which is distinctly private in nature such as
restrooms, shower rooms, bath houses, health clubs and other similar facilities.
C. Any facility, as to discrimination based on sex, which restricts the rental of rooms to
individuals of one sex.
ARTICLE 10: MINORITY PARTICIPATION GOALS FOR PUBLIC WORKS
CONTRACTS.
SECTION 10-1. POLICY: The City of Decatur encourages a diverse workforce for all
public projects. Toward that end, the City establishes goals for participation by Minority
Business Enterprises (MBE) and minority workers for public works contracts. The objectives of
the minority participation goals include:
A. Ensuring non-discrimination in the award and administration of City public works
contracts;
B. Encouraging a level playing field on which MBE and minority workers can compete
fairly for City public works contracts;
C. Helping to remove barriers to the participation of MBE and minority workers in City
public works contracts;
D. Promoting the use of MBE and minority workers in City public works projects;
E. Ensuring the minority participation goals are narrowly tailored in accordance with
applicable law;
F. Providing appropriate flexibility to contractors in establishing and providing
opportunities for MBE and minority workers;
SECTION 10-2. DEFINITIONS:
A. MINORITY: For purposes of this Article, the City hereby adopts and incorporates by
reference “minority person” as defined in the Illinois Business Enterprise for Minorities, Females
and Persons with Disabilities Act, 30 ILCS 575/2.
B. MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE (MBE): A business that is owned and
controlled by minorities. There must be not less than 51 percent minority ownership of the
business, and the minority ownership must control the management and daily operations of the
business.
SECTION 10-3. MINORITY PARTICIPATION GOALS IN PUBLIC PROJECTS.
A. Contractors for City projects shall make a good faith effort to comply with the
following minimum goals: (1) Ten (10) percent of the total dollar amount of the contract should
be performed by Minority Business Enterprises if subcontracting opportunities are available; and
(2) Eighteen (18) percent of the total hours worked should be performed by minority workers.
B. Subcontracting is not required for a City project. If a subcontractor is used, the
contractor shall make a good faith effort to meet the City’s minority participation goals.
C. A contractor shall provide evidence of meeting the City’s minority participation goals
as directed and required by the Public Works Director or provide evidence that it made a goodfaith
effort to meet the goals.
D. A good faith effort means the contractor took reasonable and necessary steps to
achieve the minority participation goals. Good faith means the contractor actively and
aggressively sought participation by MBE or minority workers. The City shall consider the
quality, quantity and intensity of efforts made by a contractor.
E. Evidence of a good-faith effort includes, but is not limited to, as appropriate:
(i) Soliciting through all reasonable and available means the interest of MBE and
minority workers;
(ii) Outreach and recruitment efforts of MBE and minority workers;
(iii) Packaging requirements, when feasible, into tasks or quantities that permit
maximum participation from MBE and minority workers;
(iv) Providing interested MBE and firms that employ minority workers with
adequate information about the bidding process, adequate time to respond and assistance in
responding to a solicitation;
(v) Negotiating in good faith with MBE and firms that employ minority workers;
(vi) Assisting interested MBE and firms that employ minority workers in
obtaining bonding, lines of credit or insurance;
(vii) Assisting interested MBE and firms that employ minority workers in
obtaining necessary equipment, supplies or materials;
(viii) Seeking services from available minority community organizations;
minority contractors’ groups, minority business assistance offices and other organizations, as
appropriate, to provide assistance in recruiting MBE and minority workers;
(ix) If an MBE or a firm that employs minority workers is rejected, providing
sound reasons for rejection based on a thorough investigation of the firm;
(x) Providing payroll records or other evidence showing the percentage of
minority workers employed on the project or the percentage of project hours completed by
minority workers;
(xi) All other good faith efforts or evidence of due diligence to meet the City’s
minority participation goals.
F. The minority participation goals shall be reviewed annually by the City Manager or his
designee. Any changes of the goals shall require a majority vote by Decatur City Council.
SECTION 10-4. PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION:
A. The Public Works Director, or his designee, shall:
(i) Administer and enforce the provisions of this Article;
(ii) Monitor, track and report on contractors over the contract duration to ensure
compliance with this Article.
SECTION 10-5. PENALTIES:
A. If a contractor fails to meet the City’s minority participation goals and fails to provide
evidence of a good faith effort to meet the goals, the Public Works Director or his designee may,
as appropriate:
(i) Order immediate corrective action, as appropriate and practicable, to meet the
minority participation goals or to show a good faith effort toward meeting the goals;
(ii) Assess a fine or penalty not to exceed $2,000 for each offense, and each day
on which a violation occurs or continues shall be considered a separate offense;
(iii) Withhold the fine or penalty assessed from the unpaid portion of the
contract;
(iv) Order that the contractor will not be considered a responsive responsible
bidder for future City projects until the contractor provides evidence of making a good faith
effort toward meeting the City’s minority participation goals.
SECTION 10-6. APPEALS: The penalty assessed by the Public Works Director or his
designee shall be appealable to the City’s Human Relations Commission.
SECTION 10-7. WAIVER:
A. If a contractor does not or cannot meet the City’s minority participation goals for
contracts, it may seek in writing a waiver. The waiver request shall include, as appropriate:
(i) Evidence of the contractor’s good faith efforts to secure participation by MBE
and minority workers;
(ii) Evidence the contractor received no proposals or inquiries from qualified
MBE or firms that employ minority workers in response to a good faith effort to secure
participation.
B. The Public Works Director or his designee may, at his or her discretion, waive the
minority participation goals upon finding:
(i) The project is essential for city operations;
(ii) Emergency circumstances require a waiver;
(iii) Evidence of a good faith effort by the contractor;
(iv) Evidence the contractor received no proposals or inquiries from qualified
MBE or firms that employ minority workers in response to a good faith effort to secure
participation. (Amended, Ordinance 2015-07, March 2, 2015)
ARTICLE 11. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
SECTION 11-1. The provisions of this Chapter are, and shall be construed to be, severable, and a
finding of invalidity of any of such provisions by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not invalidate the
other provisions hereof.
SECTION 11-2. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed, and it is not the intent hereof, to
require more costly means of compliance herewith than are required for compliance with standards set out
in applicable State or Federal laws which are similar or comparable hereto.
CHAPTER 29
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF OFFENSES
(Adopted, Ordinance No. 2011-64)
1. Definitions. Whenever used herein, the following words shall have the meaning set
after them as follows:
A. ACES - means Administrative Code Enforcement System.
B. City Official - means all full-time police officers as well as any other officer, agent or
employee of the City of Decatur authorized to enforce the City Code.
C. Complaint – means a formal written accusation against a person or entity such as a
ticket or notice of violation for a violation of the City Code.
D. Default – means a failure to appear for a scheduled hearing or legal proceeding.
E. Emergency Situations - means those situations that reasonably constitute threats to the
public interests, safety or welfare,
F. Hearing Officer – means a municipal employee or an officer or agent of a
municipality appointed pursuant to this Chapter, other than a law enforcement officer whose duty
it is to:
(1) Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or not a code
violation exists;
(2) Issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant testimony at
administrative hearings, upon the request of the parties or their representatives;
(3) Administer oaths, hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested
parties relevant to the existence of a code violation;
Revised 04/2016
(4) Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing and all
exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; and
(5) Issue and sign a written finding, decision, and order stating whether a code
violation exists and imposing penalties consistent with the applicable City Code
provisions and assessing costs.
(6) Assess and issue fines, costs of the administrative adjudication hearing,
sanctions that are provided in the Code for the violation proved, orders to abate,
injunctions, orders to cease and desist, orders to perform community service, and other
appropriate orders.
(7) Remove any persons from the hearing for failing to use proper decorum
during the hearing or engaging in any other disorderly act causing the disruption of the
hearing or process.
G. Non-emergency situation - means any situation that does not reasonably constitute a
threat to the public interests, safety or welfare.
H. Petitioner - means the person or entity making a City Code violation allegation
initiating the administrative adjudication hearing process.
I. Prima Facie Evidence - means the bare minimum of evidence needed to bring a case
before a hearing officer.
J. Property Owner - means the legal or beneficial owner of real property or other person
in control, including but not limited to, a mortgagee in possession of a property, the beneficial
owners of real property held in trust and any person, business, partnership, corporation or other
entity who contracts with the federal government or any of its agencies, including without
limitation the Department of Housing and Urban Development, to care for vacant residential real
estate.
K. Respondent - means a person or entity who is accused of a violation.
2. CODE HEARING DIVISION. There is hereby established an Administrative Code
Enforcement System (hereinafter referred to as “ACES”) and a City Code Hearing Division, the
function of which is to expedite the prosecution and correction of violations of the city code in
the manner provided by this Chapter.
A. The hearing officer and such other agents or employees assigned to the department by
the City Manager shall constitute the Code Hearing Division.
B. The adoption of this Chapter is not the exclusive method of enforcing code violations
and the establishment does not preclude the City from using other methods to enforce the
provisions of its code, including the filing of suit in courts of competent jurisdiction.
3. JURISDISTION. An administrative adjudication proceeding under this Chapter may
be initiated for any alleged City Code violation.
4. VIOLATION NOTICE PROCEDURE. A proceeding under this Chapter shall be
instituted upon the filing of a written Violation Notice and Complaint by an authorized official of
the City for a violation of any ordinance under the Code. Said Violation Notice and Complaint
shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation cited.
A. A Violation Notice and Complaint shall be certified and shall contain, but shall not be
limited to, the following information, as applicable:
(1) The name and address of the party alleged to have violated the ordinance, if
known;
(2) The date, time and place of the violation;
(3) A statement detailing the type and nature of the violation;
(4) The Chapter and Section of the City Code alleged to have been violated;
(5) Vehicle make and state registration number;
(6) A section entitled “Notice of Hearing” which shall clearly set forth that the
person receiving a notice of ordinance violation may appear at an administrative
adjudicatory hearing to contest the validity of the violation notice on the date and at the
time and place as specified in the Notice of Hearing;
(7) The date, time and location of the Administrative Adjudicatory hearing, if
applicable, which hearing date shall not be less than 15, nor more than 30 days after the
date of the complaint in non-emergency situations. In emergency situations the hearing
date shall not be less than three, nor more than seven days after the date of the complaint;
(8) The fine and penalty for the violation of the ordinance, if applicable and the
fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payment;
(9) The legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing, if applicable, is
to be held and the penalties for failure to appear at the hearing;
(10) The signature and identification of the person issuing the Violation Notice
and Complaint, which signature shall act as a certification of the accuracy of all
information contained with the complaint;
(11) Statement that failure to either pay the fine and any applicable penalty or
failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the date and at the time and place
specified will result in a default judgment being entered against the respondent and a final
determination of liability for the cited violation and penalties indicated as well as costs of
the administrative hearing made as provided for.
(12) Statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination of liability for
the failure, and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, available administrative or
judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or penalty will constitute a debt due and
owing the City with the judgment being enforceable in the Circuit Court.
(13) Statement setting forth applicability of and providing for payment and
waiver of an administrative adjudicatory hearing.
B. The correctness of facts contained in any violation notice shall be verified by the
person issuing said notice by:
(1) Signing his or her name to the Violation Notice and Complaint at the time of
issuance; or,
(2) In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing a single
certificate attesting to the correctness of all Violation Notice and Complaints produced by
the device while under his/her control.
C. The original or a facsimile of the Violation Notice and Complaint shall be retained by
the City and kept as a record in the ordinary course of business.
D. Any Violation Notice and Complaint issued, signed and served in accordance
herewith, or a copy of the Violation Notice and Complaint, shall be prima facie correct and shall
be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice.
E. For those violations of Code that provide for a monetary fine and penalty only, the
person receiving the Violation Notice may pay the fine in full as stated on said notice. Said fine
and penalty shall be paid at the Treasurer’s Office located at the offices of the City.
5. SERVICE.
A. The City shall serve respondents with a Violation Notice and Complaint in a
manner reasonably calculated to give the respondent actual notice of the complaint,
including, as appropriate:
(1) Personal service of process upon a party or its employees or agents;
(2) Service by mail at a party’s address;
(3) Notice posted upon the property where a violation is found when the
person is the owner, occupant or manager of the property;
(4) Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an unlawfully
standing or parked vehicle, unstickered vehicle or vehicle violating any
compliance regulation and mailing such notice to the registered owner of
the vehicle by first-class mail;
(5) Such other method as is reasonably calculated to provide the
respondent with actual notice of the administrative hearing proceedings.
(Amended, Ordinance 2013-55, June 17, 2013)
B. Following service of a Violation Notice and Complaint, service of subsequent
pleadings, orders and notices may be made by mailing such pleading to the respondent by regular
first class mail.
C. Service of notices sent in accordance with this Chapter shall be complete as of the
date of deposit in the United States mail.
6. HEARINGS. A hearing authorized pursuant to this Chapter shall afford parties due
process of law, including notice and opportunity for a hearing during which the respondent may
be represented by counsel, present witnesses, and cross-examine opposing witnesses.
A. Parties may request the hearing officer to issue subpoenas to direct the attendance and
testimony of relevant witnesses and the production of relevant documents.
B. Hearings shall be scheduled with reasonable promptness, provided that for hearings
scheduled in all non-emergency situations, the respondent shall have no less than fifteen (15)
days and no more than thirty (30) days after service of process to prepare for a hearing. If
service is provided by mail, the 15-day period shall begin to run on the day that the notice is
deposited in the mail.
C. The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in an adjudicatory hearing
permitted under this Chapter. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it is of a
type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.
D. All administrative adjudication hearings conducted pursuant to this Chapter shall be
recorded.
E. Hearings shall regularly take place at such place on such days and times as may be
necessary and designated.
F. Continuances will not be granted except where absolutely necessary to protect the
rights of the parties. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Continuances,
if authorized, shall not exceed seven (7) days.
G. If on the date set for hearing the respondent or his or her attorney fails to appear, the
hearing officer may find the respondent in default and shall proceed.
H. A final determination of liability as determined by the Hearing Officer shall be
provided to the parties following the conclusion of an administrative hearing by personally
providing such or, in the case of a default judgment, by mailing within five (5) business days of
the date the order is issued and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information and
warnings:
(1) A decision and order stating whether a code violation exists.
(2) A statement of any penalties or sanctions imposed which penalties or
sanctions costs are debts due and owing the City.
(3) A statement of any finding of costs imposed if a code violation is found to
exist which costs shall be debts due and owing the City.
(4) A statement of any sanctions imposed including, but not limited to, orders to
abate, injunctions, orders to cease and desist, orders to perform community service and
other appropriate orders as determined by the hearing officer.
(5) A warning that failure to comply with any orders to abate, cease and desist,
perform community service or other appropriate order and/or pay the fine and any
penalty due and owing the City within the time specified may result in proceeding with
collection and enforcement procedures in the same manner as a judgment entered by any
court of competent jurisdiction.
(6) Any other warning of possible impoundment as permitted by law or
ordinance.
I. Final Determination of Liability. A final determination of liability shall occur
following the failure to pay the fine or penalty or comply with other imposed sanctions after the
Hearing Officer’s determination of liability and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, any
administrative review procedures hereinafter set forth. Where a person fails to appear at the
administrative hearing to contest the alleged violation on the date and at the time and place
specified in a prior served or mailed notice, the hearing officer’s determination of liability shall
become final either upon a denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination or upon the
expiration of the period for filing a petition without a filing having been made.
7. ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT.
A. Judicial Review. Any final decision by a Hearing Officer that a code violation does
or does not exist shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review under the
Illinois Administrative Review Law. The findings, decision and order of the hearing officer shall
constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review and shall be subject to review in
the Circuit Court of Macon County and the provisions of the Administrative Review Law and all
amendments and modifications thereto, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto are adopted and
shall apply to and govern every action for the judicial review of the final findings, decision and
order of a hearing officer under this Chapter. The plaintiff in the administrative review
proceeding shall pay to the City of Decatur the costs of preparing and certifying the record of
proceedings before ACES, the failure to make that payment shall relieve the City of the necessity
of filing the answer required by 735 ILCS 5/3 – 108 (Illinois Administrative Review Law) and
shall be authority for the entry of an order by the court, on motion therefore by the City or any
other defendant, dismissing the complaint and (in the case of an administrative decision which
requires the payment of money) entering a judgment against the plaintiff and in favor of the City
for the amount shown by the administrative decision that is involved to be due, and for costs.
(Amended, Ordinance 2012-72)
B. Enforcement of Judgment. Any fine, costs, other sanction imposed, or part of any
fine, costs or other sanction imposed remaining unpaid or not complied with after the exhaustion
of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the Administrative Review Law
shall be a debt due and owing the City of Decatur and can be sent to collections or collected in
any manner authorized by law.
C. Nothing in this Section shall prevent the City from consolidating multiple findings,
decisions and orders against a person in such a proceeding.
D. In any case in which a respondent has failed to comply with a judgment ordering the
respondent to correct a code violation or imposing any fine or other sanction as a result of a code
violation, any expenses incurred by a municipality to enforce the judgment, including, but not
limited to, attorney’s fees, court costs, or other related costs after they are fixed by a court of
competent jurisdiction or a hearing officer, shall be a debt due and owing the municipality and
may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
E. A Hearing Officer may set aside any judgment entered by default and set a new
hearing date upon a petition filed within fourteen (14) days after the issuance of the order of
default if the hearing officer determines that the petitioner’s failure to appear at the hearing was
for good cause or at any time if the petitioner establishes that the municipality did not provide
proper service of process pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
F. After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the Illinois
Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of a code violation, unless
stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the findings, decision, and order of the Hearing
Officer may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
G. Upon commencement of an action to enforce, the City shall file a certified copy of the
findings, decision and order, which shall be accompanied by a certification that recites facts
sufficient to show that the findings, decision and order was issued in accordance with this Code.
Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided by the Code
of Civil Procedure or by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the court is satisfied that the
findings, decision and order were entered in accordance with the requirements of this Section of
the City Code and the applicable ordinance and that the respondent had an opportunity for a
hearing and for judicial review as provided for herein; (1) the court shall render judgment in
favor of the City and against the respondent for the relief indicated in the findings, decision and
order, plus costs. Such judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced in the same
manner as other judgments for the recovery of money; and (2) the court may also issue such
other orders and injunction as are requested by the City to enforce the order of the hearing
officer.
H. Upon being recorded in the manner required by the Code of Civil Procedure or by the
Uniform Commercial Code, a lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both,
of the respondent in the amount of any debt due and owing the municipality under this Chapter.
The lien may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a
court of competent jurisdiction.
I. Any transfers or conveyances of properties subject to an order to correct a code
violation shall be reported by the respondent to the ACES Director or their designee within one
(1) business day of the transfer or conveyance. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this
Code and be subject to a minimum fine of Fifty Dollars ($50) for every day the violation of
failing to report occurs.
J. The order to correct a code violation and the sanctions imposed by the City as the
result of a finding of a code violation shall attach to the property as well as to the owner,
occupant or person or entity in control of the property, so that a finding of a code violation
against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying or transferring the property to another owner.
Any subsequent transferee or owner of property takes and is subject to the findings, decision and
order of a hearing officer under this Chapter.
K. A mortgagee in possession of a property, the beneficial owners of real property held
in trust, and any person, business, partnership, corporation or other entity who contracts with the
federal government or any of its agencies, including without limitation the Department of
Housing and Urban Development, to care for vacant residential real estate shall be responsible
for maintaining the property to prevent and correct municipal health and safety code violations.
8. HEARING OFFICERS.
A. Prior to conducting administrative adjudication proceedings, hearing officer(s)
appointed pursuant to this Chapter shall have successfully completed a formal training program
which includes the following:
(1) Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative hearings which the
hearing officer will conduct;
(2) Orientation in each subject area of the code violations that they will
adjudicate;
(3) Observation of administrative hearings; and,
(4) Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence and issuing
final orders.
B. In addition to the above, every hearing officer must be an Attorney licensed to
practice law in the State of Illinois for at least three (3) years.
C. Hearing officers shall have the authority and duty to:
(1) Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or not a code
violation exists;
(2) Administer oaths, hear testimony and accept evidence relevant to the
existence of a code violation;
(3) Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing and all
exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
(4) Issue and sign a written finding, decision and order stating whether a code
violation exists including finding a respondent in default;
(5) Issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give testimony at the
hearing so long as request for issuance of subpoenas made in sufficient time to compel
appearance or at any time prior to the hearing date;
(6) Assess and issue fines, costs of the administrative adjudication hearing,
sanctions that are provided in the Code for the violation proved, orders to abate,
injunctions, orders to cease and desist, orders to perform community service, and other
appropriate orders as determined by the hearing officer;
(7) Remove any persons from the hearing for failing to use proper decorum
during the hearing or engaging in any other disorderly act causing the disruption of the
hearing or process; and,
(8) Certify the record to the Circuit Court if required.
9. PENALTIES
A. The penalties in addition to costs to be imposed by the hearing officer for violations of
the various codes are shown in Table 29-1 attached hereto.
B. The maximum monetary fine under this subsection shall be exclusive of the costs of
enforcement or the costs imposed to secure compliance with the City Code and shall not be
applicable to cases to enforce the collection of any tax imposed and collected by the City.
C. If requested and available, the fine imposed may be substituted for a proportionate
number of community service hours. One (1) hour of community service is equal to ten dollars
($10.00). Community service programs will be assigned by the hearing officer with a date to
return for the completion of the community service. Failure to complete community service by
the date ordered or failing to appear at the return date will constitute a waiver of community
service and the original fine will be imposed. (Amended, Ordinance 2016-17, April 4, 2016)
10. COSTS OF ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION PROCEEDING. If a code
violation is proved and the respondent is ordered to pay the costs of the administrative
adjudication proceeding, the costs shall be ordered to be paid by the respondent as determined by
the City Council and set forth in Table 29-2 attached hereto, including, but not limited to costs
for hearing officer, file management, document automation and record keeping, recording costs,
costs of peer courts or panels, hearing security, prosecutor’s fee and other related costs.
11. SETTLEMENT OF VIOLATIONS; MINIMUM FINES.
A. If applicable and subject to subsection (C) of this Section, a person accused of
violating a section of the City Code being prosecuted in ACES may offer to settle the case by
paying the minimum fine set forth in Table 29-1 if payment is made within the time and in the
manner set forth in subsection (B) of this Section.
B. Payments in settlement of violations set forth in Table 29-1 shall be made within
fourteen (14) days after the date that the Violation Notice and Complaint was issued to the
person accused of such violation. A payment shall be considered made within said fourteen (14)
days if the payment is actually received by the City’s Finance Department, or such other place as
designated for receipt of fines, within the fourteen day period. Payments shall be made by cash
or certified check, money order or cashier’s check made payable to the City of Decatur, or such
other forms of tender as the Director of Finance shall specify.
C. The Corporation Counsel or his or her designee may, in his or her discretion, elect to
reject any such minimum fine as settlement of any violations set forth prior to the date the Notice
to Appear and Complaint which charges a person with such violation is filed with the Circuit
Court or Violation Notice and Complaint which charges a person with such violation is filed
with ACES. In addition, if a violation proximately causes actual out-of-pocket expenses or loss
to the victim or victims of said violation, the Corporation Counsel or his or her designee may
elect to accept payment of restitution to the victim or victims of the said violation in addition to
payment of the minimum fine set forth, as settlement of a violation prior to and in lieu of filing a
complaint for the same.
D. Peace officers who have issued a Notice to Appear in Circuit Court or Notice of
Violation and Complaint in ACES to a person for an offense under this Code for which the
minimum fine is set forth in Table 29-1 shall deliver the original copies of the Notice to Appear
or the Violation Notice and Complaint to ACES.
E. If a person pays a minimum fine pursuant to this Section, and such payment is not
rejected under Subsection (C) of this Section, then the Complaint charging the person with the
particular violation shall not be filed by the City in either the Circuit Court or ACES or if filed,
shall be dismissed with no administrative costs assessed.
F. Effective May 1, 2013, and every two (2) years thereafter on May 1, the minimum
fine set forth in Table 29-1 shall be increased automatically by the amount of Ten Dollars ($10)
unless the City Council, by ordinance, delays the effective date of such increase. The City Clerk
shall on or after May 1 of any such year cause a new Table 29-1 be codified. (Amended
Ordinance 2015-16, April 20, 2015)
12. SEVERABILITY. It is declared to be the intention of the Council that the sections,
subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and words of this Code and Chapter are severable. If
any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or word is declared unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid by the lawful judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, its
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining sections,
subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and words of this Code and Chapter, since the
sections or parts of sections would have been enacted by the Council without and irrespective of
any unconstitutional or otherwise invalid section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or
word being incorporated into this Code and Chapter. (Amended Ordinance 2012-61)
TABLE 29-1
TABLE OF OFFENSES AND FINES
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-94)
CHAPTER/
SECTION
TITLE/OFFENSE FINE SCHEDULE
Chapter 6 City Council
Section 7 Disturbing Meeting $250 - $500
Chapter 7 Officers and Employees Generally
Section 14 Impersonation $250 - $500
Section 15 Interference $250 - $500
Chapter 14 Fire Department
Section 5 Use of Equipment; Penalty $250 - $500
Chapter 25 ELECTRICAL COMMISSION, ELECTRICAL
CONTRACTORS AND LICENSED ELECTRICIANS
Section 3 License Required $150-$500
Chapter 26 Heating, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Commission
& Contractors
Section 3 License Required $150 - $500
Chapter 28 Unlawful Discrimination
Section 6-12
(11)
Discrimination in Real Estate Transactions 1st Offense – Not to Exceed
$500; 2nd & Subsequent
Offenses – Not to Exceed
$1,000
Chapter 31 Landmarks and Historic Districts
Section 12 Certificate of Appropriateness $250 - $500
Section 16 Certificate of Demolition $250 - $500
Section 20 Penalties $250 - $500
Chapter 34 Traffic – SEE CURRENT CHAPTER 34 FOR SPECIFIC
VIOLATIONS AND FINES
Chapter 34.1 Overweight and/or Overdimension Vehicles
Section 1 Overweight and/or Overdimension Vehicles Pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/15-
113
Section 6 Safety Inspections $250 - $500
Chapter 35 Numbering Houses
Section 9 Penalty for Failing to Properly Number Existing Buildings $150 - $500
Section 10 Failing to Number New Buildings $150 - $500
Chapter 36 Trees and Shrubs
Section 1 Trees, Shrubs and Ground Covers on City Property $150 - $500
Section 2 Trees, Shrubs and Ground Covers on Private Property $150 - $500
Chapter 37 Construction and Excavation in Streets
Section 1 License Required $150 - $500
Section 6 Permit Required $150 - $500
Chapter 38 Stormwater Ordinance
Section 3 Land Disturbance Permits Required $150 - $500
Section 20 Failure to Meet or Maintain Design or Maintenance Standards $150 - $500
Section 23 Illicit Discharges $150 - $500
Section 24 Prohibition of Illicit Connections $150 - $500
Section 26 Notification of Spills $150 - $500
Chapter 39 Sub-Sidewalk Space
Section 1 Permit Required $150 - $500
Section 6 Disturbing Pipes $150 - $500
Section 8 Failure to Secure Permit $150 - $500
Section 9 Sidewalks to be Kept Clear and in Repair $150 - $500
Section 12 Precautions Required $150 - $500
Chapter 40 Care of Streets
Section 1 Covering Vehicles $150 - $500
Section 2 Covering Must be Tight $150 - $500
Section 3 No Vehicles on Fresh Oil $150 - $500
Section 4 Horses With Cleats $150 - $500
Section 5 Vehicles With Lugs $150 - $500
Chapter 41 Miscellaneous Street Regulations
Section 1 Barbed Wire Fence $150 - $500
Section 2 Fires on Pavement $150 - $500
Section 3 Advertising Distribution Device Permit Required $150 - $500
Section 5 Buildings; Signs $150 $500
Section 6 Handbills $150 $500
Section 8 Merchandise on Sidewalk $150 - $500
Section 9 Placing Materials on Public Streets $150 - $500
Section 10 Offensive Vehicles $150 - $500
Section 11 Parades; Processions $150 - $500
Section 12 Sales on Sidewalks and Public Places $150 - $500
Section 13 Food and Beverage Carts $150 - $500
Section 14 Posting of Posters $150 - $500
Section 15 Temporary Banners $150 - $500
Section 16 Bicycles on Sidewalks and Central Park $150 - $500
Section 17 Central Park Fountain $150 - $500
Section 18 Downtown Entertainment Permits $150 - $500
Chapter 41.1 Standards for the Construction of Facilities in the Public
Rights-of-Way
Section 3 Annual Registration Required $150 - $500
Section 4 Permit Required; Applications and Fees $150 - $500
Section 8 Insurance $150 - $500
Section 17 Vegetation Control $150 - $500
Section 18 Removal, Relocation or Modifications of Utility Facilities $150 - $500
Section 19 Cleanup and Restoration $150 - $500
Chapter 42 Cable Service and Competitive Video Service
Section 7 Permits to Operate Systems in the Municipality $150 - $500
Section 8 Service Rates to Subscribers: Customer Service $150 - $500
Section 9 Scope $150 - $500
Chapter 43 Firearms
Section 1 Sale to Minor Under 16 Years Forbidden $250 - $500
Section 2 Registry of Sale Required $250 - $500
Chapter 44 Fire Prevention and Hazardous Materials Control
Art. I. Fire Prevention and Control
Section 5 Fireworks $250 - $500
Art II. Basic Fire Control Measures and Regulations
Section 2 Interference With Fire Department Operations $250 - $500
Section 3 Compliance With Orders $250 - $500
Section 4 Vehicles Crossing Fire Hose $250 - $500
Section 6 Operation of Vehicles on Approach of Authorized Emergency
Vehicles
$250 - $500
Section 7 Vehicles Following Fire Apparatus $250 - $500
Section 8 Unlawful Boarding or Tampering with Fire Department
Emergency Equipment
$250 - $500
Section 9 Damage, Injury – Fire Department Equipment, Personnel $250 - $500
Section 11 Blocking Fire Hydrants and Fire Department Connections $250 - $500
Section 12 Hydrant Use Approval $250 - $500
Section 15 Maintenance of Fire Suppression Equipment $250 - $500
Section 16 Sale of Defective Fire Extinguishers $250 - $500
Section 17 Street Obstructions $250 - $500
Section 18 Smoking on Buses $250 - $500
Section 19 Shredded Bark $250 - $500
Section 20 Emergency Lights $250 - $500
Art. III. Control of Hazardous Materials and Environmentally
Damaging Substances
Section 2 Unlawful Releases Prohibited $250 - $500
Section 6
Notification of Hazardous Materials Required
$250 - $500
Section 7 Warning Placards on Hazardous Materials Facilities $250 - $500
Section 8 Hazardous Use of Combustibles $250 - $500
Section 9 Tank Vehicles $250 - $500
Section 10 Combustible Liquids $250 - $500
Section 11 Flammable Liquids $250 - $500
Chapter 46 Emergencies and Disasters
Section 9 Penalty $250 - $500
Chapter 47 Control of Animals, Fowl and Dogs
Section 2 Running at Large (Farm Animals) $150 - $500
Section 3 Farm Animals Prohibited $150 - $500
Section 4 Keeping Chickens, Fowls or Rabbits $150 - $500
Section 5 Sanitation $150 - $500
Section 6 Sale of Fowl $150 - $500
Section 7 Animals as Prizes Prohibited $150 - $500
Section 8 Cruelty to Animals $150 - $500
Section 9 Keeping Poisonous Animals Prohibited $150 - $500
Section 10 Wild Animals Prohibited $150 - $500
Section 11 Running At Large Prohibited (Domestic Animals) $150 - $500
Section 12 Impounding $150 - $500
Section 13 Dog or Cat in Estrus $150 - $500
Section 14 Rabies Inoculation – Dogs $150 - $500
Section 15 Rabies Inoculation – Cats $150 - $500
Section 16 Vicious Dog Prohibited $150 - $500
Section 17 Nuisance Animals $150 - $500
Section 18 Biting Animals $150 - $500
Section 19 Registration $150 - $500
Section 21 Registration Tag $150 - $500
Section 22 Tag Worn $150 - $500
Section 25 Animal Biting Any Person or Suffering Rabies $150 - $500
Section 28 Dead Animals Prohibited $150 - $500
Chapter 48 Nuisances
Section 4 Disclosure of Principal $150 - $500
Section 5 Use of Premises $150 - $500
Section 6 Sewer Service Lines $150 - $500
Section 7 Abandoned Excavation $150 - $500
Section 8 Weeds $150 - $500
Section 9 Storage, Disposition and Use of Pesticides and Other
Chemicals
$150 - $500
Section 10 Deposit of Garbage $150 - $500
Section 11 Garbage on Premises $150 - $500
Section 12 Hours of Construction $150 - $500
Section 13 Burning of Waste $150 - $500
Section 14 Storage of Machinery $150 - $500
Section 15 Trash and Debris $150 - $500
Chapter 49 Removal of Garbage, Junk, Rubbish or Trash
Section 4 Removal of Garbage $150 - $500
Chapter 50.1 Transient Merchants
Section 8 Restrictions $150 - $500
Section 9 Identification $150 - $500
Section 10 Entering Dwellings $150 - $500
Chapter 51.2 Food and Beverage Tax
Section 3 Certificate of Registration $250 - $500
Section 4 Duty to Collect $250 - $500
Section 5 Records $250 - $500
Section 6 Monthly Returns $250 - $500
Chapter 51.3 Utility Taxes
Section 5 Collection $250 - $500
Section 6 Payment of Taxes $250 - $500
Section 8 Books and Records $250 - $500
Chapter 52 Alcoholic Liquor
Section 3 License Required $250 - $500
Section 6 Changes in License $250 - $500
Section 12 Posting of License $250 - $500
Section 13 Use of License $250 - $500
Section 15 Toilets $250 - $500
Section 17 Hours $250 - $500
Section 18 Public Places $250 - $500
Section 20 Gambling $250 - $500
Section 21 Inspections $250 - $500
Section 22 Obscene Conduct $250 - $500
Section 23 Obscenity Prohibited $250 - $500
Section 24 Sales to Minors $250 - $500
Section 27 Sale of False Identification $250 - $500
Section 28 Use of False Identification $250 - $500
Section 29 Possession By Minors $250 - $500
Section 30 Warning Displayed $250 - $500
Section 31 Employment of Minors $250 - $500
Section 32 Parents and Guardians $250 - $500
Section 33 Owner of Premises $250 - $500
Section 34 Consumption in Public Places $250 - $500
Section 36 Separation of Alcoholic Liquor Sales $250 - $500
Chapter 52.1 Places of Amusement
Section 2 License Required $250 - $500
Section 3 Specific Use $250 - $500
Section 10 Gambling $250 - $500
Section 11 Building Codes $250 - $500
Section 12 Liability of Certain Persons $250 - $500
Section 14 Inspections $250 - $500
Section 17 Hours $250 - $500
Section 18 Posting of License and Hours of Operation $250 - $500
Chapter 53 Ambulance Service
Section 2 License Required $150 - $500
Section 9 Licensed Vehicles $150 - $500
Section 10 Driver and Attendant $150 - $500
Section 11 Emergency Medical Technicians $150 - $500
Section 12 Continuous Operation $150 - $500
Section 13 Records $150 - $500
Section 14 Change in Operations $150 - $500
Section 15 Cooperation $150 - $500
Section 16 Calls for Service $150 - $500
Section 17 Monitoring Police or Fire Calls $150 - $500
Chapter 54 Amusement Devices
Section 1 License $250 - $500
Section 5 Hours $250 - $500
Section 6 Gambling Forbidden $250 - $500
Section 7 Pinball and Gambling Devices $250 - $500
Chapter 55 Drive-In Restaurants
Section 2 Noise $250 - $500
Section 3 No Intoxicating Liquor By Patrons $250 - $500
Section 4 No Congregating in Vicinity $250 - $500
Section 5 No Drive In Other Than For Service $250 - $500
Section 6 No Unoccupied Automobile Except For Service $250 - $500
Section 7 No Parking Near Entrance on Street $250 - $500
Section 8 Trash Receptacles $250 - $500
Section 9 No Litter Except in Receptacles $250 - $500
Section 10 No Loud, Obscene Language $250 - $500
Section 11 Must Keep Clean $250 - $500
Section 12 Must Keep Street Clean $250 - $500
Section 13 No Loud Speakers Other Than Public Address System $250 - $500
Chapter 56 Refuse and Recyclables Removal
Section 4 Accumulation of Refuse and Recyclables $150 - $500
Section 5 Temporary Storage of Refuse and Recyclables $150 - $500
Section 6 Manner of Storage $150 - $500
Section 7 Clean Containers $150 - $500
Section 8 Approved Containers $150 - $500
Section 9 Container Weight $150 - $500
Section 10 Bulk Containers $150 - $500
Section 11 Location of Container $150 - $500
Section 12 Spillage $150 - $500
Section 13 Ashes $150 - $500
Section 14 Limbs and Branches $150 - $500
Section 15 Grass Clippings $150 - $500
Section 16 Tampering With Container $150 - $500
Section 17 Use of Other Container $150 - $500
Section 18 Payment Required $150 - $500
Section 19 Service Required $150 - $500
Section 20 Commercial Premises $150 - $500
Section 21 Minimum Removal Service $150 - $500
Section 22 Vehicles $150 - $500
Section 23 Removal $150 - $500
Section 32 Vehicle Decal $150 - $500
Section 33 Vehicle Number $150 - $500
Section 34 Closed Vehicles $150 - $500
Section 35 Inspection of Vehicles $150 - $500
Section 36 Collection of Refuse and Recyclables $150 - $500
Section 37 Use of Streets $150 - $500
Section 38 List of Customers $150 - $500
Section 39 Licensee Telephone $150 - $500
Section 40 Billing $150 - $500
Section 41 Rate Schedules $150 - $500
Chapter 56.1 Recyclable Materials
Section 8 No Scavenging $150 - $500
Chapter 57 House Moving
Section 1 Permit Required $150 - $500
Section 5 Shade Trees $150 - $500
Section 6 Wires and Cables $150 - $500
Section 7 Cost of Building $150 - $500
Section 9 Fire Limits $150 - $500
Section 10 Police Escort $150 - $500
Chapter 58 Secondhand Stores, Auction Houses and Rummage
Rooms
Section 3 License Required $250 - $500
Section 10 Employees $250 - $500
Section 11 Minors $250 - $500
Section 12 Identification $250 - $500
Section 13 List of Goods $250 - $500
Section 14 Records $250 - $500
Section 15 Inspections $250 - $500
Section 16 Hold for 72 Hours $250 - $500
Section 17 Price Limitation $250 - $500
Chapter 59 Sign Hangers
Section 2 License Required $150 - $500
Chapter 60 Taxicabs and Taxi Drivers
Section 2 Taxi License Required $500 - $1,000
Section 8 Insurance $250 - $500
Section 12 Standards for Vehicles $250 - $500
Section 13 Color Scheme $250 - $500
Section 14 Name of Owner $250 - $500
Section 16 Meters $250 - $500
Section 18 Schedule of Rates $250 - $500
Section 19 Taxicab Driver’s License Required $500 - $1,000
Section 22 Driver’s Badge $250 - $500
Section 24 Driver Leaving Vehicle $250 - $500
Section 25 Seeking Patrons $250 - $500
Section 26 Drugs, Alcohol $250 - $500
Section 27 Horns $250 - $500
Section 28 Use of Taxi For Unlawful Act $250 - $500
Section 29 Telephones $250 - $500
Section 30 Trip Logs $250 - $500
Chapter 61 Livery Vehicles
Section 2 Livery License Required $500 - $1,000
Section 5 Insurance $250 - $500
Section 8 Standards for Vehicles $250 - $500
Section 9 Name of Owner $250 - $500
Section 11 Schedule of Rates $250 - $500
Section 12 Driver’s License Required $500 - $1,000
Section 16 Driver’s Badge $250 - $500
Section 17 Record of Driver’s Licenses $250 - $500
Section 18 Appointment Required $250 - $500
Section 19 Drugs; Alcohol $250 - $500
Section 20 Use of Livery for Unlawful Act $250 - $500
Section 21 Trip Logs $250 - $500
Chapter 63 Mobile Home Parks
Section 2 Mobile Home Placement
Section 6 License Required $150 - $500
Section 13 Site Plan Required $150 - $500
Section 17 Minimum Standards $150 - $500
Section 19 Distance from Perimeter Line $150 - $500
Section 37 Register of Owners and Occupants $150 - $500
Chapter 64 Water Service
Section 14 Special Meter Reading $250 - $1,000
Section 15 Annual Reading Required $250 - $1,000
Section 23 Penalty $250 - $1,000
Section 25 Tampering With Water Infrastructure $500 - $1,500
Chapter 65 Watermain Connection Charges
Section 1 Permit Required $150 - $500
Section 2 Connection Charge Not Required $150 - $500
Section 3 Charge For Special Assessment Main $150 - $500
Section 4 Computation of Charge $150 - $500
Section 6 Service Shut Off $150 - $500
Section 8 Penalty $150 - $500
Chapter 66 Regulation of Lake Decatur
Section 3 Buildings Prohibited $150 - $500
Section 4 Deposit of Waste $500 - $1,500
Section 5 Discharge of Waste $500 - $1,500
Section 6 Pollution In Zone A $500 - $1,500
Section 7 Commercial or Industrial Waste $500 - $1,500
Section 8 Internments $500 - $1,500
Section 9 Garbage and Animal Manure $500 - $1,500
Section 10 Animal Yards $500 - $1,500
Section 11 Washing; Burning $500 - $1,500
Section 12 Deposit of Debris $500 - $1,500
Section 13 Boating Prohibited – Lake (Defined Area) $150 - $500
Section 14 Boating Prohibited – River (Defined Area) $150 - $500
Section 15 Mooring $150 - $500
Section 17 Boating Regulations $150 - $500
Section 18 Lights Required $150 - $500
Section 19 Boat Licensure and Registration $150 - $500
Section 20 Boat Rentals $150 - $500
Section 21 Fire Extinguishers $150 - $500
Section 22 Personal Flotation Devices $150 - $500
Section 23 Mufflers Required $150 - $500
Section 24 Breach of The Peace $150 - $500
Section 25 Toilets on Board $150 - $500
Section 26 Operation of Boats; Abandoned Boats $150 - $500
Section 27 Water Skiing $150 - $500
Section 28 Swimming $150 - $500
Section 29 Infectious Diseases $150 - $500
Section 30 Hunting $150 - $500
Section 32 Location of Blinds and Pits $150 - $500
Section 33 Permits for Blinds and Pits $150 - $500
Section 37 Regulations for Blinds and Pits $150 - $500
Section 38 Discharging Firearms $150 - $500
Section 39 Aircraft $150 - $500
Section 40 Camping $150 - $500
Section 41 Fishing $150 - $500
Section 42 Walleye and Bass $150 - $500
Section 45 Sale of Boat During Suspension $150 - $500
Section 46 Ice Skating and Ice Fishing $150 - $500
Section 47 Ice Boating $150 - $500
Section 48 Piers and Docks $150 - $500
Section 51 Trespassing on Dam $150 - $500
Chapter 67 Building Code
Section 17 Penalty $150 - $500
Chapter 67.1 Flood Plain Protection Provisions
Section 4 Permit Requirements $150 - $750
Section 6 Protecting Buildings $150 - $750
Section 12 Penalty $150 - $750
Chapter 67.2 Residential Building Code
Section 9 Application for Permit $150 - $500
Section 11 Work Down Without Permit $150 - $500
Section 13 Penalty $150 - $500
Chapter 68 Mechanical Code
Section 8 Permit Required $150 - $500
Section 10 Work Down Without Permit $150 - $500
Section 11 Penalty $150 - $500
Chapter 69 Electrical Code
Section 6 Permit Required $150 - $500
Section 7 Work Done Without Permit $150 - $500
Section 13 Penalty $150 - $500
Chapter 70 Property Maintenance Code
Section 8 Penalty – 1st Offense in 12 month period $150 - $2,000
2nd Offense in 12 month period $500 - $2,000
3rd and Subsequent Offenses in 12 month period $1,000 - $2,000
Chapter 70.1 Plumbing Code
Section 4 Work Done Without Permit $150 - $500
Section 8 Penalty $150 - $500
Chapter 71 Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
Section 7 Penalty $150 - $500
Chapter 73 Offenses
Section 3 Performance Prohibited $250 - $500
Section 4 Sexual Solicitation Prohibited $250 - $500
Section 5 Premises as Nuisance $250 - $500
Section 6 Inmate $250 - $500
Section 7 Gambling $250 - $500
Section 8 Discharge of Firearms $250 - $500
Section 9 Breach of Peace $250 - $500
Section 10 Noise on Public Street $250(M1)
Mandatory Minimum Fine
Section 11 Impersonation of City Employee $250 - $500
Section 12 Interference with City Employee $250 - $500
Section 13 Coin Boxes $250 - $500
Section 14 Corner Stones $250 - $500
Section 15 Abandoned Refrigerator $250 - $500
Section 16 Tampering with Meters $250 - $500
Section 17 Removal of Sod $250 - $500
Section 18 Climbing on Poles $250 - $500
Section 19 Aiding and Abetting $250 - $500
Section 20 Unlawful Solicitation $250 - $500
Section 21 Payment of Fines and Fees $250 - $500
Section 22 Public Urination/Defecation $250 - $500
Section 23 Retaliation Against Occupant $250 - $500
Section 24 Defacement of Property $250 - $500
Section 25 Possession of Cannabis $250 - $500
Section 26 Possession of Drug Paraphernalia $250 - $500
Section 27 Littering $250 - $500
Section 28 Resisting or Interfering $250 - $500
Section 29 Damage to Property $250 - $500
Section 30 Trespass $250 - $500
Section 31 Tobacco and Minors $250 - $500
Section 32 Retail Theft $250 - $500
Section 33 Theft $250 - $500
Section 34 Mob Action $250 - $500
Section 35 Assault $250 - $500
Section 36 Battery $250 - $500
Section 37 Reckless Conduct $250 - $500
Section 38 Truancy $250 - $500
Chapter 73.1 C u rfew Hours for Minors
Section 2 Offenses $250 - $500
Section 7 Penalties $250 - $500
Chapter 74 Sanitary Sewer System
Section 3 Permit Required $150 - $500
Section 5 Annexation to the Sanitary District of Decatur Required $150 - $500
Section 6 Charge Required $150 - $500
Section 32 Penalty $150 - $500
Chapter 75 Water Services and Connections
Section 11 Opening or Shutting Service Lines $150 - $500
Section 14 Permit Required $150 - $500
Section 16 Inspection $150 - $500
Section 17 Penalty $150 - $500
Ordinance No.
3512
Zoning Ordinance of the City of Decatur Sections 1-38 $150.-$500
(Amended, Ordinance 2014-67, December 1, 2014) (Amended, Ordinance 2013-03, January 7, 2013)
TABLE 29-2
Administrative Code Enforcement System Costs
Hearing Officer Fee: $40.00
Prosecutor Fee: 40.00
Document Automation Fee: 25.00
Peer Court Fee: 5.00
Hearing Security Fee: 25.00
File Management and Recordkeeping Fee: 5.00
CHAPTER 30
HISTORICAL AND ARCHITECTURAL SITES COMMISSION
1. ESTABLISHED. There is hereby created and established to advise and make recommendations
to the Council, the Historical and Architectural Sites Commission consisting of
eleven residents of the City appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Council for terms of
three years and until the respective successor of each member is appointed and qualified, all of
which said terms shall commence on May 1 and as to which vacancies shall be filled by appointment
for the remainder of any unexpired term.
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2005-15, March 7, 2005)
2. RESIDENCY. All new appointees to the Commission on or after April 18, 2019
shall be residents of the City of Decatur, Illinois, and shall serve without compensation. This
section shall not apply to those members serving as of April 18, 2019 and continuing to serve
without interruption. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2019-17, April 15, 2019)
3. QUALIFICATIONS. In order to properly carry out the various duties and responsibilities
of the Commission, it is necessary and desirable that there be appointed to the Commission
persons having knowledge and expertise in the fields of architecture, archaeology, history,
local government, engineering, anthropology, real estate, finance, law and related disciplines.
The Mayor and the Council shall attempt, insofar as practicably possible, to appoint persons to
the Commission such that all of the herein specified disciplines and areas of expertise are represented,
but no action or decision of the Commission shall be invalid for failure to have on the
Commission, or in attendance at the meeting whereat the action or decision was made, a person
or persons representing any or all of such disciplines or areas of expertise.
Revised 04/2019
Chapter 30
4. STAFF. The City Manager may designate officers and employees of the City to
serve as advisory and staff personnel for the Commission.
5. OFFICERS, RULES AND MEETINGS. From among its members, and by the
concurrence of six members thereof, the Commission shall elect a Chairman and a Secretary and
provide rules for the conduct of its business, among which rules shall be provisions for the time
and place of regular meetings and the calling by the Chairman, or on the concurrence of not less
than six members, of special meetings. Six members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction
of business which shall be accomplished only by the affirmative votes of a majority of the
members in attendance while a quorum is present; provided that, the election of the Chairman or
Secretary or the adoption, modification or recision of any rule or part thereof, or any decision
made pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 31 of the City Code, shall require the affirmative
vote of six members. All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public and any person,
or his duly authorized representative, shall be entitled to appear and be heard on any matter
then pending before the Commission. The secretary shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of
all proceedings and actions of the Commission, which record shall be kept and maintained at the
office of the City Clerk. The Commission shall submit a report of its activities and recommendations
to the Council at least once a year during the month of June and at such other times as the
Commission may deem appropriate.
6. POWERS AND DUTIES. The Historical and Architectural Sites Commission has
the following powers and duties:
(a) To aid in the development and restoration of historical and architectural sites and
buildings existing in Decatur and Macon County;
Chapter 30
(b) To recommend properties and areas to the City Council for designation as landmarks
and historic districts, and to grant certificates of appropriateness or demolition for and within
such properties or areas, as provided in Chapter 31 of the City Code.
(c) To make recommendations to the City Council and County Board, the Decatur Planning
Commission, Macon County Regional Plan Commission, civic, fraternal, patriotic, and other
organizations and the State of Illinois concerning the rediscovery, identifying and maintenance
of sites of historical or architectural importance in the City and County that may heretofore have
been ignored.
(d) To develop and recommend improved regulations for the maintenance of the area
surrounding historical monuments and sites for the greater convenience of the visiting public.
(e) To make recommendations for the design and implementation of specific marking of
the streets and routes leading from one historical and architectural monument or site to another.
(f) To coordinate activities of all civic, patriotic, fraternal, and other organizations of the
community in improving and maintaining historical and architectural monuments, sites and their
environs.
(g) To make suggestions and recommendations to the appropriate agency of the State of
Illinois with respect to historic sites under State Jurisdiction and to nominate and prepare supporting
papers for State and National Registers.
(h) To perform any and all other functions which will foster the marking and keeping of
historical and architectural monuments and sites in accordance with the respect and tradition to
which they are entitled, and as will aid the public in visiting such areas with convenience and in
proper surroundings.
Chapter 30
(i) To actively seek out those private and governmental sources of financial aid for the
preservations and historical restoration of historic and architectural significance.
(j) To prepare and recommend a development program and identify in some detail the
nature, type and costs of the projects which are recommended to be undertaken immediately, as
well as indicate in a general way those projects which might be undertaken at a later time, including
those policies which are recommended to be adopted by the Council or other public bodies,
along with suggestions to make the policies operative, indicating the role of other groups in
the implementation of the development program.
(k) To perform such other and further functions as may be from time to time provided by
the Council.
7. GIFTS AND DONATIONS. The Commission may solicit and recommend to the
Council the acceptance of gifts or donations of money or property, whether real or personal, and
may recommend to the Council the acquisition otherwise of such property to carry out the purposes
and office of the Commission. The Council may from time to time provide for the administration
and use of the money or property so acquired and the Commission may make recommendations
with regard thereto. There is hereby established, until the further order of the Council,
a fund to be separate from other funds of the City to be known as the Historical and Architectural
Sites Fund into which moneys received shall, upon direction of the Council, be deposited to
be expended or transferred therefrom only upon the direction of the Council.
CHAPTER 31
LANDMARKS AND HISTORIC DISTRICTS
1. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE. The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the
educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the City of Decatur by:
(a) Protecting, enhancing and perpetuating the distinctive historical and/or architectural
characteristics of the City which represent elements of the City's cultural, social, economic,
political or architectural history;
(b) Fostering civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the past as
represented in the City's landmarks and historic districts;
(c) Stabilizing and improving property values of the City's landmarks and historic
districts; and,
(d) Protecting and enhancing the City's attractiveness to tourists and visitors and the
support of business and industry thereby provided.
It is the intent of this Chapter to accomplish the foregoing purposes and objectives by
providing a mechanism whereby landmarks and districts in the City of Decatur identified by the
City Council as having historical or architectural significance may be preserved and enjoyed in a
suitable and harmonious environment.
2. DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this Chapter, the following words or terms shall
have the meaning or construction ascribed to them in this section:
Revised 02/2017
Chapter 31
(a) "Alteration" means any act or process that changes the exterior architectural
appearance of a property. Examples of alteration include, but are expressly not limited to, the
following: new construction; window replacement, when the character of the window is to be
changed; addition of aluminum or other siding materials; fence construction or removal;
pavement, including parking lots or driveways, whether connected to a garage or not; and the
installation or modification of satellite dishes or solar collectors.
(b) "Area" means a specific geographic division of the City of Decatur.
(c) "Certificate of Appropriateness" means a certificate issued by the Commission
indicating its approval of plans for alteration or construction of a Landmark or of a property
within a Historic District as defined by this section.
(d) "Certificate of Demolition" means a certificate issued by the Commission authorizing
a demolition.
(e) "Commission" means the Historical and Architectural Sites Commission of the City
of Decatur.
(f) "Council" means the City Council of the City of Decatur.
(g) "Demolition" means any act or process which destroys in part or in whole a
Landmark or a structure within a Historic District.
(h) "Exterior Architectural Appearance" means the architectural character and general
composition of the exterior of a Landmark or of a property within a Historic District, including
but not limited to the kind and texture of the building material and type, design and character of
all windows, walls, roofs, doors, light fixtures, signs, appurtenant elements, and accessory
structures and fences visible from a public right of way.
Chapter 31
(i) "Historic District" means an area of contiguous properties designated as a "Historic
District" by ordinance of the City Council, pursuant to procedures prescribed in this Chapter, and
which contains within definable geographic boundaries one or more properties that may qualify
as Landmarks or which has within its boundaries properties which, while not of such historic
and/or architectural significance to be designated as Landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the
distinctive historical or architectural character of the area.
(j) "Historic Preservation Administrator" means the person appointed by the City
Manager, from the Economic and Community Development Department, to undertake the
responsibilities assigned by this Chapter and to assist the Commission in the implementation of
this Chapter.
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2000-11, March 13, 2000)
(k) "Landmark" means a single property, structure, site, object, or improvement
designated as a "Landmark" by ordinance of the City Council, pursuant to procedures prescribed
in this Chapter, which is worthy of rehabilitation, restoration, and preservation because of its
historic and/or architectural significance to the City of Decatur.
(l) "Property" means the real property and any and all improvements, structures, objects
or works of art situated on it.
3. OTHER LICENSES OR PERMITS. No provisions herein shall be construed as
repealing any other code or ordinance of the City of Decatur, and any permit or license required
thereunder shall be required, in addition to any Certificate of Appropriateness or Certificate of
Demolition which may be required hereunder. Where a Certificate of Appropriateness or
Certificate of Demolition is required, no such other permit or license shall be issued by any
Chapter 31
department of the City of Decatur before a certificate has been issued by the Commission as
herein provided.
4. CRITERIA FOR DESIGNATION OF LANDMARKS AND HISTORIC
DISTRICTS. In order to designate any area or property as either a Landmark or a Historic
District, the Council and the Commission shall make express findings that the area or property in
question meets one or more of the following criteria and has integrity of design:
(a) It has character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural
characteristics of the City of Decatur, County of Macon, State of Illinois, or United States of
America (hereinafter, in this Chapter, respectively, City, County, State or Nation);
(b) It was the location of a significant local, county, state or national event;
(c) It is identified with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the
development of the City, County, State or Nation;
(d) It embodies distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style valuable for the
study of a period, type, method of construction or use of indigenous materials;
(e) It is identified as the work of a master designer, architect or landscape architect
whose individual work has influenced the development of the City, County, State or Nation;
(f) It is one of the few remaining examples of a particular architectural style or use, or is
an example which clearly represents a major architectural style and has undergone little or no
alteration since its construction;
(g) It is one of a contiguous grouping of properties having a sense of cohesiveness
expressed through a similarity of characteristic of style, period or method of construction;
(h) It embodies elements of design, detailing, materials or craftsmanship that make it
structurally or architecturally significant or innovative;
Chapter 31
(i) It has a unique location or singular physical characteristics that make it an established
or familiar visual feature;
(j) It is associated with an antiquated use due to technological or social change, including
but not limited to blacksmith shops, covered bridges and hitching posts;
(k) It is a monument to or a cemetery of historic personages.
5. APPLICATION FOR DESIGNATION AS A LANDMARK OR HISTORIC
DISTRICT. Any person, group of persons, corporation or association may apply to the
Commission for the designation of a Landmark or Historic District. Application for such shall
be filed with the Historic Preservation Administrator on forms provided by said officer, which
forms shall require such information as is deemed necessary by said officer to effect the
provisions of this Chapter. The Historic Preservation Administrator shall forward all completed
application forms to the Commission and to the Director of the Economic and Community
Development Department.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-11, March 13, 2000)
6. RECOMMENDATION OF ECONOMIC AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
DEPARTMENT. After receipt of a completed application form seeking the designation of a
property or area as a Landmark or Historic District, the Director of the Economic and
Community Development Department shall file with the Historic Preservation Administrator a
written opinion as to the effect of the proposed designation on the surrounding neighborhood, the
relationship of said proposal to the Official Comprehensive Plan of the City, and any other
planning considerations relevant to said proposal. The written opinion shall also include a
recommendation as to whether said proposal should be approved, rejected or approved with
Chapter 31
modifications. No action may be taken by the Commission on such proposal until it has received
the written opinion of said Director as required herein.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-11, March 13, 2000)
7. PUBLIC HEARING ON DESIGNATION OF LANDMARK OR HISTORIC
DISTRICT.
A. The Commission shall schedule a public hearing on the proposed designation of a
property or area as a Landmark or Historic District, said hearing to be held before the
Commission within forty-five (45) days following the receipt by the Commission of the written
opinion of the Director of the Economic and Community Development Department regarding
such designation. Notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall be sent
by certified mail to the owners of record of the property proposed for designation as herein
provided. Such notice to owners must be given not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than
thirty (30) days prior to said hearing, and notice shall be considered given for the purposes
hereof on the date of mailing. Notice of said hearing shall also be published in a newspaper
having general circulation in the City of Decatur, Illinois, said notice to be published not less
than five (5) days nor more than ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Notice published as required
herein shall state the street address and legal description of a proposed Landmark and the
boundaries of a proposed Historic District.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-11, March 13, 2000)
B. Testimony and other evidence concerning the compliance of the proposed Landmark
or Historic District with the criteria required for the designation of same as provided in Section 4
Chapter 31
hereof shall be taken at the public hearing from any person wishing to be heard. The owner of
any proposed Landmark or of any property within a proposed Historic District shall be allowed a
reasonable opportunity to present evidence regarding said criteria and to respond to such
evidence or testimony given by others, and shall be afforded the right of representation by
counsel. The Commission may adopt rules of procedure not in conflict with the provisions
hereof to govern the conduct of such public hearing or any hearing required by this Chapter. The
rules of evidence normally applicable in a judicial hearing shall not apply in any hearing held by
the Commission except as expressly adopted by the Commission. The hearing shall be closed
upon the completion of testimony and the submission of all other evidence.
8. DECISION OF THE HISTORIC AND ARCHITECTURAL SITES
COMMISSION. Within forty-five (45) days following the close of the public hearing, the
Commission shall make a determination upon the evidence whether the proposed Landmark or
Historic District meets the criteria required for the designation of same by Section 4 hereof. Such
determination shall be in the form of a written resolution of the Commission. A copy of the
resolution certified by the Chairman of the Commission shall be filed with the City Clerk not
more than ten days after its adoption by the Commission.
9. DESIGNATION BY THE COUNCIL OF A LANDMARK OR HISTORIC
DISTRICT.
A. Within forty-five (45) days of the filing of a resolution with the City Clerk as
provided in Section 8 hereof, the Council shall either designate by ordinance such area or
property as a Landmark or Historic District, or, by resolution, refuse to so designate such area or
property. Notice of the date, time and place of the meeting at which the Council shall consider
the designation of such area of property as a Landmark or Historic District shall be sent by
Chapter 31
certified mail to the owners of record of such properties; such notice must be given not less than
ten (10) days prior to said meeting, and notice shall be considered given for the purposes hereof
on the date of mailing. The Council may accept in part the findings and determinations of the
Commission and designate some areas or properties as Historic Districts or Landmarks and
refuse to so designate other areas or properties. Such ordinance designating an area or property a
Landmark or Historic District shall contain express findings that such area or property meets the
criteria required for such designation by Section 4 hereof.
B. A certified copy of the ordinance designating any area or property a Landmark or
Historic District shall be sent by regular mail to the owners of all property so designated by such
ordinance and shall be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of Macon County. No ordinance
designating any area or property a Landmark or Historic District shall be effective until recorded
with the Recorder of Deeds as required herein, but no such ordinance shall be found invalid for
failure to mail a copy thereof to the owner or owners of the affected areas or properties.
C. No area or property proposed for designation as a Landmark or Historic District and
refused such designation by resolution of the Council may be considered for such designation by
the Commission for one (1) year after such refusal by the Council, except upon motion by the
Council.
10. INTERIM CONTROL. No building or demolition permit shall be issued by the
Building Inspections Manager for any area or property proposed for designation as a Landmark
or Historic District from the date of the filing with the Historic Preservation Administrator of the
written opinion of the Director of the Economic and Community Development Department, as
required by Section 6 hereof, until the final disposition by the Council. Such prohibition shall
only extend to those areas or properties which the Director of the Economic and Community
Chapter 31
Development Department recommends for approval in said opinion. In no event shall the
prohibition required hereby extend for more than four (4) months.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-11, March 13, 2000)
11. RECISION OF DESIGNATION AS LANDMARK OR HISTORIC DISTRICT.
Designation as a Landmark or Historic District may be rescinded by ordinance of the Council
after application to the Commission and compliance with the same procedures set forth herein
for designation, where applicable.
12. CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS REQUIRED.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, group of persons, association or corporation to
make any alteration to any Landmark or property within a Historic District unless a certificate of
appropriateness is issued for such alteration by the Commission, or by the Council on appeal, or
unless such alteration is specifically permitted by subsection (b) hereof, or unless such alteration
is specifically permitted by the Historic Preservation Administrator, or his designee, pursuant to
the provisions of subsection (C) hereof.
B. No certificate of appropriateness shall be required for the following listed alterations:
(1) change in exterior paint scheme or colors;
(2) installation of, or change in, storm doors, storm windows or screens;
(3) installation of, or change in, window air conditioners;
(4) installation of, or change in, radio or television antennae;
(5) ordinary repair and maintenance of existing exterior architectural features which does
not change the basic structural appearance of same.
Chapter 31
C. The Historic Preservation Administrator is expressly authorized to issue Certificate of
Appropriateness for the following listed alterations:
(1) construction and repair of fences;
(2) roof and gutter replacement, but only with like materials;
(3) driveway and sidewalk replacement;
(4) tuckpoint for brickwork;
(5) replacement of windows, but only with like windows;
(6) change in garage doors to any style that is visually compatible with the existing
architectural style; and,
(7) any replacement of materials with like materials.
A denial by the Historic Preservation Administrator of a Certificate of Appropriateness
may be appealed to the Commission, and such appeal shall be treated as an application for such
Certificate under paragraph 14 hereof and shall be subject to all procedures prescribed thereby.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 92-57, July 6, 1992)
13. CRITERIA FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. In considering an
application for a certificate of appropriateness, the Commission shall be guided by the following
general standards:
(a) A property owner is entitled to a reasonable economic use of his property, and
consideration shall be given to the economic loss or hardship that would result from the denial of
an application.
(b) Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use for a property
which requires minimum alteration of the building, structure, or site and its environment, or to
use a property for its originally intended purpose.
Chapter 31
(c) The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building, structure, or site and
its environment shall not be destroyed. The removal or alteration of any historic material or
distinctive architectural feature should be avoided when possible.
(d) All buildings, structures, and sites shall be recognized as products of their own time.
Alterations that have no historic basis and which seek to create an earlier appearance shall be
discouraged.
(e) Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are evidence of the history
and development of a building, structure, or site and its environment. These changes may have
acquired significance in their own right, and this significance shall be recognized and respected.
(f) Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship which characterize
a building, structure, or site shall be treated with sensitivity.
(g) Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than replaced, wherever
possible. In the event replacement is necessary, the new materials should match the material
being replaced in composition, design, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement
of missing architectural features should be based on accurate duplication of features,
substantiated by historic, physical or pictorial evidence rather than on conjectural designs or the
availability of different architectural elements from other buildings or structures.
(h) The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the gentlest means
possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will damage the historic building
materials shall not be undertaken.
(i) Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve archaeological
resources affected by, or adjacent to, any project.
Chapter 31
(j) Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing properties shall not be
discouraged when such alterations and additions do not destroy significant historical,
architectural or cultural material and such design is compatible with the size, scale, material and
character of the property, neighborhood or environment.
14. APPLICATION FOR A CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. An owner
of a Landmark or property lying within a Historic District shall apply to the Commission for a
certificate of appropriateness for a proposed alteration of such Landmark or property. The
application shall be filed with the Historic Preservation Administrator on forms provided by said
officer, which forms shall require such information as is deemed necessary by said officer to
effect the provisions of this Chapter. The Historic Preservation Administrator shall forward all
completed application forms to the Commission.
15. GRANT OR DENIAL OF CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.
A. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be reviewed by the
Commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting following the filing of same with the
Historic Preservation Administrator. However, if said application is filed with such officer fewer
than seven (7) days prior to such meeting, then said application shall be reviewed at the second
regularly scheduled meeting following such filing, unless the Commission, on its own motion,
votes to review it earlier.
B. Notice of the meeting of the Commission at which an application for a certificate of
appropriateness shall be reviewed shall be given to the owner of the property by regular mail not
less than five (5) days prior to such meeting. For the purposes hereof, notice shall be considered
given on the date of mailing. The owner proposing the alterations shall be allowed reasonable
opportunities to present evidence regarding the criteria for issuance of a certificate of
Chapter 31
appropriateness and to respond to such evidence or testimony given by others, and shall be
afforded the right of representation by counsel.
C. If the Commission finds that the denial of the application for a certificate of
appropriateness would result in an economic loss or hardship to the owner that would constitute
a "taking" under the United States Constitution, then the Commission shall approve the
application. In all other cases, approval, denial or modification shall be as provided in
subsections (d), (e) and (f) hereof.
D. If the Commission finds that the alteration proposed by the owner of the Landmark or
property located in a Historic District is in compliance with the criteria listed in Section 13 of
this Chapter, and with any applicable design guidelines adopted by the Commission pursuant to
Section 18 of this Chapter, then the Commission shall approve the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness for such alteration as proposed by said owner. The certificate of
appropriateness, as approved, shall be issued by the Historic Preservation Administrator within
five (5) days following the approval by the Commission.
E. If the Commission finds that the alteration proposed by the owner of the Landmark or
property located in a Historic District is not in compliance with the criteria listed in Section 13 of
this Chapter, or with any design guidelines adopted by the Commission pursuant to Section 18 of
this Chapter, then the Commission shall disapprove the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness for such alteration as proposed by said owner.
If the Commission disapproves the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness as herein
provided, the Commission may, in its discretion, approve the issuance of such a certificate for
said alteration contingent upon certain modifications.
Chapter 31
F. The Historic Preservation Administrator, within five (5) days after the Commission
approves the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness contingent upon certain modifications,
as provided in subsection (e) hereof, shall by regular mail communicate such approval to the
owner of the Landmark or property within a Historic District. If such owner agrees with these
modifications, the Historic Preservation Administrator shall issue a certificate of appropriateness
for the alteration, as so modified.
16. CERTIFICATE OF DEMOLITION.
A. If the owner of a Landmark or property in a Historic District proposes to demolish all
or any part of a structure so designated, said owner shall apply for a certificate of demolition.
Procedures provided for in Section 15 of this Chapter shall be followed concerning such
application, except as expressly modified hereby.
B. In addition to the criteria and guidelines for a certificate of appropriateness provided
for in Section 15 of this Chapter, the Commission shall also consider evidence and testimony on
the following factors:
(1) the state of repair and structural stability of the structure, or portion thereof, proposed
for demolition;
(2) the extent and process of demolition, including any proposed changes in landscaping.
C. The Commission may, in its discretion, continue its consideration of the application
for a certificate of demolition to some date certain, not to exceed four (4) months. During the
period of said continuance, the Historic Preservation Administrator shall attempt to preserve the
structure by contacting private citizens, civic groups or other government boards or agencies
seeking potential buyers, or by any other appropriate means. Also during said period of
continuance, if required by the Commission, the owner of the Landmark or property within a
Chapter 31
Historic District must place such structure on the open market for sale, but said owner is under
no obligation to accept any offer to purchase received during this period; however, refusal to
accept a bone fide offer may be considered by the Commission as evidence regarding the
economic loss of hardship to the owner of a denial of the application.
D. At either the original or continued hearing on the application for a certificate of
demolition, the decision of the Commission shall be according to the criteria for the issuance of
certificates of appropriateness as elsewhere provided.
17. APPEALS.
A. Denial of the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness or of a certificate of
demolition by the Commission may be appealed to the Council. Notice of such appeal must be
filed with the City Clerk upon forms supplied by said clerk within twenty (20) days after said
denial by the Commission. Failure to file such notice of appeal within the time limits required
herein shall divest the Council of jurisdiction to consider such appeal, and in such case the
decision of the Commission shall be final.
B. The Council may, by ordinance, reverse the Commission and grant a certificate of
appropriateness or a certificate of demolition as applied for by the owners of Landmarks or
properties within Historic Districts, as provided by this section.
C. No application for a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of demolition may
be considered by the Commission for one (1) year after an application for substantially the same
alteration or demolition was denied by the Commission, or, if appealed, for one (1) year after the
same was denied by the Council.
Chapter 31
18. DESIGN GUIDELINES. The Commission may adopt design guidelines to be used
in making alterations under certificates of appropriateness. Said guidelines must be published in
pamphlet form and available for public viewing with the City Clerk.
19. EMERGENCY BUILDING OR DEMOLITION PERMITS. The provisions of
this Chapter shall not prohibit the Building Inspections Manager from issuing building or
demolition permits if the same are deemed necessary by said officer for the public health, safety
or welfare. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
20. PENALTIES.
A. Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to
comply with, or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of the provisions of this Chapter
shall be fined not less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor more than Five Hundred
Dollars ($500.00) for each offense. For purposes of this Chapter, a separate and distinct offense
shall be regarded as committed each day upon which said persons shall continue any such
violation, or permit any such violation to exist after notification thereof.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-66, October 31, 2011)
B. In addition to the penalty provided for in subsection (a) hereof, the City may bring an
appropriate action in any court of proper jurisdiction seeking injunctive relief for any violation of
the provisions of this Chapter.
21. SEVERABILITY. If any provision of this Chapter or application thereof to any
person or circumstance is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity does not
affect other provisions or applications of this Chapter which can be given effect without the
invalid application or provision, and to this end each such invalid provision or invalid application
of this Chapter is severable, unless otherwise provided by this Chapter.
CHAPTER 32
NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICES DEPARTMENT
(REPEALED, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
CHAPTER 33
ACQUISITION, DISPOSITION AND CONTROL OF PROPERTY
1. ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY. Property or interests in property may be acquired
by, or on behalf of, the City in such manner, upon such conditions and limitations, for such consideration,
and by such officers or employees, as the Council may from time to time by ordinance
or resolution direct, authorize or approve either generally or with relation to specific property,
or classes thereof, or interest or interests therein.
2. CONTROL AND USE OF PROPERTY. Property or interests in property so acquired
and owned or held by, or on behalf of, the City shall be held, controlled and used by the
City for such uses, under the control and use by such officers or employees, in such manner, and
upon such conditions and limitations, as the Council may from time to time by ordinance or resolution
direct, authorize or approve either generally or specially, or, absent such action by the
Council, as the City Manager shall direct, authorize or approve.
3. DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY. Interests of the City in property whether real or
personal may be disposed of or encumbered in such manner, upon such notice, upon such conditions
and limitations, for such consideration, and by such officers or employees, as the Council
shall from time to time by ordinance or resolution direct, authorize or approve either generally
or with relation to specific property, or classes thereof, or interest or interests therein.
CHAPTER 34
TRAFFIC AND PARKING
1. DEFINITIONS. Except as otherwise defined herein, the words and phrases used in this
Chapter shall, for the purpose hereof, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
the Illinois Vehicle Code. As used in this Chapter the following words mean:
A. Alley: A public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear of lots or
buildings and not used for general traffic circulation.
B. Bus Stop: The space in the roadway adjacent to the curb reserved for the
exclusive use of city passenger motor buses. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-57,
August 6, 2012)
C. Central Business District: Defined in the City’s Zoning Ordinance as district B-4,
and is generally bounded by Wood Street, Jackson Street, Cerro Gordo Street and
Church Street. The exact boundaries of the Central Business District are shown on
the Zoning District Map which is reviewed and approved annually by the City
Council, and is kept on file with the City Clerk. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-57,
August 6, 2012)
D. Commercial Vehicle: A motor vehicle used by a person, corporation or other
organization primarily for business, industry and commerce which has been
properly identified by displaying the trade name or logo of the business in such a
manner as to be clearly legible and visible from both sides of the vehicle at a
distance of 25 feet when the vehicle is not in motion. (Amended, Ordinance
2014-31, July 7, 2014)
Revised 12/2019
E. Downtown Area: Beginning at a point where the west line of South Church Street
intersects the south line of West Decatur Street, thence North along the west line
of South and North Church Streets to the north line of West Cerro Gordo Street,
thence east along the north line of West and East Cerro Gordo Streets to the east
line of North Jackson Street, thence south along the east line of North and South
Jackson Streets and the east line of South Jackson Street extended south to the
south line of East Decatur thence west along the south line of East and West
Decatur to the point of beginning. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-57, August 6,
2012)
F. Downtown Resident: A natural person over the age of sixteen (16) years whose
domicile is wholly located within the Downtown Area of the City of Decatur.
(Amended, Ordinance 2012-57, August 6, 2012)
G. Parking Payment Device: A mechanical or electronic device owned and
maintained by the City wherein coins, currency, credit cards, debit cards or other
approved methods of depositing money for payment of parking fees and shall
include parking meters, or multi-space parking fare terminals. Parking payment
devices shall be so constructed as to show, upon the insertion of the proper United
States coins, currency, credit cards, debit cards or other approved methods of
paying of parking fees, the maximum period of time for which a vehicle may be
lawfully parked. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-57, August 6, 2012)
H. Parkway: That portion of a street or highway lying between the edge of the
roadway and the adjacent property line, except any sidewalk lying therein.
(Amended, Ordinance 2012-57, August 6, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2014-31,
July 7, 2014)
I. Pay to Park Zone: An area designated by the City Council or City Manager
where a vehicle may be temporarily parked and allowed to remain for the period
of time indicated on the Parking Payment Device.
J. Property Line: The line marking the boundary between any street and the lots
abutting thereon.
K. Public Buildings: Buildings used by the municipality, the County, park district,
school district, or other municipal corporation, the State of Illinois, or the United
States Government.
L. Public Infrastructure: All publicly owned physical improvements made on public
property, except buildings, generally used for transportation storm drainage,
sanitary sewer drainage, water distribution, traffic control and lighting.
(Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
M. Roadway: That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
N. Safety Zone: The area or space officially marked within a roadway prohibiting
parking. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
O. Street: The entire width between boundary lines of every publicly maintained
way when any part thereof is opened to the use of the public for purposes of
vehicular travel. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
P. U-Turn: The turning of any vehicle to the left within the boundaries of any street
or intersection thereof for the purposes of proceeding in the direction opposite to
which it was moving before turning.
2. TRAFFIC AND PARKING COMMISSION. There is hereby created a Traffic and
Parking Commission consisting of nine members of which five such members shall be
citizen members to serve without compensation and the remaining members shall be
employees or officers of the City, one from the Public Works Department, one from the
Fire Department, one from the Police Department, and one from the Economic and
Community Development Department. The five citizen members shall serve for a term
of three years, and shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council.
The other four members, being representatives of the departments and divisions of the
City aforesaid, shall be designated by the City Manager by appointment in writing
communicated to said Commission, which appointment shall designate the respective
representative and an alternate for each such representative. Each citizen member of the
Commission shall have one vote and each City representative shall have one vote, cast
either by the representative or alternate, in conducting the business of said Commission.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
3. OFFICERS. The Commission shall select a Chairman from the citizen members to
preside, and a Vice-Chairman to act in the absence of the Chairman. The Public Works
Director, or designee, shall be Secretary of the Commission.
4. MEETINGS. The Commission shall hold regular meetings at such time and place as it
may determine. Special meetings as may be desirable or necessary shall be called by the
Chairman.
5. BY-LAWS. The Commission may adopt such rules and by-laws for the conduct of its
business as it may deem necessary or desirable.
6. DUTIES. The Commission shall investigate ways and means to coordinate traffic
activities, including on and off-street parking, to encourage educational activities in
traffic matters in the schools, and shall recommend to the City Council, in writing, ways
and means of improving such conditions and the administration and enforcement of
traffic regulations and parking conditions; such recommendations to include any matters
such as traffic control devices, safety zones, turning movements, prohibition of parking,
through streets, one-way streets, or any other matter concerning parking or traffic which
in its opinion would improve such conditions in the City. The Traffic and Parking
Commission shall assist the City Plan Commission in developing traffic and parking
plans. Such Commission shall also assist in the education of the public and the obtaining
of the public support for measures adopted to improve traffic and parking conditions.
(Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
7. TEMPORARY REGULATIONS. The Public Works Director is hereby empowered to
promulgate rules and procedures for temporary changes to traffic and parking regulations
in order to facilitate construction, rehabilitation, maintenance or other temporary
operation necessary for improvements to public infrastructure. The Police Chief is
hereby empowered to make, suspend and enforce temporary regulations to cover
emergencies or special conditions. Such temporary regulations shall remain in effect
only during the period of such emergency or special conditions. He is further authorized
to make, and cause to be enforced, temporary traffic or parking rules, regulations or
restrictions or test traffic control devices or to test prospective rules, regulations or
restrictions under actual traffic conditions. No such temporary rule, regulation or
restriction shall remain in effect more than ninety (90) days. The Police Chief shall,
within 72 hours of the time the same becomes effective, file a report thereof with the City
Clerk. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
8. DIRECTION OF TRAFFIC. Members of the Police Department and auxiliary police
assigned to traffic duty, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter, or in emergencies as public safety or convenience may
require, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order, signal, or direction of a police officer, member of the Police or Fire Department or
auxiliary police officer assigned to traffic duty or Public Works Department employee
during the course of employment. Except in case of emergency, it shall be unlawful for
any person not authorized by law to direct or attempt to direct traffic.
9. GOVERNMENT VEHICLES. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the driver
of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States, the State of Illinois,
Macon County, Park Districts, School Districts, the City of Decatur, or other municipal
corporations and it shall be unlawful for any said driver to violate any of the provisions of
this Chapter except as herein otherwise permitted or as permitted by the Illinois Vehicle
Code. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
10. FIRE EMERGENCY. The Fire Department officer in command, or any designated Fire
Department personnel, may exercise the powers and authority of a police officer in
directing traffic at the scene of any fire or where the Fire Department has responded to an
emergency call for so long as Fire Department equipment is on the scene, in the absence
of or in assisting the Police.
11. WINTER PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
A. The City Manager or authorized designee may declare a snow emergency when it
is determined in the opinion of the City Manager or designee that new snow has
accumulated to a depth of two or more inches in, on or along any emergency
snow route in the City or any winter no-parking zone in the City such that
vehicular movement has become difficult or dangerous, and further to declare
such emergency to be ended when it is reasonably deemed the same has
exhausted its purpose.
B. The declaration of a snow emergency shall be in writing signed by the City
Manager or designees and shall be endorsed with the time and date thereof along
with a statement of the manner, means and extent the same was, or was attempted
to be communicated to the media and the public, and which shall be filed as soon
as practicable with the City Clerk who is hereby authorized and directed to
receive and preserve the same for public inspection for a period of time not less
than two years, and by the same manner and method the ending of such
emergency shall be declared.
C. When official signs are posted giving notice thereof, no person shall park or leave
standing any vehicle in the roadway of an emergency snow route or any winter
no-parking zone in the City at any time during the period commencing six hours
after a snow emergency has been declared and extending to the hour at which
such emergency has been declared to be ended.
D. Any police officer may cause any vehicle found to be parked or left standing in
violation of the provisions hereof to be towed away and impounded whereafter
the same may be held until all towing and storage charges relating thereto are paid
by the registered owner.
12. NON-MOTOR VEHICLES. Every person propelling, operating or making use of any
push cart, bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, or other similar devices
propelled by human power but excluding wheelchairs, strollers or baby carriages or
riding on any animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn
vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter applicable to the driver of any
vehicle, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application.
13. TRAFFIC SIGNS. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the
instructions of any traffic sign or signal placed in view by authority of the City Manager
or in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois, excepting on direction of a police
officer, member of the Fire and Police Departments or auxiliary police officer assigned to
such duty, or Public Works Department employee during the course of employment.
14. PLACEMENT OF SIGNS. The Public Works Director or designee shall place and
maintain all traffic control devices, signs and all other markings for the control of traffic
and parking, as determined and directed by the City Manager or as required by this
Chapter or Ordinance to make effective the provisions hereof. (Amended, Ordinance
2014-31, July 7, 2014)
15. TURNS. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or "U" turn
is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign, and
when authorized marks, buttons, or other indications are placed within an intersection or
within the streets approaching the intersection indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such
indications.
16. UNLAWFUL SIGNS OR OBSTRUCTIONS. No person shall place, maintain or
display upon or in view of any street or highway any unauthorized sign, signal, parking
payment device, marking, speed bump or device which purports to be or is an imitation
of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which
attempts to direct or alter the movement of traffic, nor shall any person place, maintain,
or display upon or in view of any street, highway, alley, sidewalk, parkway, or other
public place any other sign which hides from view or interferes with the movement of
traffic or the effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal, and
no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any street or
highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. Any such
unauthorized device is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and may be removed by the
authorities having control of such street or their designee. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-
31, July 7, 2014)
17. DAMAGE TO SIGNS. No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact
alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic-control device, or any
Public Works Department cone, barricade or safety device, or any railroad sign or signal
or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof.
18. YELLOW CURB. No person shall park a vehicle at any time on any street where the
adjacent curb is painted yellow.
19. PARKING SPACES. Where parking spaces on the street or in off-street parking
facilities of the City are designated by marking lines or by painting, no person shall park
a vehicle in such manner as to occupy two spaces nor shall a person permit or allow more
than one vehicle to occupy said space. All vehicles shall be parked as not to interfere
with or obstruct the parking of vehicles in adjacent spaces, except as follows: Vehicles of
the second division as defined by the Illinois Vehicle Code may be parked parallel in
more than one space if the length of said vehicle so requires, provided said vehicle shall
not be so parked as to obstruct other traffic, and provided further that the appropriate
payment shall be inserted in the appropriate parking payment device of each space
occupied, as provided in this Chapter. However, such vehicle must observe the time
limits applicable to the parking spaces in which said vehicle is parked. (Amended,
Ordinance 2012-32, May 7, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
20. OBSTRUCTIVE PARKING. No person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle upon any
street in such manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet
of width of the roadway on a one-way street or twenty (20) feet of width of the roadway
on a two-way street for free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a driver may stop
temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of goods or passengers or when
necessary in obedience to traffic regulations, traffic signs or signals of a police officer.
21. OVER-SIZED VEHICLE REGULATIONS – CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
AND NIGHT PARKING.
A. All vehicles having more than six wheels, including vehicles pulling trailers, are
prohibited and excluded from the use of the following streets:
(i) Franklin Street from Wood Street to Eldorado Street
(ii) Water Street from Wood Street to Eldorado Street
(iii) Main Street from Wood Street to Eldorado Street
1. The above restriction shall not apply to fire, police or other emergency
vehicles, public works vehicles in the performance of maintenance work,
school buses, motor coaches licensed for the commercial transportation of
passengers, trucks or other vehicles which are making service calls or
deliveries to residences, businesses and construction sites located on said
streets, or vehicles participating in approved parades or events. The Public
Works Director shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof.
2. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction, be fined, not to exceed, Two Hundred Dollars
($200.00) for each offense.
B. No motor vehicle which has a width greater than seven (7) feet, a height greater
than eight (8) feet, or a length greater than twenty (20) feet may be parked on any
street or alley in any residential district of the City, as established by the Zoning
Ordinance, after the hour of 10:00 P.M. or before the hour of 6:00 A.M. on any
day.
22. PARKING OF DETACHED TRAILERS. The parking of detached trailers or
detached semi-trailers is hereby prohibited on streets and alleys at any time.
23. NO PARKING. When official signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle at any time upon any street so designated by signs.
24. HOURS. When official signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle at any time during the no parking hours stated on such signs upon
any street designated by ordinance except for emergency vehicles on emergency calls.
25. TIME LIMITS. The City Manager or designee is empowered to establish maximum
time limits for a person to stand, stop, or park a vehicle on any street, alley or public
parking lot. The City Manager shall file a map or written report establishing said time
limits with the City Clerk thirty (30) days before the time limits shall become effective.
The Public Works Director or designees shall erect official signs giving notice thereof
maximum parking time limits. No person shall park a vehicle within said parking space
for longer than the time designated for the street or parking space described therein. This
section shall apply to both pay parking zones and free parking zones. (Amended,
Ordinance 2012-32, May 7, 2012)
26. TRUCK AND PASSENGER ZONES; PERMITS.
A. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time
other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, not to exceed
three (3) minutes, at any place marked as a passenger loading zone during the
hours when regulations applicable to such passenger loading zones are effective,
as designated by ordinance.
B. The City Manager or designees may designate commercial loading zones. The
City Manager shall file a map or written report establishing said commercial
loading zones with the City Clerk thirty (30) days before the commercial loading
zone shall become effective. The Public Works Director shall erect appropriate
signs giving notice thereof, and parking spaces in said commercial loading zone
shall, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. of each day except Sunday
and those holidays designated in this Chapter, be reserved for the parking of
commercial vehicles or any motor vehicle engaged in the actual loading or
unloading of goods for nearby or adjacent businesses. During said time of said
days, no vehicle other than a commercial vehicle or a vehicle engaged in the
actual loading or unloading of goods for nearby or adjacent businesses shall be
parked or stopped and left standing in such zones, and vehicles allowed hereby to
be parked in said zones shall be so parked during said time of said days only when
the same are being loaded or unloaded. Vehicles other than commercial vehicles
or those vehicles engaged in the actual loading or unloading of goods for nearby
or adjacent businesses may be parked in said zones after the hour of 3:00 p.m. and
before the hour of 6:00 a.m. on each day of the week for a period of time not to
exceed 30 minutes. No driver of a commercial vehicle shall stand such vehicles
in a commercial loading zone except while actively engaged in loading or
unloading activity. Failure to actually engage in loading or unloading for a period
of thirty (30) minutes shall constitute a violation of this section.
C. Motor vehicles of the second division with more than two axles or greater than
thirty (30) feet in overall length or greater than eight (8) feet in width are
prohibited from loading or unloading on any street or alley in the downtown area
on week days except between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.
D. Motor vehicles of the second division and commercial motor vehicles engaged in
the actual loading or unloading of goods are prohibited from parking in such a
manner that any part of the vehicle projects into the street or alley so as to block
or impede traffic.
E. No commercial motor vehicle, motor vehicle of the second division, trailer, or
part thereof not engaged in the actual loading or unloading of goods shall be
parked or left standing in any commercial loading or unloading zone or upon any
street at any time unless authorized by the City Manager or authorized designee.
This does not include said motor vehicles lawfully parked at parking payment
devices or garages.
27. PARKING ENFORCEMENT. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the City
Manager or designees to enforce the requirements of this chapter.
28. HANDICAPPED SPACES.
A. The City Manager may designate spaces, both on-street and in off-street parking
facilities owned by the City, as reserved for parking for handicapped persons or
disabled veterans as defined and determined by applicable provisions of the
Illinois Vehicle Code. The City Manager shall file a map or written report
establishing said handicapped parking spaces with the City Clerk thirty (30) days
before the designation shall become effective. The Public Works Director shall
erect official signs giving notice of the designation.
B. It is hereby prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not bearing registration
plates or decals issued to handicapped persons or disabled veterans pursuant to
applicable provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code in any parking space, including
any private or public off-street parking facility, which is specifically reserved by
the posting of official signs for motor vehicles bearing such plates or decals in
accordance with law or ordinance.
C. It is hereby prohibited to park any motor vehicle within the boundaries of the area
or space directly adjacent to a properly designated handicapped parking space,
provided said adjacent area or space is clearly designated by markings on the
pavement or otherwise, as an area reserved for the exclusive use of the occupant
of the adjacent handicapped parking space.
D. It is hereby prohibited to park any motor vehicle in such a manner that blocks
entry to or exit from any properly designated handicapped parking space.
E. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this Section shall be fined
Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) in addition to any costs or charges
connected with the removal or storage of any motor vehicle as authorized by law
or ordinance.
F. Any motor vehicle bearing registration plates issued to a handicapped person or to
a disabled veteran pursuant to applicable provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code
shall be exempt from the payment of parking fees and exempt from any ordinance
imposing time limitations on parking except limitations of one-half hour or less
on any street or any parking lot or parking place, but such motor vehicle shall be
subject to all other parking laws or ordinances.
G. Such parking privileges granted by this section are also extended to motor
vehicles of not-for-profit organizations used for the transportation of handicapped
persons when said motor vehicles display the decal or device issued pursuant to
applicable provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
H. Parking privileges granted by this section are strictly limited to the person to
whom the special registration plates, decals, or device is issued and qualified
operators acting under express direction of the disabled person while that person
is present. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
29. IMPROPER PARKING. No persons shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway in any
other manner than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of
traffic, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within twelve (12) inches of the edge
of the regularly established curb line, except that upon those streets which have been
marked or signed for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb
indicated by such marks or signs with the front of the vehicle directed at the curb. Where
parking spaces are delineated by painted lines on the pavement, it shall be unlawful to
stand or park a vehicle other than entirely within the parking space so delineated.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-09, February 6, 2017)
30. SALE OR REPAIR OF VEHICLE. No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any
street, highway, alley, sidewalk, parkway or other public place for the purpose of
displaying it for sale, or for washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
31. SALES ON STREETS. No person shall operate or park on any street, highway, alley,
sidewalk, parkway or other public place any vehicle for the exclusive purpose of
advertising by any method. No person shall park any vehicle upon any business street
from which vehicle merchandise is sold or peddled. No person shall park upon any street
in a non-residentially zoned district a vehicle from which merchandise is sold or peddled.
(Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
32. PROHIBITED PARKING SPACES. No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle at
any time in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic, when an emergency exists, or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic-control device:
A. On a sidewalk or parkway;
B. In front of a public or private driveway;
C. On a crosswalk;
D. Within an intersection;
E. Within twenty (20) feet of any intersection or crosswalk;
F. Within thirty (30) feet of the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign,
or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
G. Within twenty-five (25) feet of the intersection of any alley with any street;
H. In an alley except during the actual loading and unloading of goods, supplies and
merchandise;
I. On any railroad tracks;
J. Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad grade crossing;
K. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such parking
would obstruct traffic;
L. On the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the edge of curb of a street;
M. Upon any viaduct, bridge, or other elevated structure upon a highway;
N. In any subway or highway tunnel or the approach thereto;
O. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of a point of
the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone, unless a different length is
indicated by signs or markings;
P. In any area between the boundary lines of a way publicly maintained for purposes
of vehicular travel, not including shoulders or parkways that are unimproved and
maintained in a natural state with grass, trees or other vegetative cover;
Q. Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant;
R. Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire department station
and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any such station within
seventy-five (75) feet of such entrance when properly sign-posted;
S. At any place where official signs prohibit parking;
T. At any place designated as a fire lane.
(Amended, Ordinance 2016-13, March 7, 2016) (Amended, Ordinance 2013-07, July 7, 2014)
33. UNAUTHORIZED MOVING OF VEHICLE. No person other than a police officer,
the owner, or some person authorized by the owner thereof, shall move a vehicle into any
prohibited parking area, or to any unlawful distance away from a curb or start or cause to
be started the motor of any motor vehicle, or shift, change, or move the levers, brake,
starting device, gears, or other mechanism of a parked motor vehicle in order to move the
motor vehicle to a position other than that in which it was left by the owner or driver
thereof, or attempt to do so. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
34. PUBLIC BUILDINGS. When official signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person
shall stand or park any vehicle longer than necessary to load or unload passengers within
a space designated by official signs along the adjacent curb immediately in front of any
entrance to any public building, hospital, hotel, theater or church.
35. ABANDONED OR DISABLED VEHICLES.
A. No person shall stand, park, leave, or abandon any vehicle on the property of
another without the consent of the owner of said property.
B. No person shall stop, stand, park, or leave a vehicle on a public street or alley for
a period of time in excess of 72 hours.
C. No person shall stop, stand, park or leave a vehicle on a public street or alley for a
period of time in excess of 72 hours except by permit.
D. No person shall allow, permit, place or leave the following which are hereby
found to be a danger to the public health, safety and welfare on a public street,
alley or right-of-way:
(1) a vehicle parked in an official posted tow away zone,
(2) a vehicle in a place obstructing an emergency vehicle’s operation,
(3) a vehicle in a place obstructing either vehicle or pedestrian traffic,
(4) a vehicle in a place violating emergency snow routes,
(5) a vehicle herein defined and specifically found to be a nuisance because of
the hazard created by its condition or location to other traffic or
pedestrians because of its physical condition or its position in relation to
public right of ways:
(a) a vehicle parked on a public right-of-way covered by a tarp or
other covering which obscures reflective devices,
(b) a vehicle containing garbage, debris or hazardous materials,
(c) a vehicle in such a state of deterioration that it poses an immediate
threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, including, but not
limited to a current state of disrepair from depositing harmful
materials or substances upon the street including, but not limited to
glass, oil, transmission or brake fluids or other such substances or
the placing of a vehicle on blocks, jacks or other elevating device
posing a threat to the public health, safety and welfare.
A vehicle found to be on the public right-of-way in violation of this section shall
be subject to immediate removal and towing pursuant to Section 38(A) (2) of this
Chapter.
E. Except where necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with
law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person
shall stop, stand, leave or park any vehicle in a public parking area or on a City
street or alley if the vehicle does not display a current annual registration sticker
as required by the Secretary of State or temporary permit pending registration. A
vehicle found to be on the public right-of-way in violation of this section shall be
subject to immediate removal and towing pursuant to Section 38(A) (2) this
Chapter. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
36. PARKING ON PRIVATE LOTS.
A. When a parking lot or area established to provide off-street parking facilities for
tenants, customers, guests or employees of the owner is posted with appropriate
signs giving notice thereof it shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to
stop, stand, or park a vehicle on said lot. Such signs shall be clearly legible and
posted in a conspicuous place. The Police Chief may establish and publish further
requirements as are deemed necessary for such signs.
B. Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall be fined a
minimum of Fifty Dollars ($50.00).
37. REMOVAL OF VEHICLES. Police officers are hereby authorized to remove or cause
to be removed a vehicle from a public street or highway to the nearest garage, impound
lot or other place of safety, or to a location designated by the Police Chief, under the
following circumstances:
A. When any vehicle is left unattended upon any viaduct, bridge, or other elevated
structure upon a highway, or in any subway or highway tunnel or the approach
thereto.
B. When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and is left
unattended or the person or persons in charge are incapacitated to such an extent
as to be unable to provide for its custody or control.
C. When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street, an alley or an off-street parking
facility and is parked as to constitute a hazard or obstruction to traffic.
D. When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street in front of a driveway so as to
prevent or hinder ingress or egress thereto.
E. When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street or an alley for a period of time
in excess of seventy-two (72) hours.
F. When any vehicle is parked or left standing in violation of the provisions of
paragraphs 18 through 35 inclusive, of this Chapter.
G. When any vehicle has been parked on public property for a period of time of at
least seventy-two (72) hours or private property for a period of at least seven (7)
days and from which vehicle the engine, wheels or other parts have been
removed, or on which vehicle the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered,
damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven
under its own motor power. This subsection shall not include a motor vehicle
which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own
motor power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations.
H. When any vehicle is parked or left standing upon any street, alley or off-street
parking facility during an emergency situation as determined by the City
Manager, Police Chief, or authorized designee.
I. When any vehicle is parked or left standing on any street or alley that has had
parking temporarily restricted by order of the Police Chief, pursuant to Section 7
hereof, for purposes of maintenance or repair.
J. When a sound amplification system in any vehicle has been used in violation of
Section 10 of Chapter 73 of the City Code and the vehicle owner has received a
prior written warning for a violation of this Section. No vehicle shall be
impounded unless the owner received a prior written warning for operating a
vehicle in violation of Section 10 of Chapter 73 or for owning any vehicle used in
violation of the provisions of this Section. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-55,
November 17, 2014)
K. When any vehicle is parked on any street, alley or other public property which
lacks evidence of current, legal registration, visible from the outside of said
vehicle.
L. When any vehicle is used in the commission of prostitution as defined in Section
5/11-14 of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/11-14, solicitation of a sexual
act as defined in Section 5/11-14.1 of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/11-
14.1, patronizing a prostitute as defined in Section 5/11-18 of the Illinois Criminal
Code, 720 ILCS 5/11-18, patronizing a juvenile prostitute as defined in Section
5/11-18.1 of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/11-18.1, or public indecency
as defined in Sections 5/11-9 of the Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/11-9. (Amended,
Ordinance 2012-83, November 19, 2012)
M. When any vehicle is used in the possession or delivery of a controlled substance
as defined and included in the schedules of Article II of the Illinois Controlled
Substance Act, 720 ILCS 570/101 et. seq., of cannabis over 10 grams as defined
in the Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/1 et. seq. and in violation of the
Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act or drug paraphernalia when possessed
with the intent to introduce a controlled substance into the human body as defined
in the Drug Paraphernalia Control Act, 720 ILCS 600/2 et seq. unless possessed
in conjunction with cannabis as permitted by the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and
Tax Act. This subsection shall take effect on the first day of January, 2020.
(Amended, Ordinance 2019-237, December 2, 2019, Effective January 1, 2020)
(Amended, Ordinance 2016-64, September 19, 2016)
N. When any vehicle is used in the commission of a weapons offense as defined and
contained within Article 24 of Chapter 720 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
O. When any vehicle is used in the commission of the offense of driving under the
influence of alcohol, drugs and/or intoxicating substances as defined in Section
5/11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-501.
P. When any vehicle is used in the commission of the offense of driving on a
suspended or revoked license as defined in Section 5/6-303 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, 625 ILCS 5/6-303.
Q. When any vehicle is used in the commission of the offense of fleeing or
attempting to elude a police officer as defined in Section 5/11-204 or 11/204.1 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-204 and 204.1.
R. When any vehicle is used in the commission of the offense of reckless driving and
aggravated reckless driving as defined in Section 5/11-503 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-503.
S. When any vehicle is used in the commission of the offense of street racing and
aggravated street racing as defined in Section 5/11-504 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-506. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-83, November 19, 2012)
T. When any vehicle is being operated by a person without verifiable liability
insurance as defined and required by Section 5/7-601 of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
626 ILCS 5/7-601.
U. When any vehicle is being used in violation of Section 5/3-801 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/3-801, and Section 5/3-413 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, 625 ILCS 5/3-413, for a period in excess of six (6) months regarding no
registration of a motor vehicle, Section 5/3-401 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625
ILCS 5/3-401, for no valid registration, or Section 5/3-702 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, 625 ILCS 5/3-702, and Section 5/3-708 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625
ILCS 5/3-708, for operation of a motor vehicle when registration is cancelled,
suspended, or revoked. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-67, October 31, 2011)
V. When any vehicle is being operated by a person without a valid driver’s license as
defined in Section 5/6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/6-101.
38. PROCEDURES FOR REMOVAL OF VEHICLES.
A. Except as provided in subsection B hereof, vehicles authorized for removal by
Section 37 of this Chapter shall be removed as provided herein:
(1) A police officer may remove or cause to be removed a vehicle as
authorized herein only after notice that such vehicle may be
removed and that the owner of such vehicle is entitled to a hearing
thereon is given to the registered owner thereof, except as provided
in subparagraph (2) hereof. If the owner of such vehicle does not
appear for a hearing as provided by said notice, such vehicle may
be removed, but not sooner than seven days after such notice is
given. If the owner of such vehicle does appear as provided, such
vehicle may be removed immediately upon notification to the
owner that probable cause exists to believe that the violation
occurred as alleged.
(2) A police officer may remove or cause to be removed a vehicle as
authorized herein without notice to the owner thereof whenever
such vehicle is parked or abandoned so as to constitute an
immediate hazard or obstruction to other vehicles on or seeking
access to public streets or alleys, or so as to prevent or hinder
repair to, or maintenance of, streets or alleys with temporary
parking restrictions for that purpose, or when any vehicle is parked
on any street, alley or other public property which lacks evidence
of current, legal registration, visible from the outside of said
vehicle, provided that notice as required in subparagraph (1) hereof
is given to such owner, if the same can be ascertained, within 24
hours of such removal or if a vehicle is parked or located on public
streets, alleys or right-of-ways in violation of Section 35 (C) or 35
(D) of this Chapter. If the vehicle is not currently registered,
notice shall be sent to the most recent registered owner at the most
recent registered address as identified by the Illinois Secretary of
State. If the owner of such vehicle appears as provided within
seven (7) days after such notice is given, or within seven (7) days
of removal if no notice was given, as the case may be, and it is
found that no probable cause exists to believe that the violation
occurred as alleged, the vehicle shall be released to such owner by
the City without payment of any fees by such owner.
(3) If a vehicle is removed as provided in subparagraph (1) hereof or
held in storage either after a hearing or after seven (7) days as
provided in subparagraph (2) hereof, such vehicle shall not be
released to the owner thereof until payment of towing and storage
fees is made; provided that, should such owner be found not guilty
by a court of law of the parking violation which caused the
removal of the vehicle, then said vehicle shall be released to such
owner without payment of any fees. Such a vehicle may also be
released to the owner thereof if said owner provides the City with
assurance satisfactory to the Legal Department that said owner will
pay all towing and storage fees in the event such owner is found
guilty by a court of law of the alleged parking violation.
B. The provisions of this subsection shall be applicable to vehicles removed pursuant
to Sections 37 (J) through 37 (V) inclusive of this Chapter: (Amended, Ordinance
2013-64B) (Amended, Ordinance 2014-55, November 17, 2014)
(i) The owner of record of a motor vehicle used in the violation of
Section 10 of Chapter 73 of the City Code or Sections 37 (J) through
37 (V) inclusive of this Chapter shall be subject to having said vehicle
impounded and shall also be liable to the city for an administrative fine
of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00), in addition to the payment of
any fees for the towing and storage of the vehicle to the appropriate
City towing contractor. (Amended, Ordinance 2017-09, February 6,
2017) (Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
(ii) Whenever a police officer has reasonable suspicion to believe that
a vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to Section 37
(J) through 37 (V) inclusive of this Chapter, the police officer shall
provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by the City
or its contractor. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall
notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the
time of the alleged violation and the owner of said vehicle, if present at
the time, of the fact of the seizure and the vehicle owner’s right to post
a cash bond as indicated in subsection (iii) hereof to retrieve
possession of the vehicle pending a hearing to be held by a hearing
officer for the City designated by the City Manager. The notification
shall also explain the vehicle owner’s right to a probable cause hearing
with respect to the alleged violation, as provided in subsection (vii)
hereof. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-09, February 6, 2017)
(iii) Whenever the owner, lessee or lienholder of a vehicle seized
pursuant to this subsection wishes to retrieve the vehicle seized prior
to the evidentiary hearing, he or she may do so by posting a cash bond
of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) at the Decatur Police
Department, 707 W. South Side Drive, Decatur, Illinois, in addition to
the payment of applicable towing and storage fees to the City's towing
contractor. (Amended, Ordinance 2017-09, February 6, 2017)
(Amended, Ordinance 2017-02, January 17, 2017)
(iv) Within ten (10) days after a vehicle is seized and impounded
pursuant to this subsection, the City shall notify by personal service or
by first class mail the owner of record or lessee and any lienholder of
record of said vehicle of the date, time and location of a hearing that
will be conducted pursuant to this subsection B. (Amended,
Ordinance 2017-09, February 6, 2017) (Amended, Ordinance 2013-
64B; July 1, 2013)
(v) A hearing shall be scheduled and held, unless continued by order
of the City’s hearing officer, on designated days of each month. The
hearing shall be scheduled not less than seven (7) days and not more
than thirty (30) days after notice thereof is mailed. All interested
persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the
hearing. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply and hearsay
evidence shall be admissible. The hearing shall be open to the public
and recorded. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
(vi) If, after the hearing, the City’s hearing officer determines by a
preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used in the
commission of a violation of Section 10 of Chapter 73 of the City
Code or in violation of Sections 37 (J) through 37 (V) inclusive of this
Chapter and was not stolen prior to said violation, he shall enter an
order requiring the vehicle to continue to be impounded until the
owner thereof pays the penalty and fees imposed hereby if the vehicle
is still in the custody of the City or its contractor; if a bond had been
posted and the owner, lessee or lienholder has possession of the
vehicle, the hearing officer shall enter an order deducting the
appropriate penalty from the cash bond that was posted. If, after said
hearing, the City’s hearing officer determines by a preponderance of
the evidence that the vehicle was not used in the commission of a
violation of Section 10 of Chapter 73 of the City Code or a violation of
Sections 37 (J) through 37 (V) inclusive of this Chapter, or that the
vehicle was stolen prior thereto, said hearing officer shall enter an
order dismissing the proceedings and the vehicle or cash bond shall be
returned without payment or deduction of any penalty and any towing
or storage fees paid by the owner, lessee or lienholder shall be
reimbursed by the City. Any penalty imposed hereby on the owner of
record of any vehicle shall be a debt due and owed to the City and may
be enforced and collected as provided by law. (Amended, Ordinance
2017-09, February 6, 2017)
(vii) In addition to the hearing provided for in the immediately
preceding subsections hereof, every owner whose vehicle is
impounded for a violation of Section 10 of Chapter 73 of the City
Code or Sections 37 (J) through 37 (V) inclusive of this Chapter shall
be entitled to a probable cause hearing before a police shift
commander, or designee, on the question of whether the vehicle was
used in violation of said provision. This hearing must be requested, in
writing, within twenty four (24) hours of the impoundment of the
vehicle, and the hearing shall be held within three (3) days of receipt
of such request by the City, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at said hearing
and hearsay evidence shall be admissible. If, after the hearing, the
police shift commander, or designee, determines that there is probable
cause to believe that the vehicle was used in the commission of a
violation of Section 10 of Chapter 73 of the City Code or Sections 37
(J) through 37 (V) inclusive of this Chapter, he shall order the
continued impoundment of the vehicle unless the owner of the vehicle
posts a cash bond with the City in the amount of Two Hundred Fifty
Dollars ($250.00). If the police shift commander, or designee,
determines that there is no such probable cause, the vehicle will be
returned without penalty or other fees. (Amended, Ordinance 2017-09,
February 6, 2017) (Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
(viii) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section, whenever a
person with a lien of record against a vehicle impounded under this
subsection has commenced foreclosure proceedings, possession of the
vehicle shall be given to that person if he or she agrees in writing to
refund to the City the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less any
amounts necessary to pay all lien holders of record, up to the total
amount of penalties and fees imposed elsewhere herein.
(ix) Any motor vehicle impounded under this subsection that is not
reclaimed within thirty (30) days after the expiration of the time during
which the owner of record may seek judicial review of the City’s
action, or the time at which a final judgment is rendered in favor of the
City, or the time a final administrative decision is rendered against an
owner of record, may be disposed of as an unclaimed vehicle as
provided by law.
(x) Fees for towing and storage of a vehicle under this subsection shall
be the same as those charged per the applicable contract for towing
service with the City in effect at the time of the violation.
39. PAY TO PARK ZONES. Pay to Park Zones are hereby established upon the streets of
the City and in the municipal parking lots operated by the City and other City parking
facilities as defined and designated by ordinance. Parking Payment Devices may be
installed in said zones under the direction of the City Manager or designee alongside of
or next to individual parking spaces designated and marked upon the pavement or
parking area or at one or more locations in parking lots near pedestrian access points to
the parking lots.
40. PARKING NEXT TO A PARKING PAYMENT DEVICE
A. When a parking space in any pay to park zone is parallel with the adjacent curb or
sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked parallel with
the adjacent curb or sidewalk and within the lines designating such place, and
facing in the lawful direction of traffic, such that the front or rear of the vehicle
shall be alongside of and next to the parking payment device, depending upon the
placement of the device.
B. When any vehicle shall be parked in any space alongside of or next to which a
parking payment device is located the operator of said vehicle upon entering the
parking space shall immediately insert or cause to be inserted in such device the
indicated required coin of the United States, and at once shall put said device into
operation as thereon directed, at which time the vehicle may lawfully occupy the
parking space for the period of time prescribed for the coinage inserted.
41. EXPIRED PARKING PAYMENT DEVICE. It shall be unlawful for any person or
operator to permit a vehicle to remain in any space adjacent to any parking payment
device while the said device is displaying a signal indicating that the vehicle occupying
such parking space has already been parked beyond the period of time for which the
coinage inserted in said device entitles the vehicle to remain in said parking space.
42. UNLAWFUL EXTENSION OF PARKING PAYMENT DEVICE TIME.
It shall be unlawful for any person to insert or cause to be inserted any coins into any
parking payment device for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking time of
any vehicle beyond the legal parking time established for the parking space or zone as
indicated by the maximum time period on the device adjacent to the parking space.
43. PLUGGING PARKING PAYMENT DEVICES. It shall be unlawful to insert or cause
to be inserted in any parking payment device any slug, device, or item whatsoever other
than the proper United States coins, currency, credit cards, debit cards or other approved
methods of paying of parking fees.
44. DAMAGING PARKING PAYMENT DEVICES. It shall be unlawful for any person
to deface, injure, tamper with, open, or willfully break, destroy, or impair the usefulness
of any parking payment device installed under the provisions of this Chapter.
45. PARKING CITATION. A notice shall be attached to or placed upon any vehicle
parked in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter which said notice shall
indicate that such vehicle is illegally parked. The notice shall direct the operator of said
vehicle to report to the City Financial Management Department in regard to such
violation and shall indicate the penalty for such violation and the time and manner of
payment thereof as is elsewhere provided in this Chapter.
46. HOURS OF PARKING ENFORCEMENT. Enforcement of time limited parking
regulation, including parking regulated by a parking payment device, contained herein
shall occur Monday through Friday between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M. and
upon such other days and times as shall be provided by ordinance. All other parking
regulations may be enforced at all times. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
47. PARKING FEES. The proper United States coins, currency, credit cards, debit cards or
other approved methods of paying of parking fees required to be inserted in parking
payment devices as provided herein hereby are levied and assessed as fees to cover the
cost of the supervision, inspections, installation, operation, maintenance, control, and use
of the parking spaces and payment devices described herein and also the cost of
supervising and regulating the parking of vehicles on public streets and in public parking
lots.
48. TEMPORARY RESERVATION OF PARKING SPACE. The City Manager or
authorized designee may authorize the temporary reservation of parking spaces by
individuals, corporations, or other organizations at the rate established in Section 74 of
this chapter for each space so reserved if such reservation is necessary or desirable in
order to allow said individual, corporation or other organization to perform a service or
accomplish a job or project of short duration. Said fee shall be paid prior to receiving
temporary “No Parking” signs or meter hood. This section shall apply to all events,
except those that are City-sponsored.
49. PARKING IN A RESERVED PARKING SPACE. It shall be unlawful for any person
or operator to park a vehicle in any space temporarily reserved by means of a meter hood,
barricade or by any other manner without the prior approval of the City Manager or
authorized designee.
50. PARKING PAYMENT DEVICE PROVISIONS. The provisions herein with regard to
parking payment devices are intended to and shall be in addition to all other ordinances,
rules and regulations concerning traffic, parking, and the use of the streets, and shall not
be taken to repeal any other ordinance or part of any ordinance unless in direct conflict
therewith.
51. HOLIDAYS. Those days designated holidays upon which parking time limit regulations
shall not be enforced and the operation of the Motor Vehicle Parking System Garages
shall be suspended, and for said purposes only, are hereby defined and designated as New
Year's Day, Martin Luther King Jr. Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Veteran’s Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day; provided that, if any such holiday
shall occur on a Saturday such regulations shall not be enforced on the immediately
preceding Friday, and if any such holiday shall occur on a Sunday such regulations shall
not be enforced on the immediately succeeding Monday.
52. PARKING GARAGES. The following described parking garages are hereby
designated as City of Decatur Parking Garages, B and C:
Garage B - located in the block bounded by Eldorado, Water and North Streets, and 1/2
block east of North Main Street;
Garage C - located in the block bounded by Wood, Franklin and Main Streets, and 1
block west of Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive.
53. PARKING LOTS. The following identified parking lots are hereby designated Motor
Vehicle System Parking Lots A, D, E, F, G, I and L:
Lot A - located in the north half of the block bounded by Wood, Water,
Washington and South Main Streets;
Lot D - located in the block bounded by Prairie, North Main, William and Church
Streets;
Lot E - located at the southeast corner of William and North Main Streets;
Lot F - located at the northeast corner of Wood and North Main Streets;
Lot G – located on the west half of the block bounded by North Main, North
Street, Water Street and William Street;
Lot I – located in the southeast corner of South Main and East Main Streets;
Lot L – located in the northwest corner of North Main and West Main Streets.
(Amended, Ordinance 2012-83, November 19, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2014-31,
July 7, 2014)
54. PAY TO PARK SPACES. Parking spaces in lots A and F and in Garage C are hereby
established as Pay to Park spaces, and the City Manager is hereby authorized and directed
to cause parking payment devices to be installed as provided in this Chapter. The hourly
charges for parking spaces in lot A, lot F, and Garage C shall be at the rate established in
Section 74 of this chapter. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
55. RESERVED PARKING. The City Manager may cause to be reserved parking spaces in
City parking garages and in Parking Lot G to be used for monthly or other than hourly
parking, and such spaces shall be so marked and designated, the number of said spaces to
be based on demand. It shall be unlawful to park in a reserved parking space without
City Manager’s authorization. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-83, November 19, 2012)
(Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
56. MONTHLY CHARGES.
A. The monthly charge or rate for other than hourly parking in spaces designated for
the same on uncovered levels of Garage B and C shall be at the rate established in
Section 74 of this chapter.
B. The monthly charge or rate for other than hourly parking in spaces designated for
the same on covered levels of Garages B and C is shall be at the rate established
in Section 74 of this chapter.
C. The charges described in sections A and B do not apply to those parking spaces
included in another agreement with the City of Decatur.
57. PARKING PERMIT. No person shall park, store or leave standing a motor vehicle in
those areas of Garage C or in Lot G reserved for monthly or other than hourly parking,
unless the owner or operator of such vehicle shall have received from the Financial
Management Department a permit for such parking of such vehicle and shall have paid
the charges for the same for the then current period. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-83,
November 19, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
58. APPLICATION. Applications for permits to use the space in the areas designated for
monthly or other than hourly parking, shall be made to the Director of Financial
Management and shall be accompanied by payment of the monthly parking fee for the
applicable period.
59. ISSUANCE OF PERMITS. Permits shall be issued for any area designated for monthly
or other than hourly parking only up to the number of spaces available in such area. In
the event the number of applicants for spaces in a designated area exceeds the number of
spaces therein, such excess applications shall be placed and kept on file in chronological
order by the Director of Financial Management, and as space becomes available, permits
shall be issued in the order applications were received. No person shall sell, transfer, or
assign any permit to another person. Renewal of permits shall have preference over all
other applicants, provided that renewal applications shall be made and the appropriate fee
paid before expiration of the current period.
60. IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLE. Any vehicle parked, stored or left standing within
an area in Garages B and C designated for monthly or other than hourly parking which
has not been issued a permit for such may be towed from the area and impounded until
such time as the owner thereof shall pay the costs and charges for such towing along with
a processing fee at the rate established in Section 74 of this chapter.
61. NATURE OF PERMIT. The issuance of a parking permit authorized under the
provisions of this Chapter shall constitute a license to use vacant space and neither the
City nor any officer or employee thereof shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury
growing out of or connected with the use of said space, or to such vehicle or its contents,
or for the loss or theft thereof.
62. REVOCATION OF PERMIT. Any parking permit authorized under the provisions of
this Chapter may be revoked by the City Manager at any time.
63. PARKING IN SPACES. Vehicles parked, stored or left standing in any City parking
garage, parking lot or on-street parking spaces shall be so parked, stored or left standing
within the marked lines, whenever the same are provided, designating individual spaces.
No vehicle shall be parked, stored or left standing in any driveway, access way or space
either designated as a no parking space, or safety zone. Any vehicle parked, stored or left
standing in violation of the provisions of this section may be towed from the area and
impounded subject to the same provisions as set forth in Section 37 of this Chapter.
(Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
64. CONFERENCE OR CONVENTION PARKING PERMITS. The City Manager,
Public Works Director or designee may issue parking permits to bona fide groups
sponsoring conferences, conventions and similar events in Decatur for use at any three
hour or longer free parking space except in Parking Lot E. The group sponsoring the
conference must purchase passes for the entire group at least five business days in
advance by paying a fee established in Section 74 of this chapter per space per day. The
conference organizer shall provide each patron with a printed conference parking permit
hang-tag which shall be hung from the interior rear view mirror, or certificate which shall
be displayed on the dashboard of the vehicle parked. The conference or convention
parking permit shall be valid on the date(s) for which it is issued and shall include the
right to leave the parking spaces and return to the parking spaces without additional cost.
Said payment is to be made to the Financial Management Department of the City of
Decatur. (Amended, Ordinance 2013-42, May 6, 2013)
65. DOWNTOWN RESIDENT PARKING PERMITS.
A. Any resident of the Decatur Central Business District may, upon providing proof
of residency at the time of application and renewal to the Financial Management
Department of the City of Decatur, be eligible to receive a nontransferable
"Downtown Resident Parking Permit. The vehicle described in the permit
application only, shall be authorized to park in the Central Business District by
one of the following methods:
(1) Class A: Class A permit holders must abide by all metered and posted
parking spaces between the hours of 10:00 A.M. to 3:00 P.M. Monday
through Friday. From 3:00 P.M. through 10:00 A.M. Monday through
Friday and all day Saturday and Sunday, vehicles displaying valid
Downtown Resident Parking Permits - Class A may be parked at any
otherwise unrestricted City-controlled parking space, with a designated "3
Hour Limit” or greater for up to a maximum of 72 consecutive hours, (or
longer, upon prior written authorization by the Public Works Director, or
designee). Class A permit holders must abide by “2 Hour Limit”,
commercial loading zones, handicapped parking spaces, “30 Minute
Limit” and all other restricted spaces at all times. (Amended, Ordinance
2014-31, July 7, 2014)
(2) Class B: Class B permit holders may park at any unrestricted, Citycontrolled
parking space designated "2 Hour Limit" or greater for up to a
maximum of 72 consecutive hours, (or longer, upon prior written
authorization by the Public Works Director, or designee). Class B permit
recipients must abide by posted commercial loading zones, handicapped
parking spaces, “30 Minute Limit” and all other restricted spaces at all
times. The Class B permit shall be issued upon proof of residency and
payment of the Class B permit fee. The Class B permit fee shall be at the
rate per month established in Section 74 of this chapter. (Amended,
Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
66. DOWNTOWN EMPLOYEE PARKING PERMITS.
A. Each Downtown Employee shall, upon providing proof of employment in the
Central Business District at the time of application and renewal and paying the
Downtown Employee Parking Permit fee to the Financial Management
Department of the City of Decatur, be eligible to receive a single, transferable
"Downtown Employee Parking Permit " authorizing the vehicle described in the
permit application only, to park in spaces designated by the City Manager or
designee in the Downtown Area, as follows:
(1) From 6:00 A.M. through 4:00 P.M. Mondays through Fridays.
(2) Vehicles must display valid Downtown Employee Parking Permit.
(Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
B. The Downtown Employee Parking Permit fee per month per vehicle shall be at
the rate established in Section 74 of this chapter, except for employee parking
permits for Lot G. Monthly charges for employee parking permits in Lot G shall
be $25 per month. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-83, November 19, 2012)
C. Any person found to have parked a vehicle in a designated “Downtown Employee
Parking” space without a valid “Downtown Employee Parking Permit” will be
subject to a fine of Fifty Dollars ($50.00).
D. Any vehicle found to be parked in a designated “Downtown Employee Parking”
space without a valid “Downtown Employee Parking Permit” will be subject to
being towed away and impounded in accordance with the procedures defined
herein.
E. Downtown Employee Parking Area is hereby described as the on-street parking
areas located outside of the Central Business District, designated parking in Lot
G, and such other parking spaces as may be designated by the City Manager or
designee. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-83, November 19, 2012) (Amended,
Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
67. NO REFUNDS. No charges or fees provided for herein for parking in any city parking
garage or lot may be refunded or prorated for any unused time or unexpired term.
68. RULES AND REGULATIONS. The City Manager is authorized to establish such
reasonable rules, regulations and procedures as may to said officer appear necessary or
convenient to regulate and control parking on City streets and in City parking garages and
parking lots pursuant to, and not in conflict with, the provisions hereof. The City
Manager shall file a map or written report establishing said time limits with the City
Clerk thirty (30) days before the time limits shall become effective.
69. PENALTIES.
A. Any person, firm or corporation in whose name a citation alleging a violation
enumerated in Section 73 of this Chapter is issued, and who shall neglect or
refuse to pay such citation after written notice, shall be indebted to the City of
Decatur in the amount specified in Section 73, unless and until a complaint is
filed in the Administrative Court or Circuit Court.
B. Debts for unpaid citations alleging violations of this Chapter may be referred to a
qualified private enterprise for collection. In the event an unpaid parking citation
is referred for collection, the City Financial Management Department may assess
an additional fee for the cost of collection each violation notice. No citation shall
be referred for collection before written notice, directed to the registered owner of
the illegally parked vehicle is attempted by the City. No citation shall be referred
for collection if there is pending an appeal of the citation. Any fees or costs
incurred by the City in any such collection by attorneys and qualified private
collection enterprises retained by the City shall be charged to the offender.
C. In the event the City brings legal action for the enforcement of any provision of
this Chapter, the Office of the Corporation Counsel may assess a fee of Twenty-
Five Dollars ($25.00) if settlement is reached prior to initial court appearance and
Fifty Dollars ($50.00) if settlement or judgment is obtained after a court
appearance. This fee shall be in addition to any other fines, fees, penalties or
costs as provided by this Ordinance or State Law.
D. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Chapter
shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than Ten Dollars ($10.00) nor more than
Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) per offense.
70. IMMOBILIZATION AND IMPOUNDMENT.
A. The City of Decatur is hereby authorized to immobilize and impound a vehicle
that has accumulated fines of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) or more for unpaid
parking citations issued to the vehicle by the City.
B. When a vehicle or vehicles has accumulated unpaid parking citations of One
Hundred Dollars ($100.00) or more, the registered owner shall be sent a notice of
impending immobilization and impoundment by first class mail to the address of
the registered owner of the cited vehicle(s) as recorded with the Illinois Secretary
of State or the state in which the vehicle is registered. Such notice shall state the
name and address of the registered owner, the state registration number of the
motor vehicle(s), and a list of all unpaid parking citations issued to the vehicle(s).
Such notice shall be deemed served as of the date of deposit in the United States
mail.
C. Upon receipt of the notice of impending immobilization and impoundment, the
registered owner shall have twenty-one (21) days after the date of the notice to
pay all fines or to submit a written request for a hearing to present documentary
evidence that would conclusively disprove liability. Documentary evidence that
would conclusively disprove liability shall be based on the following grounds: (1)
that all fines for the violations cited in the notice of impending immobilization
and impoundment have been paid in full; or (2) that the registered owner has not
accumulated fines of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) or more that were unpaid at
the time the notice of impending immobilization and impoundment was issued.
The written request for a hearing must be submitted within twenty-one (21) days
after the date of the notice of impending immobilization and impoundment to the
City of Decatur’s Legal Department.
D. Within ten (10) days after receipt of the written request for a hearing, the City
shall notify by certified mail, return receipt requested, the owner of record of said
vehicle of the date, time and location of an administrative hearing. A hearing
shall be scheduled and held, unless continued by order of the City’s hearing
officer, on designated days of each month. The hearing shall be scheduled not less
than seven (7) days and not more than thirty (30) days after notice thereof is
mailed. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard
at the hearing. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply and hearsay evidence
shall be admissible. The hearing shall be open to the public and recorded.
E. If, after the expiration of twenty-one (21) days after the notice of impending
immobilization and impoundment, the outstanding fines remain unpaid, a written
request for a hearing has not been submitted to the City of Decatur’s Legal
Department, if the owner requesting a hearing fails to appear at such hearing, or
after a hearing, the owner has been found liable, the City Manager or designees
may cause an immobilization device to be attached to the eligible vehicle in a
manner to prevent the operation of the vehicle when said vehicle is on the public
way or any City-owned property. Once an immobilization device has been
attached, the vehicle is eligible for impoundment. If the vehicle subject to
immobilization cannot be fitted with the device, the vehicle may be impounded by
the City Manager or designees.
F. When a vehicle has been immobilized and/or impounded, a notice shall be mailed
to the address of the registered owner notifying the owner of the procedures to
have the vehicle released. Such notice shall contain the following: (1) the date
and time when the vehicle was immobilized and/or impounded; (2) the amount
which must be paid to have the vehicle released; (3) a contact name, address and
phone number for where the fines, penalties and fees may be paid. A Thirty-Five
Dollar ($35.00) fee is assessed when an immobilization device is utilized on a
vehicle. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
G. Any registered owner of a vehicle impounded may have the vehicle removed from
the storage area by paying all costs incurred in towing and storing the vehicle,
together with the full amount due on the unpaid parking tickets and any penalties
and fees associated with the immobilization and impound. Fees for towing and
storage of a vehicle shall be the same as those charged per the applicable contract
for towing service with the City in effect at the time.
H. No person shall move or cause to be moved any vehicle that has an
immobilization device attached thereto except as authorized by the City of
Decatur and its employees. Further, no person shall tamper with, damage, remove
or cause to be removed from any vehicle an immobilization device placed thereon
under the authority of the City of Decatur and its employees except as authorized
to do so by the City. Further, it shall be unlawful to interfere with or hinder any
officer or employee of the City, or those designated to act on behalf of any officer
or employee of the City, while engaged in the duties of the enforcement of this
section. Any person who is found to have violated this subsection shall be fined
in an amount of not less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor more than
Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) plus the cost, if any, of any damage to the
immobilization device. (Amended, Ordinance 2017-09, February 6, 2017)
I. This Section shall not apply to those who have entered into a payment
arrangement with the City for unpaid parking citations and are current on those
payments. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
71. DRIVER’S LICENSE SUSPENSIONS.
A. Once final determination of liability has been rendered in ten (10) separate
violations of Sections 11, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32,
33, 34, 35, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 48, of this Code against the owner of a
registered vehicle, the City may send a certified report to the Secretary of State
requesting that the registered owner’s drivers license be suspended.
B. Prior to the action set forth in subsection A, the City shall cause a notice of
impending driver's license suspension to be sent by first class mail to the address
of the registered owner of the cited vehicle(s) as recorded with the Illinois
Secretary of State or the state in which the vehicle is registered. Said notice shall
state that failure to pay the fine or penalty owing within forty-five (45) days of the
notice date will result in the City notifying the Secretary of State that the person is
eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under section 6-306.5 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended. The notice shall also state that the person may
obtain a computer generated copy of the ticket imposing a fine or penalty by
sending a self addressed, stamped envelope to the City along with a request for
the copy.
C. Upon receipt of the notice of impending driver’s license suspension, the registered
owner shall have twenty-one (21) days after the date of the notice to pay all fines
or to submit a written request for a hearing to present documentary evidence that
would conclusively disprove liability. Documentary evidence that would
conclusively disprove liability shall be based on the following grounds: (1) that all
fines for the violations cited in the notice of impending driver’s license
suspension have been paid in full; or (2) that the registered owner has not
accumulated ten or more final determinations of parking or standing violation
liability that were unpaid at the time the notice of impending drivers license
suspension was issued. The written request for a hearing must be submitted
within twenty-one (21) days after the date of the notice of impending driver’s
license suspension to the City of Decatur’s Legal Department. (Amended,
Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
D. Within ten (10) days after receipt of the written request for a hearing, the City
shall notify by certified mail, return receipt requested, the owner of record of said
vehicle of the date, time and location of an administrative hearing. A hearing
shall be scheduled and held, unless continued by order of the City’s hearing
officer, on designated days of each month. The hearing shall be scheduled not less
than seven (7) days and not more than thirty (30) days after notice thereof is
mailed. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard
at the hearing. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply and hearsay evidence
shall be admissible. The hearing shall be open to the public and recorded.
(Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
E. Upon expiration of the forty-five (45) days for payment, if the person named in
the notice has not paid the fine or has not prevailed at a hearing pursuant to
subsection C herein, the City shall prepare a certified report for the Secretary of
State on forms supplied by the Secretary of State, or in a manner that contains: (1)
The name, last known address and driver's license number of the person who
failed to pay the fine or penalty and the registration number of any vehicle known
to be registered to such person in this state, (2) The name of the City making the
report pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended,
(3) The statement that the City sent notice of impending driver's license
suspension to the person named in the report at the address recorded with the
Secretary of State, and (4) The date on which such notice was sent and the address
to which it was sent.
F. Whenever a person named in the certified report pays the previously reported
fines and penalties, or whenever the City determines that the original report was
in error, the City shall notify the Secretary of State of the same. A certified copy
of such notification shall also be given upon request and at no additional charge to
the person named therein.
G. A final determination of violation liability shall occur when payment in full of the
fine and penalties is made, or if not paid in full, after twenty-one (21) days after
the issuance of the citation has elapsed and no appeal has been filed with the City,
or if an appeal is filed within twenty-one (21) days after the issuance of the
citation, a final determination shall occur seven (7) days from the date of the
written response to the appeal.
72. REGISTERED OWNER. The fact that an automobile which is illegally parked in
violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is registered in the name of a person shall make
that person prima facie responsible for such violation and subject to the penalty therefore.
73. SETTLEMENT OF FINES.
A. Citations issued for violations of several sections in this Chapter may be settled for
the amount shown as follows:
Section Title Amount
11A Winter Parking Restrictions $25
18 Yellow Curb $25
19 Parking Spaces $25
20 Obstructive Parking $25
21A Oversized Vehicle Regulations – Central Business District $200
21B Night Parking Over-Sized Vehicles 10 PM to 6 AM $50
22 Parking Detached Trailers $50
23 No Parking Zone $25
24 Hours $25
25 See Section 73 B, below. Graduated
26 Truck and Passenger Zones; Permits $25
28 Handicapped Spaces $250
29 Improper Parking $25
30 Sale or Repair of Vehicles (no parking for) $50
31 Sales on Streets $25
32A-S Prohibited Parking $25
32T Parking in a Fire Lane $250
34 Public Buildings $25
35 Abandoned or Disabled Vehicles $50
36 Parking on a Posted Lot $50
38 Removal of Vehicle $250
40 Parking Next to a Parking Payment Device $10
41 Expired Parking Payment Device $10
42 Unlawful Extension of Parking Payment Device Time $25
49 Parking in a Reserved Parking Space $25
55 Reserved Parking $50
57 Parking Permit $50
59 Issuance of Permits $50
63 Parking in Spaces $25
66C Downtown Employee Parking Permits $50
Except for Section 28, the fine amount shall double if not paid within 7 days of the date of the
citation. The fine amount shall quadruple if not paid within 21 days of the date of the citation.
(Amended, Ordinance 2012-32, May 7, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2013-07, January 22, 2013)
(Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
B. Citations issued for violations of Section 25 of this chapter may be settled
as follows:
Citation Fine Schedule
Citation Number Fine After 7 Days After 21 Days
1 Free Free Free
2 $5 $10 $20
3 $10 $20 $40
4 $20 $40 $80
5 $40 $80 $160
6 $60 $120 $240
7 $80 $160 $320
8 $100 $200 $400
Additional Citations $100 $200 $400
The number of violations referred to herein so as to determine the proper settlement amount shall
be the number of violations occurring after May 1, 2012. The number of violations shall reset to
zero (0) after 12 months elapse without a citation being issued to the same vehicle with the same
registration.
C. Citations issued for violation of Sections 38 and 66 C may be settled for the fine
and fee amounts defined in those respective Sections.
D. If not settled as provided in this Section, fine shall be imposed upon conviction, as
elsewhere set out herein.
74. PARKING RATES AND FEES. The parking rates and fees required by several
sections in this Chapter shall be the amounts established as follows:
Section Title Amount
48 Temporary Reservation of Parking Space $10.00 per day per space
54 Pay to Park Spaces $0.25 per hour
56 A Monthly Charges – uncovered parking $15.00 per month
56 B Monthly Charges – covered parking $25.00 per month
60 Impoundment of Vehicle – processing fee $35.00 per impoundment
64 Conference or Convention Parking Permits $3.00 per space per day
65 B Downtown Resident Parking Permit – Class B $60.00 per month
66 B Downtown Employee Parking Permit $15.00 per month
66 B Downtown Employee Parking Permit Lot G $25.00 per month
The City Manager shall, from time to time, review the parking rates and fees established
in this section and recommend changes for City Council review and approval. (Amended,
Ordinance 2012-83, November 19, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2013-64; July 1, 2013)
75. COMPLAINT PROCEDURE. The registered owner of the vehicle that has been issued
a citation for violating any section of this Chapter, except Section 70, and 71, may appeal the
issuance of the citation in writing within 14 days of the time of the citation unless otherwise
designated in the ordinance. Oral appeals will not be accepted.
For violations of this Chapter with an initial fine less than the amount that makes the vehicle
eligible for immobilization and impoundment, such written appeal must be received by the
Department Director or designee of the Department of the City of Decatur responsible for issuing
the citation by said 14th day. Appeals will not be accepted on citations for which more than 14
days have elapsed from the date of issuance of the citation. Filing of an appeal shall stay
increases in the fine schedule specified in Section 73 herein, for a period of seven (7) days from
the date of the written response to the appeal. The decision of the Department Director shall be a
final and appealable administrative decision. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
For violations of this Chapter with an initial fine of an amount that makes the vehicle eligible for
immobilization and impoundment, an administrative hearing shall be held, pursuant to Chapter
29 of Decatur City Code. The city shall serve respondents with notice in a manner reasonably
calculated to give the respondent actual notice of the complaint, as outlined in Chapter 29,
Section 5, of Decatur City Code. Fine increases shall be stayed for a period of seven (7) days
from the date of the hearing officer’s decision and order. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-31, July 7,
2014)
All interested parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. The
formal rules of evidence shall not apply, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible. The hearing
shall be open to the public and recorded. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be a final and
appealable administrative decision. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-57, August 6, 2012) (Amended,
Ordinance 2014-31, July 7, 2014)
76. SEVERABILITY. If any part or parts of this Chapter are for any reason held to be
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
CHAPTER 34.1
OVERWEIGHT AND/OR
OVERDIMENSION VEHICLES
1. OVERWEIGHT AND/OR OVERDIMENSION VEHICLES. It shall be unlawful
for any person to be in control of, to drive, to park, or move on, upon or across or for the owner
to cause or knowingly permit to be parked, driven, or moved upon or across, any street or
highway under the jurisdiction of the City of Decatur, any vehicle or combination of vehicles
exceeding the size and weight limitations stated in 625 ILCS 5/15-102 (width), 625 ILCS 5/15-
103 (height), 625 ILCS 5/15-111 (weight).
2. GOVERNMENTAL VEHICLES. Size and weight limitations while operating on
City streets shall not apply to fire apparatus or equipment for snow or ice removal operations
owned or operated by or for any governmental body, and to any vehicle or combination of
vehicles operating under the terms of a valid oversize and/or dimension permit issued by the City
under the authority of Section 6 herein.
3. RESTRICTIONS. Where lower size and weight limits or other restrictions are
imposed by ordinance under authority of 625 ILCS 5/15-316 and 5/15-317, and signs indicating
such limitations or restrictions are posted, it shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle or
combination of vehicles in excess of such size or weight limitations or in violation of such
restrictions.
Revised 10/11
4. CONSTRUCTION VEHICLES. It shall be unlawful to operate any “construction
vehicle” as defined herein on any street in the City when signs are posted on that street
prohibiting “Construction Vehicle”. CONSTRUCTION VEHICLE shall be defined as any
vehicle over 10,000 pounds actual weight, registered gross weight (G.V.W.R.) that is required to
comply with 625 ILCS 5/12-712 and 5/12-713 identification required to be displayed.
5. PROSECUTION. Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of these sections
the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty and either or both the owner or the
driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation.
6. SAFETY INSPECTIONS. It shall be unlawful for any person to be in control of, to
drive, to park, to move on, upon or across or for the owner to knowingly permit to be parked
driven, or moved upon or across, any street or highway under the jurisdiction of the City, any
vehicle or combination of vehicles in violation of the requirements in 625 ILCS 5/12-101 (Rules
and Regulations).
7. PENALTIES. A. The owner and/or driver of a vehicle or combination of vehicles
found to be in violation of any of the provisions of Section 1 and/or Section 5 of this Chapter
shall, upon conviction, be fined under the terms set forth in 625 ILCS 5/15-113 (weight, height
and width).
B. The owner or driver of a vehicle or combination of vehicles found to be in violation
of any of the provisions of Section 6 of this Chapter shall be fined not less than Two Hundred
Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-69, October 31, 2011)
8. RULES AND REGULATIONS. The City Manager is authorized to cause to be
promulgated, published and enforced such reasonable rules, regulations and procedures, not in
conflict with said provisions, as may to said officer appear to be necessary or convenient to
administer the provisions of said Code and this Chapter and to carry out the intent and purpose
thereof and hereof.
CHAPTER 35
NUMBERING HOUSES
1. NUMBERING - BASE LINES. For the purpose of numbering the buildings, stores
and residences of the City, East and West Main Streets, and East and West Main Streets
extended, shall constitute the base of all streets or parts of streets running north or south
therefrom, and North and South Main Streets shall constitute the base of all streets or parts of
streets running east and west therefrom.
2. NAMES OF STREETS FIXED. All streets or parts of streets extending north or
northerly from said East and West Main Streets, shall be designated respectively by the prefix
"North" to the names of such streets or parts of streets and all parts of such streets extending
south or southerly from said East and West Main Streets, shall be designated respectively by the
prefix "South" to the names of such streets or parts of streets; all streets or parts of streets
extending east or easterly from said North and South Main Streets shall be designated
respectively by the prefix "East" to the names of such streets or parts of streets and all parts of
such streets extending west or westerly from said North and South Main Streets, shall be
designated respectively by the prefix "West" to the names of such streets or parts of streets.
3. MANNER OF NUMBERING ON NORTH AND SOUTH STREETS. All
buildings and lots situated on streets running north and south shall be numbered by commencing
at said East or West Main Street with number one hundred and increasing toward the north and
Revised 02/2017
Chapter 35
south at the rate of one hundred numbers to each and every block or square, the even numbers to
be placed on the east side and the odd numbers on the west side of said streets.
4. MANNER OF NUMBERING ON EAST AND WEST STREETS. All buildings
and lots situated on streets running east and west shall be numbered by commencing at said
North and South Main Streets with number one hundred and increasing towards the east and
west at the rate of one hundred numbers to each and every block or square, the even numbers to
be placed on the north side and the odd numbers on the south side of said streets.
5. MANNER OF DESIGNATING NUMBERS. All streets of the City shall be so
numbered as will best suit the original plat of the City and its several subdivisions and additions
as the same are now recorded in the Recorder's Office of the County of Macon. There shall be
one number for every ten (10) feet in each block or square, except where such block or square is
over five hundred feet in length, and in such case there shall be one number for every one-fiftieth
part of the length of said block or square, provided, however, that no building or lot need have
more than one number for each street upon which it abuts.
6. NUMBERS ON SHORT STREETS. All streets that do not touch or cross either of
said Main Streets shall be numbered in the same manner.
7. ASSIGNING PROPER NUMBERS. The Director of the Economic and Community
Development Department, or his or her designee, is hereby authorized to assign to each and
every building, and lot, its proper number in accordance with the preceding sections, and to
deliver to each occupant or owner thereof, free of charge, a certificate designating the number or
numbers so assigned.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-11, March 13, 2000)
Chapter 35
8. SIZE OF NUMBERS. New and existing buildings shall have approved address
numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly
legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast
with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or Alphabet letters.
Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches (4”) (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of
0.5 inch (12.7 mm). The code enforcement official may require additional numbers as needed.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-68, October 31, 2011)
9. PENALTY FOR FAILING TO PROPERLY NUMBER EXISTING
BUILDINGS. Any owner or occupant of any building now erected in the City, who, after
having received a certificate as hereinbefore provided, shall not, within thirty (30) days thereof,
number such building owned and occupied by him in conformity herewith, or who shall number
the same without having first obtained the proper number thereof shall be fined not less than One
Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense,
and each day after the thirtieth (30th) day as specified herein, or each day that such building shall
be numbered without first having obtained the proper number therefor, as provided herein, shall
be considered a separate offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-68, October 31, 2011)
10. FAILING TO NUMBER NEW BUILDINGS. Any owner or occupant of any
building hereinafter erected in the City who does not, within thirty (30) days after the same has
been erected, number the same according to the provisions hereof, or numbers the same without
first having obtained the proper number shall be fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars
($150.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each day after the
thirtieth (30th) day, as specified herein, or each day that such building shall be numbered without
Chapter 35
first having obtained the proper number therefor, as provided herein, shall be considered a
separate offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-68, October 31, 2011)
CHAPTER 36
TREES AND SHRUBS
1. TREES, SHRUBS, AND GROUND COVERS ON CITY PROPERTY. No trees,
shrubs, or ground covers may be planted, removed or pruned on City property, including streets
and rights-of-way, unless a permit therefore is obtained from the City Forester. Conditions for
issuance of permits by the City Forester shall be included in the Arboricultural Specifications
Manual, as adopted and amended by the Public Works Department and on file with the City
Clerk. The issuance of this permit shall not grant any property rights to the holder of the permit
and all property shall remain the property of the City of Decatur. Any work related to trees on
city property will be in accordance with the aforementioned Arboricultural Specifications
Manual.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-63, July 17, 2000)
2. TREES, SHRUBS, AND GROUND COVERS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
A. Trees, shrubs and ground covers on private property adjacent to a street, sidewalk,
and/or alley shall not interfere with either vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic using said street,
sidewalk, and/or alley or create a hazard to public safety.
B. The owner or occupant of property located at any corner formed by intersecting
streets shall maintain clear sight lines across said premises within the area formed by the
property lines adjacent to said corner and a diagonal line joining points on said intersecting
property lines twenty-five (25) feet from the point of their intersection. Within the above stated
area, no
Revised 11/11
Chapter 36
vegetation shall be allowed to grow above two (2) feet in height except trees whose branches are
removed to a height of eight (8) feet or more above the ground.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the real property owner or occupant to remove any
dead tree, dead part of a tree, or any healthy tree or part thereof which is a menace to public
safety.
D. The City Forester shall cause notice to be served on either the owner or occupant of
non-complying premises directing them to prune or remove vegetation so as to comply with the
requirements hereof. Said notice shall be served either by personal service or by certified mail,
return receipt requested. If the City is unable to serve the owner or occupant either by personal
service or by mail, notice may be given by placing or posting on said premises a notice directing
that such vegetation be pruned or removed. If, at the end of five (5) days from the date of receipt
of said notice, or five (5) days from the date of posting of same, said vegetation has not been
pruned or removed, the City Forester may, at his or her discretion, cause said vegetation to be
pruned or removed, at the property owners' expense, so as to comply with the requirements
hereof, in addition to seeking other penalties as provided herein and such other judicial relief as
may be available. For purposes of this section, "owner" is hereby defined as the last owner of
record of such premises as shown by the records in the Recorder's Office of Macon County.
3. PENALTIES. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor
more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-81; Ordinance No. 2011-69)
CHAPTER 37
CONSTRUCTION AND EXCAVATION IN STREETS
1. LICENSE REQUIRED. No person, firm or corporation, other than
employees of the City or persons or entities engaged in performing work pursuant to a contract to
which the City is a party or performing work as an employee of or pursuant to a contract with a
public utility franchised by the City, shall construct anything in or on, or make any excavation in,
or otherwise alter any street, alley, easement or other public place of the City for any purpose
without then being currently licensed by the City so to do.
2. APPLICATION FOR LICENSE. Licenses may be obtained from the City Clerk
upon application furnishing such information as may reasonably be required upon forms to be
furnished by such Clerk accompanied by a non-refundable, non-proratable fee of Seventy-five
Dollars ($75.00), a bond in the amount of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) conditioned as
elsewhere provided herein, and a certificate of insurance showing coverage as elsewhere
provided herein. Said license shall expire on January 31, next after the issuance thereof.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2016-81, November 21, 2016)
3. BOND. The principal of said bond shall be the licensee, with the City as obligee, and
conditioned upon the full compliance by the principal with all provisions of statute, ordinance,
standards, rule or regulation applicable to the work to be performed under said license, the
payment of all fees or charges accruing to the City connected therewith and against any faulty
workmanship or materials and to remain in effect for a period not less than three (3) years from
Revised 11/2016
the end of the license period during which work under said license was done, all in such form
and with such surety or security as may be approved by the Corporation Counsel which said
security may be in any form as is approved for Site Development or Subdivision Bonds.
4. INSURANCE. No such license shall be valid unless there is, and all privileges under
any issued license shall terminate automatically at anytime there ceases to be on file with the
Finance Department, a certificate evidencing a valid contract of insurance between the licensee
and a company authorized to do business in this State and approved by the Risk Manager. The
contractor may purchase insurance for the full limits required, or a combination of primary
policies for lesser limits and the remaining limits provided by an Umbrella or Excess policy.
Any policy providing excess limits shall name the City as additional insured and be primary.
The Certificate shall provide for not less than thirty (30) days notice to the City before
cancellation or modification of coverage can be effective.
The insurance contracts shall provide:
(a) Comprehensive General Liability on an occurrence basis for
premises, operations, completed operations and product liability
with limits not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000
in the aggregate and for completed operations and products. There
shall not be any exclusions limiting property damage, or barring
contractual liability, or barring explosion, collapse or underground
operations. The City will be named as an additional insured and
the licensee’s insurance must be primary.
(b) Commercial Auto Liability with limits of not less than
$1,000,000 Combined Single Limit for bodily injury and property
damage each occurrence. The policy shall also cover hired and
nonowned vehicles. The City will be named as an additional
insured and the licensee’s insurance must be primary.
(c) Workers Compensation insurance according to the provisions
of the Illinois Worker’s Compensation Act, as amended, with
Employer’s Liability of not less than $500,000 each accident,
$500,000 for Disease - policy limit and $500,000 for Disease -
each employee.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-04, February 7, 2005)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 89-42, May 1, 1989)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 89-35, April 7, 1989)
5. REVOCATION OF LICENSE. Such a license may be revoked or issuance or
renewal thereof refused by order of the City Manager if it appears to said officer that the licensee
or applicant has so performed as to indicate there exists reasonable cause so to do, but only after
an opportunity to be heard upon the matter has been afforded such licensee or applicant.
6. PERMIT REQUIRED. No construction, excavation or other alteration, other than
that done by employees of the City or persons or entities engaged in performing work pursuant to
a contract to which the City is a party or performing work as an employee of or pursuant to a
contract with a public utility franchised by the City, shall be done in or on any street, alley,
easement or other public place of the City for any purpose without a permit for that specific work
issued by the Engineering Division upon application thereto to be furnished thereby and
requiring such information as may be deemed by it to be necessary or desirable for it to enforce
the provisions hereof.
7. EMERGENCY. In the event of an emergency occurring during a time other than the
usual office hours of the Engineering Division, work may be commenced without first obtaining
a permit for the same, provided that application for such permit is made promptly upon the next
business day of said Division.
8. APPLICATION FOR PERMIT. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by
payment of the permit fee in the amount determined from the current schedules set out in the
Street Excavation and Restoration Specifications or the Street New Construction Specifications,
whichever is applicable, from time to time approved by the Council.6
9. EXCAVATION AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS. All work, materials,
restoration, processes, procedures, protections, fees, charges or reimbursements shall be done,
made, performed or supplied in any excavation or construction in any street, alley, easement or
other public place of the City in conformity and compliance with the provisions of the current
Street Excavation and Restoration Specifications or the Street New Construction Specifications,
whichever is applicable to the work, from time to time approved by the Council, the provisions
of the City Code and other applicable ordinances, and the provisions of the rules and regulations
authorized to be promulgated hereby.
10. RULES AND REGULATIONS. The City Manager is hereby authorized to from
time to time promulgate and enforce such rules and regulations as may be by said officer deemed
necessary or desirable to carry out the intent and purpose hereof, or to enable the proper
administration and enforcement of the provisions hereof and of said specifications.
11. PENALTY. Any person or entity making or causing any excavation, restoration or
other alteration, or removing or causing removal of any curb, or constructing or causing
construction of any sidewalk, curb, gutter, pavement, driveway or other structure or
improvement in or on any street, alley, easement or other public place of the City without a
license or permit, or by one not having a license or permit as required hereby, or other than in
conformity and compliance with the provisions hereof and of said standards, rules and
regulations made applicable thereto hereby shall be fined not less than One Hundred Fifty
Dollars ($150.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-69, October 31, 2011)
CHAPTER 38
STORMWATER ORDINANCE
1. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE. The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect,
maintain and enhance the environment of the City of Decatur and the public health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the City of Decatur by controlling discharges of pollutants to the City
of Decatur’s stormwater system, by maintaining and improving the quality of the receiving
waters into which the stormwater outfalls flow, including, without limitation, lakes, rivers,
streams, ponds, wetlands and groundwater of the City of Decatur and to enable the City of
Decatur to comply with the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit (NPDES)
and applicable regulations for storm water discharges in 40 CFR sect. 122.26.
2. DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall
apply: Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the
singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. The word "shall" is
mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. Words not defined in this
section shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in
the latest edition of Webster's Dictionary.
(a) “Agricultural” means related to or used for the production of food and fiber,
including but not limited to, general farming, livestock and poultry enterprises,
grazing, nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod production
and wild crop harvesting and includes lands used for on-site buildings and other
structures necessary to carry out such activities. Revised 04/21/2014
(b) “As built plans” means drawings depicting conditions as they were actually
constructed.
(c) “Base fee” means a fee incurred by each parcel in the City of Decatur for the
benefit of the stormwater system.
(d) “Best management practices” or “BMPs” means schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. BMPs
also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to
control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage
from raw material storage.
(e) “Channel” means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks
that conducts flowing water continuously or periodically.
(f) “City” means the City of Decatur, a municipal corporation organized under the
laws of the State of Illinois.
(g) “Combined Sewer” means a sewer designed to receive or receiving both
wastewater and storm or surface water.
(h) “Commencement of construction” means the initial disturbances of soils
associated with clearing, grading, or excavating activities or other construction
activities.
(i) “Community water” means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes,
reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wetlands, wells and other bodies of
surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of
the boundaries of the City of Decatur.
(j) “Construction site erosion and sediment control” means preventing or reducing
soil erosion and sedimentation from land disturbing activity, whether naturally
occurring or acting in connection with or promoted by human-made activities or
effects.
(k) “Contaminant” means any physical, chemical, biological, or radiological
substance or matter in water.
(l) “Credit” means a conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater service
charge to an individual property based upon: a) a reduction in stormwater runoff
from said property; b) a reduction in suspended solids leaving the property; or c)
implementation of an approved stormwater education program in accordance with
the provisions of this Chapter and the “City of Decatur Stormwater Credit
Regulations”.
(m) “Customer” means the owner of property located within the City of Decatur.
(n) “Design storm event” means a hypothetical storm event, of a given frequency
interval and duration, used in the analysis and design as associated with
stormwater runoff.
(o) “Developed Land” means property that has been altered from its natural state by
the addition of impervious area equal to at least one percent (1%) of the gross
area.
(p) “Discharge” means dispose, deposit, spill, pour, inject, seep, dump, leak or place
by any means, or that which is disposed, deposited, spilled, poured, injected,
seeped, dumped, leaked, or placed by any means including any direct or indirect
entry of any solid or liquid matter into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
(q) “Easement” means an acquired privilege or right of use or enjoyment that a
person, party, firm, corporation, municipality or other legal entity has in the land
of another.
(r) “Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU)” means the average impervious area of
residential property per dwelling unit located within the City as periodically
determined and established as provided in this Chapter, currently determined by
the City to be 4,500 square feet of impervious surface area. The number of
Equivalent Residential Units (ERU) on each property shall be calculated by the
Public Works Director or designee based on the most recent aerial photograph
available to the City of Decatur and/or impervious surface data from an approved
Site Plan for the property.
(s) “Erosion” (soil erosion) means the detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
(t) “Erosion and sediment control plan” means a written plan (including drawings or
other graphic representations) that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion
and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities.
(u) “ERU Rate” means that portion of the Stormwater Service Charge that is based on
the amount of impervious area on a property.
(v) “Excavation” means any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or
any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the resulting conditions.
(w) “Existing development” means buildings and other structures and impervious area
existing prior to Ordinance adoption.
(x) “Fill” means any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved to a
new location and shall include the resulting conditions.
(y) “Final stabilization” means that soil disturbing activities at the site have been
completed and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of, at least, 70
percent of the cover for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent
structures has been established or equivalent stabilization measures (such as the
use of riprap, gabions or geotextiles) have been employed.
(z) “Gross Area” means the entire area of a parcel, including both the impervious
and pervious areas.
(aa) “Hot spot” or “priority area” means an area where land use or activities generate
highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those
typically found in stormwater.
(bb) “Illicit connections” means illegal and/or unauthorized connections to the
municipal separate stormwater system whether or not such connections result in
discharges into that system.
(cc) “Illicit discharge” means any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater and not specifically exempted
in Section 23 of this Ordinance.
(dd) “Impervious surface” means any land cover that prevents rain or melting snow
from soaking into the ground, including but not limited to roofs (including
overhangs), roads, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking lots and swimming
pools. For purposes of this Chapter, all road, driveway or parking surfaces
including gravel surfaces shall be considered impervious, unless specifically
designed to encourage infiltration and approved by the Public Works Director.
(ee) “Incident of Noncompliance” or “ION” means any violation of the stormwater
pollution prevention plan observed during an inspection at a construction site.
(ff) “Land disturbing activity” means any land alterations or activities that may result
in soil erosion, sedimentation, or change in runoff including but not limited to
removal of ground cover, grading, excavating, and filling of land.
(gg) “Maintenance” means any activity necessary to keep a stormwater facility in
good working order so as to function as designed. Maintenance shall include
complete reconstruction of a stormwater facility if reconstruction is needed to
restore the facility to its original operational design parameters. Maintenance shall
also include the correction of any problem on the site property that may directly
impair the functions of the stormwater facility.
(hh) “Maintenance agreement” means a document recorded in the land records that
acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance
of stormwater management practices.
(ii) “Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)” (“Municipal separate
stormwater system”) means the conveyances owned or operated by the
municipality for the collection and transportation of stormwater, including the
roads and streets and their drainage systems, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches,
man-made channels, and storm drains.
(jj) “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit” or “NPDES permit”
means a permit issued pursuant to 33 U.S.C. 1342.
(kk) “New development” means structural development, including construction of a
new building or other structures; expansion or alteration of an existing structure
that results in an increase in the surface dimensions of the building or structure;
land-disturbing activities; or creation or expansion of impervious surface.
(ll) “Non-structural BMPs” means institutional and pollution prevention type
practices through education and source control, recycling, and maintenance that
prevent pollutants from entering stormwater runoff or reduce the volume of
stormwater requiring management.
(mm) “Notice of Intent” or “NOI” means the completed permit form submitted to the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with its rules and
regulations for the authorization to discharge stormwater from a construction site.
(nn) “Notice of Termination” or “NOT” means the completed form submitted to the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with its rules and
regulations where a construction site has been finally stabilized and all
stormwater discharges from the construction site authorized under a Notice of
Intent are eliminated.
(oo) “Off-site facility” means a structural BMP located outside the subject property
boundary described in the permit application for land development activity.
(pp) “On-site facility” means a structural BMP located within the subject property
boundary described in the permit application for land development activity.
(qq) “Peak flow” means the maximum instantaneous rate of flow of water at a
particular point resulting from a storm event.
(rr) “Person” means any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm or association and any municipal or private corporation organized
or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country.
(ss) “Pervious surface” means any land cover that permits rain or melting snow to
soak into the ground.
(tt) “Priority area” means “hot spot”, see definition for “hot spot”.
(uu) “Qualified person” or “qualified personnel” means a person or personnel
knowledgeable in the principles and practice of erosion and sediment controls,
such as a licensed professional engineer or other knowledgeable person who
possesses the skills to assess conditions at the construction site that could impact
storm water quality and to assess the effectiveness of any erosion and sediment
control measures selected to control the quality of stormwater discharges from the
construction activities.
(vv) “Runoff” means that portion of the precipitation on a drainage area that is
discharged from the area into the municipal separate stormwater system.
(ww) “Sediment” means solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension,
is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water,
gravity, or ice and has come to rest at a different site.
(xx) “Sedimentation” means the deposition of eroded soils at a site different from the
one where the erosion occurred.
(yy) “Single-Family Residential (SFR)” means land containing a single dwelling
structure containing one or more bedrooms, a bathroom, and kitchen facilities,
designed for human occupancy by a single family. SFR units may include
houses, zero-lot-line residential units such as duplexes or triplexes, manufactured
homes and mobile homes located on one or more individual lots or parcels of
land.
(zz) “Site” means the bounded area described in an erosion control plan or storm
water management plan.
(aaa) “Soils Report” means a study of soils on a subject property with the primary
purpose of characterizing and describing the soils. The soils report shall be
prepared by a qualified person, who shall be directly involved in the soil
characterization either by performing the investigation or by directly supervising
employees.
(bbb) “Stabilization” means providing adequate measures, vegetative and/or structural,
that will prevent erosion from occurring.
(ccc) “Storm Events” means the runoff, rainfall or flood occurrence having a
probability of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (e.g., a two-year event
has a 50 percent probability of being equaled or exceeded in a given year; a 10-
year event has a 10 percent probability; a 100-year event has a probability of 1
percent; etc.).
(ddd) “Stormwater” means the flow of water which results from, and which occurs
during and immediately following, a rainfall, snow-melt or ice-melt event.
(eee) “Stormwater management” means any measures taken to permanently reduce or
minimize the negative impacts of storm water runoff after land development
activities.
(fff) “Stormwater management plan” means the set of drawings and other documents
including the erosion and sediment plan that is part of the stormwater pollution
prevention plan (SWPPP) that comprise the information and specifications for the
programs, drainage systems, structures, BMPs, concepts and techniques to be
installed during the construction process to control pollutants in stormwater
discharges that will occur after construction operations have been completed.
(ggg) “Stormwater management system” means all publicly or privately owned
facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not
limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs,
inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins,
natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other
drainage structures.
(hhh) “Stormwater pollution prevention plan” or “SWPPP” means a written document
which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented
to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance
systems, and / or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable and assure
compliance with NPDES Permit No. ILR10 and ILR40.
(iii) “Stormwater runoff” means the waters derived from rains falling or snow-melt or
ice-melt occurring within a drainage area, flowing over the surface of the ground
and collected in channels, watercourses or conduits.
(jjj) “Stormwater Utility” means a utility established to generate a dedicated source of
funding for stormwater management system improvements where users pay a fee
for stormwater management, and including a fee based on discharge of
stormwater to the stormwater management system.
(kkk) “Structural BMPs” means practices to divert flows from exposed soils, store
flows or otherwise limit runoff and the discharges of pollutants from exposed
areas of a construction site.
(lll) “Surface water” includes waters upon the surface of the earth in bounds created
naturally or artificially including, but not limited to, streams, other water courses,
lakes and reservoirs.
(mmm)“Total maximum daily load” or “TMDL” means the sum of the individual waste
load allocations (WLAs) for point sources and load allocations (LAs) for non
point sources and natural background. If a receiving water has only one point
source discharger, the TMDL is the sum of that point source WLA plus the LAs
for any non point sources of pollution and natural background sources, tributaries,
or adjacent segments. TMDLs can be expressed in terms of either mass per time,
toxicity, or other appropriate measure.
(nnn) “Watercourse” means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water,
either natural or man-made, which gathers or carries surface water.
(ooo) “Watershed” means all the land area that contributes runoff to a particular point
along a waterway.
(Amended, Ordinance 2014-14, April 21, 2014)
3. LAND DISTURBANCE PERMITS REQUIRED. Every person shall comply with
the City of Decatur stormwater policy for runoff control. In addition, a land disturbance permit
will be required to be obtained from the City Engineer in the following cases:
(a) Land disturbing activity disturbs one (1) or more acres of land;
(b) Land disturbing activity of less than one (1) acre of land if such activity is part of
a larger common plan of development that affects one (1) or more acre of land;
(c) Land disturbing activity of less than one (1) acre of land, if in the discretion of the
City Engineer such activity poses a unique threat to water, or public health or
safety because the activity by itself or of a cumulative effect negatively impacts
water quality;
(d) The creation and use of borrow pits;
(e) The creation and use of stockpiles greater than fifty (50) cubic yards in volume.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-04, January 18, 2011)
4. BUILDING PERMIT. No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has
obtained a land disturbance permit where the same is required by this Ordinance.
5. EXEMPTIONS. The following activities are exempt from the land disturbance
permit requirement:
(a) Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life,
property, or natural resources.
(b) Additions or modifications to existing single family structures not subject to the
minimum standards as set forth in Section 3 of this Ordinance.
(c) Existing agricultural use of land involving:
(1) Any activity directly related to the planting, growing and harvesting of
agricultural crops; or
(2) Implementation of conservation measures approved by the USDA –
NRCS and the Macon County Soil and Water Conservation District; or
(3) The construction of agricultural structures not subject to the minimum
standards as set forth in Section 3 of this Ordinance.
(d) Industrial activities having separate NPDES Stormwater permits that are current
and for which they are in compliance.
6. WAIVERS. Every applicant shall provide a stormwater pollution prevention plan as
required by this Ordinance, unless a written request is filed to waive this requirement. Requests
to waive the stormwater pollution prevention plan requirements shall be submitted to the City
Engineer for approval.
7. CONDITIONS FOR WAIVER. The minimum requirements for the stormwater
pollution prevention plan may be waived in whole or in part upon written request of the
applicant, provided at least one of the following conditions applies:
(a) It can be demonstrated the proposed development is not likely to impair
attainment of the objectives of this Ordinance.
(b) Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of stormwater
discharges have been established in a stormwater management plan that has been
approved by the City Engineer.
(c) Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. The off-site
facility must be in place and designed to provide the level of stormwater control
that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices.
Further, the facility must be operated and maintained by an entity that is legally
obligated to continue the operation and maintenance of the facility.
(d) It is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that the waiver will not
lead to any of the following conditions downstream:
(1) Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures;
(2) Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation;
(3) Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life or property;
(4) Degradation of biological functions or habitat.
8. LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT NOT TO BE ISSUED WHERE WAIVER
REQUESTED. No land disturbance permit shall be issued where a waiver has been requested
until the waiver is granted. If no waiver is granted, the plans must be resubmitted with a
stormwater pollution prevention plan.
9. APPLICATION FOR A LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT.
(a) Each application shall include the following:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the property owner;
(2) The address and legal description of subject property including the
tax parcel number of the subject property;
(3) Name, address and telephone number of the contractor and any
subcontractor(s) who shall perform the land disturbing activity and
who shall implement the erosion and sediment control plan;
(4) A description of the nature, extent and purpose of the land
disturbing activity including the size of the area for which the
permit will be applicable;
(5) A description of the intended sequence of major activities which
disturb soils for major portions of the site (e.g. grubbing,
excavation, grading);
(6) The name of the receiving water(s), or if the discharge is through a
municipal separate storm sewer, the name of the municipal
operator of the storm sewer and the ultimate receiving water(s);
(7) Copy of the Notice of Intent submitted, if required, to the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency;
(8) The applicant shall obtain from any other state or federal agency
any other appropriate environmental permits that pertain to the
property. However, the inclusion of those permits in the
application shall not prohibit the City of Decatur from imposing
additional development requirements and conditions,
commensurate with this Ordinance, on the development of
property covered by those permits.
(b) Each application shall be accompanied by:
(1) A stormwater pollution prevention plan as required by NPDES IL R10
plus the additional information required by the City of Decatur. Said plan
shall include:
i. An erosion and sediment control plan as set forth in Section 15 of
this Ordinance;
ii. A storm water management plan as set forth in Section 16 of this
Chapter, providing for stormwater management during the
construction and after the construction has been finished.
(2) Payment of land disturbance permit and other stormwater management
pollution prevention plans fees, which shall be set by separate resolution
or ordinance.
10. REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF APPLICATION
(a) The City Engineer will review each application for a land disturbance permit to
determine its conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance. The City
Engineer shall provide one of the following responses to the applicant:
(1) Approval of the permit application;
(2) Approval of the permit application, subject to such
reasonable conditions as may be necessary to substantially
secure the objectives of this Ordinance, and issue the
permit subject to these conditions; or
(3) Denial of the permit application, indicating the reason(s) for the
denial.
(b) If the City Engineer has granted conditional approval of the land
disturbance permit, the applicant shall submit a revised plan that conforms
to the conditions established by the City Engineer. However, the applicant
shall be allowed to proceed with his land disturbing activity so long as it
conforms to conditions established by the City Engineer.
11. PERFORMANCE BOND OR PERFORMANCE SECURITY.
(a) The City of Decatur shall, at its discretion, require the submittal of a performance
security or performance bond prior to issuance of a permit to ensure the permit
holder conforms to the conditions and requirements of the approved stormwater
pollution prevention plan. The amount of the performance security or
performance bond shall be the total estimated construction cost of the structural
and non-structural BMPs approved under the permit plus 10 percent of the total
estimated costs.
The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to
complete work specified in the stormwater pollution prevention plan. The
applicant shall provide an itemized construction cost estimate complete with unit
prices which shall be subject to acceptance, amendment or rejection by the City
Engineer. Alternatively the City Engineer shall have the right to calculate the cost
of construction cost estimates.
(b) The performance security or performance bond shall be submitted and accepted
by the City Engineer prior to the issuance of a building permit by the City of
Decatur.
(c) The performance security or performance bond shall be released in full only upon
submission of record drawings and written certification by a registered
professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Illinois that the structural
and non-structural BMPs have been installed in accordance with the approved
plan and other applicable provisions of this Ordinance. The City Engineer will
make a final inspection of the BMPs to ensure it is in compliance with the
approved plan and the provisions of this Ordinance prior to the release of the
performance bond or performance security. Provisions for a partial pro-rata
release of the performance security or performance bond based on the completion
of various development stages may be made at the discretion of the City Engineer.
(d) Occupation permits will not be granted until all corrections to all BMPs have been
made and accepted by the City Engineer.
12. PERMIT DURATION. Every land disturbance permit shall expire and become
null and void if substantial work authorized by such permit has not commenced within one
hundred eighty (180) calendar days of issuance, or is not complete within eighteen (18) months
from the date of the commencement of construction.
13. BMP MANUAL FOR STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLANS.
The City of Decatur adopts as its best management practices (BMP) manual the following
publications, which are incorporated by reference in this Ordinance as is fully set out herein:
(a) Illinois Urban Manual, latest amendment prepared by the United States
Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Services.
This manual includes a list of acceptable BMPs including the specific
design criteria and operation and maintenance requirements for each
stormwater practice. The manual may be updated and expanded from time
to time, at the discretion of the governing body of the municipality, upon
the recommendation of the City Engineer, based on improvements in
engineering, science, monitory and local maintenance experience.
Stormwater facilities that are designed, constructed and maintained in
accordance with these BMP criteria will be presumed to comply with
requirements of NPDES Permit No. ILR10.
(b) “Illinois Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control” commonly referred to as the “Green Book”, latest version,
developed through the efforts of the Northeastern Illinois Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Steering Committee, chaired by Mr. James K.
Michels, P.E.
(c) Illinois Department of Transportation Erosion Control / NPDES Guidelines
(d) City of Decatur Stormwater Policy
(e) Other publications pertaining to best management practices and / or
erosion and sediment control as may be approved, in writing, by the City
Engineer.
14. STANDARDS AND PERFORMANCE CRITERIA FOR STORMWATER
POLLUTION PREVENTION PLANS. Unless granted a waiver or judged by the City
Engineer to be exempt, the following performance criteria shall be addressed for the stormwater
pollution prevention plan to permanently reduce or minimize the negative aspects of stormwater
runoff after land development activities at all sites.
(a) All site designs shall control the stormwater discharge in compliance with City of
Decatur requirements.
(b) The stormwater pollution prevention plan shall be designed, at a minimum, for a
storm event equal to or greater than a 25-year 24-hour rainfall event.
(c) The management practices, controls and other provisions contained in the
stormwater pollution prevention plan must be at least as protective as the
requirement contained in the Illinois Urban Manual.
(c) Watercourses shall be protected from degradation through the application of
recommended design and construction guidelines in the BMP manual.
(c) Prior to or during the site design process, applicants for land disturbance permits
shall consult with the City Engineer to determine if they are subject to additional
stormwater pollution prevention plan requirements which may include stormwater
discharges:
(1) To waters for which there is a TMDL allocation for sediment or a parameter
that addresses sediment (such as total suspended solids, turbidity, or siltation);
(2) To waters listed in the Illinois 2004 303(d) list. This includes Lake Decatur
and its tributaries, the Sangamon River below the Lake Decatur Dam and
Stevens Creek;
(3) To critical areas with sensitive resources (i.e. swimming beaches, recharge
areas, water supply reservoirs) that may be subject to additional performance
criteria, or may need to utilize or restrict certain stormwater pollution
prevention practices;
(4) From “hot spots” that may require the application of specific structural BMPs
and pollution prevention practices.
15. EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN REQUIREMENTS. The
erosion and sediment control plan shall accurately describe the potential for soil erosion and
sedimentation problems resulting from land disturbing activity and shall explain and illustrate the
measures that are to be taken to control these problems. The length in time and the complexity
of the plan is to be commensurate with the size of the project, severity of the site condition, and
potential for off-site damage. The plan shall be sealed by a qualified person. The plan shall also
conform to the requirements found in the BMP manual as referenced in Section 13 of this
Ordinance, and shall include at least the following:
(a) Project Description - Briefly describe the intended project and proposed land
disturbing activity including number of units and structures to be constructed and
infrastructure required.
(b) A topographic map with contour intervals of five (5) feet or less showing present
conditions and proposed contours resulting from land disturbing activity.
(c) All existing drainage ways, including intermittent and wet-weather. Include any
designated floodways or flood plains.
(d) A general description of existing land covers. Individual trees and shrubs do not
need to be identified.
(e) Stands of existing trees as they are to be preserved upon project completion,
specifying their general location on the property. Differentiation shall be made
between existing trees to be preserved, trees to be removed and proposed planted
trees. Tree protection measures must be identified, and the diameter of the area
involved must also be identified on the plan and shown to scale. Information
shall be supplied concerning the proposed destruction of exceptional and historic
trees in setbacks and buffer strips, where they exist. Complete landscape plans
may be submitted separately.
(f) Approximate limits of proposed clearing, grading and filling.
(g) Approximate flows and location of existing stormwater leaving any portion of the
site.
(h) A general description of existing soil types and characteristics and any anticipated
soil erosion and sedimentation problems resulting from existing characteristics.
(i) Location, size and layout of proposed stormwater and sedimentation control
improvements.
(j) Proposed drainage network.
(k) Proposed drain tile or waterway sizes.
(l) Approximate flows leaving site after construction and incorporating water run-off
mitigation measures. The evaluation must include projected effects on property
adjoining the site and on existing drainage facilities and systems. The plan must
address the adequacy of outfalls from the development. When flows are
concentrated the plan must address the capacity of waterways, if any, accepting
stormwater off-site; and what measures, including infiltration, sheeting into
buffers, etc., are going to be used to prevent the scouring of waterways and
drainage areas off-site, etc.
(m) The projected sequence of work represented by the grading, drainage and
sedimentation and erosion control plans as related to other major items of
construction, beginning with the initiation of excavation and including the
construction of any sediment basins or retention facilities or any other structural
or non-structural BMPs.
(n) Specific remediation measures to control erosion and sedimentation run-off.
Plans shall include detailed drawings of all control measures used; stabilization
measures including vegetation and non-vegetation measures, both temporary and
permanent, will be detailed. Detailed construction notes and a maintenance
schedule shall be included for all control measures in the plan.
(o) Specific details for the construction of rock pads, wash down pads, and settling
basins for controlling erosion; road access points; eliminating or keeping soil,
sediment, and debris on streets and public ways at a level acceptable to the City
Engineer. Soil, sediment, and debris brought onto streets and public ways must
be removed by the end of the work day by machine, broom or shovel to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer. Failure to remove the sediment, soil or debris
shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance.
(p) Proposed structures; location (to the extent possible) and identification of any
proposed additional buildings, structures or development on the site.
(q) Requirement that qualified personnel shall inspect disturbed areas of the
construction site that have not been finally stabilized, structural control measures,
and locations where vehicles or equipment enter or exit the site at least once every
seven calendar days and within 24 hours of the end of a storm that is 0.5 inches or
greater or equivalent snowfall.
16. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS. The storm water
management plan shall include sufficient information to allow the City Engineer to evaluate the
environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed
development of the site, both present and future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness
and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing stormwater generated at the project
site. To accomplish this goal the stormwater management plan shall be prepared in accordance
with the City of Decatur Storm Drainage Policy and include the following:
(a) Soils information when a stormwater management control measure depends on
the hydrologic properties of soils (e.g., infiltration basins), then a soils report shall
be prepared by a qualified person and submitted with the plan. The soils report
shall be based upon on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles and soil survey reports.
The number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined
based on what is needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soil types
present at the location of the control measure.
(b) A permanent elevation benchmark shall be identified in the plans to assist in the
periodic inspection of the facility using the North American Vertical Datum of
1988 (NAVD).
(c) A landscaping plan detailing the revegetation of the site after the construction is
finished as set forth in Section 17 of this Ordinance.
(d) A maintenance plan for all stormwater management facilities to ensure the
continued performance of the facilities subject to the approval of the City
Engineer. The plan shall:
(1) Identify the parts or components of said facilities that need to be
maintained and inspected;
(2) Provide detailed maintenance and repair procedures for the said facilities;
(3) Identify necessary training, skills or certifications that may be required to
maintain, operate or repair any of the said facilities;
(4) Provide that the minimum maintenance and repair needs include, but are
not limited to:
i. The removal of silt, litter, landscape wastes and
other debris which adversely impacts the effectiveness of the
said facilities;
ii. The management of landscaped areas integral to the said
facilities including the cutting of grass, trimming of bushes
and trees or the removal of vegetation overgrowth that is
not incorporated into the storm water management plan;
iii. The replacement of landscape vegetation and damaged or
failed facilities;
iv. The cleaning of storm drainage inlets, pipes and structures;
v. Revising and implementing revisions or additional
maintenance procedures to address inadequacies of the
facilities.
(5) Provide for the regular periodic review, inspection and evaluation of the
effectiveness of the maintenance program by qualified personnel for the
purpose of documenting maintenance needs. Such reviews and
inspections shall be conducted at least once every year after the
construction is finished;
(6) Provide for established reporting procedures;
(7) Provide that maintenance needs are addressed in a timely manner.
(e) An executed maintenance agreement as agreed to by the City Engineer that
assigns the responsibility for compliance with the maintenance plan required in
paragraph (d) of this Section to the owner of the property on which the
stormwater facilities are located to ensure compliance with the purpose and
requirements of this Ordinance. Said agreement shall be a part of the owner’s
declaration and by appropriate notation referenced on the plat and:
(1) Include as part of said agreement the maintenance plan as approved by the
City Engineer;
(2) Provides that the property owner will arrange to have the periodic
inspection of the stormwater facilities specified in the maintenance plan
conducted by a qualified person who will submit a sealed report of the
inspection to the City Engineer;
(3) Grant permission to the City Engineer to enter the property at reasonable
times and inspect the stormwater facility to ensure that it is being properly
maintained;
(4) Provide that the property owner shall be responsible for additional
maintenance needs consistent with the needs and standards outlined in the
Illinois Urban Manual;
(5) Provide that maintenance needs must be addressed in a timely manner, on
a schedule determined by the City Engineer;
(6) Provide that if the property is not maintained in compliance with the
approved schedule, the City Engineer shall have the authority to have the
maintenance work performed at the City’s expense, and bill the same to
the property owner which shall be a lien against the property.
(f) Dedication of easements necessary to ensure access to the site for the purpose of
maintenance and inspection of the storm water management facilities. These
easements must be binding on the current property owner and all subsequent
owners of the property and must be properly recorded as a commitment against
the property.
(g) The City shall have the discretion to accept the dedication of any existing or
future stormwater management facility, provided such facility meets the
requirements of this Ordinance, and includes adequate and perpetual access and
sufficient areas, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular
maintenance. Any stormwater facility accepted by the City must also meet the
City’s construction standards and any other standards and specifications that
apply to the particular stormwater facility in question.
17. LANDSCAPING AND STABILIZATION REQUIREMENTS.
(a) Any area of land from which the natural vegetative cover has been either partially
or wholly cleared by development activities shall be revegetated according to a
plan approved by the City Engineer.
(b) A plan for establishing permanent vegetative cover to stabilize disturbed or
exposed areas must be submitted with the stormwater pollution prevention plan.
The plan shall describe the vegetative stabilization and management techniques to
be used at a site after construction is completed using BMPs. This plan will
explain how the site will be stabilized after construction, who will be responsible
for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed
to ensure adequate vegetative cover is preserved.
(c) Where it is required by the BMP, this plan must be prepared by a registered
Landscape Architect in the State of Illinois.
18. CONSTRUCTION MAINTENANCE, INSPECTION AND REPORTING
RESPONSIBILITY.
(a) The permittee must notify the City Engineer in advance of the commencement of
construction.
(b) The permittee shall have inspections of the management practices, controls and
other provisions contained in the stormwater pollution prevention plan conducted
by qualified personnel acceptable to the City Engineer. Said inspections shall be
conducted and documented and written reports prepared in accordance with the
NPDES Permit No. ILR10 that contain, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) The date and location of the inspection;
(2) Name of inspector;
(3) Type of inspection. Whether it is a weekly inspection or following
a precipitation event in excess of 0.5 inches;
(4) Name of contractor and, as applicable, subcontractors;
(5) Project name;
(6) NPDES permit number;
(7) Whether all temporary and permanent erosion and sediment
controls in the stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) or
as subsequently directed by City Engineer are in place and in
compliance with the SWPPP;
(8) Whether all temporary and permanent erosion and sediment
controls that have been installed are operating correctly;
(9) Whether erosion and sediment controls are being properly
maintained;
(10) Whether there is tracking of sediment from locations where
vehicles and equipment enter and leave project site;
(11) Whether additional controls, adjustments or maintenance directed
as a result of previous inspection have been implemented within
seven calendar days;
(12) Any incidents of non-compliance and what corrective action has
been undertaken and completed.
19. RECORDS OF INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES. The
permittee shall retain copies of the stormwater pollution plan and all reports and notices required
by it, and records of all data used to satisfy the conditions of the stormwater pollution prevention
plan for a period of at least three (3) years. The City may extend this period at any time prior to
the expiration of the three year period. These records shall be made available to the City
Engineer during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request.
20. FAILURE TO MEET OR MAINTAIN DESIGN OR MAINTENANCE
STANDARDS. If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the design or maintenance
standards required for stormwater facilities under this Ordinance, the City Engineer, after
reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by
performing the necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. In the event the
stormwater management facility becomes a danger to the environment or the public health,
safety and welfare, the City Engineer shall notify, in writing, the party responsible for
maintenance of the stormwater management facility. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible
person shall have seven (7) calendar days to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in an
approved manner. In the event that corrective action is not undertaken within that time, the City
of Decatur shall take necessary corrective action. The cost of any action by the City of Decatur
under this section shall be charged to the responsible party.
21. EXISTING LOCATIONS AND DEVELOPMENTS. All locations and
developments at which land disturbing activities have occurred prior to the enactment of this
Ordinance and meeting the criteria established in Section 3 of this Ordinance shall comply as
follows:
(a) Denuded areas must be vegetated or covered under the standards and guidelines
specified in the BMP manual and on a schedule acceptable to the City Engineer.
(b) Cuts and slopes must be properly covered with appropriate vegetation and/or
retaining walls constructed.
(c) Drainage ways shall be properly covered in vegetation or secured with rip-rap,
channel lining, etc., to prevent erosion.
(d) Trash, junk, rubbish, etc. shall be cleared from drainage ways.
(e) Stormwater runoff shall be controlled to the extent reasonable to prevent pollution
of local waters. Such control measures may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(1) Ponds
i. Detention pond
ii. Extended detention pond
iii. Wet pond
iv. Alternative storage measures
(2) Constructed wetlands
(3) Infiltration systems
i. Infiltration/percolation trench
ii. Infiltration basin
iii. Drainage (recharge) well
iv. Porous pavement
(4) Filtering systems
i. Catch basin inserts/media filter
ii. Sand filter
iii. Filter/absorption bed
iv. Filter and buffer strips
(5) Open channel
i. Swale
(f) The City Engineer shall in writing notify the owners of existing locations and
developments of specific drainage, erosion or sediment problems affecting such
locations and developments, the actions required to correct those problems, and
specify a reasonable time for compliance.
22. INSPECTION OF EXISTING FACILITIES. The City Engineer may, to the
extent authorized by state and federal law, establish inspection programs to verify that
stormwater management facilities, including those built before as well as after the adoption of
this Ordinance, are functioning within design limits. These inspection programs may be
established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random
inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection
of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other
contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with
higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are
more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of the municipality’s NPDES
stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or
safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair
records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage
control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other BMPs.
23. ILLICIT DISCHARGES. For all water generated on developed or undeveloped
land entering the municipality’s separate storm sewer system, no person shall introduce or cause
to be introduced into the municipal separate storm sewer system any discharge that is not
composed entirely of stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any nonstormwater
discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited except as
described as follows:
(a) Uncontaminated discharges from the following sources:
(1) Water line and fire hydrant flushing or other potable water sources;
(2) Landscape irrigation water or lawn watering with potable water;
(3) Rising ground water;
(4) Ground water infiltration;
(5) Pumped groundwater;
(6) Discharges from potable water sources;
(7) Foundation drains;
(8) Air conditioning condensate;
(9) Irrigation water, (except for wastewater irrigation);
(10) Springs;
(11) Water from crawl space pumps;
(12) Footing drains;
(13) Storm sewer cleaning water;
(14) Water from individual residential car washing;
(15) Routine external building washdown which does not use detergents;
(16) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(17) Dechlorinated pH neutral swimming pool discharges;
(18) Residual street wash water;
(19) Discharges or flows from fire fighting activities;
(20) Dechlorinated water reservoir discharges;
(21) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spilled material has been removed),
and;
(22) Any other uncontaminated water source.
(b) Discharges specified in writing by the City Engineer as being necessary to protect
public health and safety.
(c) Dye testing is an allowable discharge if the City Engineer has so specified in
writing.
24. PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. The construction, use,
maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the separate municipal storm sewer
system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections
made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices
applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
25. ELIMINATION OF STORMWATER POLLUTANTS BY THE USE OF BEST
MANAGEMENT PRACTICES. Any person responsible for a property or premises, which is,
or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at the person's
expense, the BMPs necessary to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal
separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent
practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section.
26. NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as
soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response
for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which
are resulting in, or may result in, illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the
municipal separate storm sewer system, the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the
discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous
materials the person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, the person
shall notify the City Engineer in person or by telephone or facsimile no later than the next
business day. Notifications in person or by telephone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the City Engineer within three (3) business days of the telephone notice.
If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment,
the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the
discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at
least three (3) years.
27. STORMWATER UTILITY AND STORMWATER FUND
(A) ESTABLISHMENT OF A STORMWATER UTILITY AND A
STORMWATER FUND:
1. A stormwater utility is hereby established. The purpose of the
stormwater utility shall be to provide for the management, protection,
control, regulation, use and enhancement of the stormwater systems and
facilities owned or operated by the City.
2. The management and supervision of the stormwater utility shall be
under the direction of the Public Works Director.
3. A Stormwater Fund is hereby established. Revenues of the
stormwater utility deposited into the Stormwater Fund shall be used for
purposes of the stormwater utility. Expenditures may include stormwater
system construction, repair, maintenance, improvements, education and
related items associated therewith including but not limited to capital debt
retirement, including interest, engineering, legal costs and other appropriate
administrative charges.
(B) SCOPE OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE STORMWATER UTILITY:
The stormwater utility shall be responsible for the operation, maintenance,
management and improvement of the stormwater system owned by the city
including all activities required by the NPDES stormwater permit.
(C) SERVICE CHARGE
1. Charge Established: A Stormwater Service Charge (SWSC) is
hereby established effective May 1, 2014, to cover the costs of
supervision, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance, control and
use of the stormwater system described herein and also the costs of
supervising and regulating the stormwater system. The SWSC shall be
considered a debt of the owner of every lot, building or premises in the
City of Decatur. The SWSC shall be a lien upon the lot or land against
which it is charged. The City may file suit to recover the same, including
fine and court costs, as herein provided.
2. Determination of Stormwater Service Charge: The SWSC shall
consist of a base fee and a fee per ERU, which fees shall be determined by
the City Council.
3. Only the base fee of the SWSC will be incurred by a property if the
property retains all stormwater on the property or if all stormwater from
the property drains out of the City of Decatur corporate boundary and does
not re-enter into the City of Decatur stormwater system.
4. Owner Responsible: The owner(s) of the premises to be served
shall be responsible for the payment of all charges for stormwater service
thereto and said owner(s) and any occupant(s) of the premises, if other
than the owner(s), shall be liable therefore. The provisions of this code and
other ordinances, rules, regulations, and directives of the City pertaining to
stormwater service shall be applicable to owners and occupants alike.
(D) APPLICABILITY
1. All property in, or partially in, the City containing developed land
from which runoff flows into any publicly owned storm water facility,
including but not limited to storm sewers, combined sewers, streets,
roadways, bridges, and ditches located within the City shall incur the
SWSC.
2. Since public right of ways form part of the stormwater conveyance
system, no SWSC shall be charged for public right of ways, and they shall
be exempt from the SWSC. For purposes of this Chapter, public right of
ways shall include public streets and sidewalks located within the
corporate limits of the City of Decatur and owned or controlled by the
United States government, the State of Illinois, Macon County, the
Decatur Park District, the Decatur School District, the City of Decatur, or
any Township, and privately owned streets that are the equivalent of a
public street, but not parking lots.
3. Parcels annexed to the City after the effective date of this
ordinance shall be subject to the SWSC.
(E) RATES
1. Single-Family Residential property: Owners of developed single
family residential properties, one (1) acre or less in gross area, shall be
required to pay for stormwater services according to the following
formula:
Monthly Charge = Base Fee + Usage Fee
(Usage Fee = 1 ERU x ERU Rate)
The monthly fees shall be:
2. Parcels other than Single Family Residential and residential parcels
greater than one (1) acre in gross area: Owners of developed parcels other
than single family residential shall incur a SWSC according to the
following formula:
Base Fee $3.00
Usage Fee $0.67
Total Monthly Fee $3.67
Monthly Charge = Base Fee + Usage Fee
(Usage Fee = number of ERUs x ERU Rate)
The monthly fees shall be:
3. Effective October 1, 2014, the Base Fee shall be $3.00.
4. Effective October 1, 2015, the Usage Rate shall be $0.67 per ERU.
5. Qualified credits shall reduce the amount of ERUs chargeable to a
parcel according to the provisions in the following section and the Storm
Water Credit Regulations.
(F) EXEMPTIONS AND CREDITS APPLICABLE TO SERVICE CHARGES.
1. Every parcel in, or partially in, the City containing developed land
from which runoff flows into any publicly owned storm water facility,
including but not limited to storm sewers, streets, roadways, bridges, and
ditches located within the City shall be required to pay a SWSC.
2. Public rights of way owned by the United States government, the
City of Decatur, Macon County, the State of Illinois, the Decatur Park
District, the Decatur Public School District, or any Township, and any
privately owned streets that are the equivalent of a public street, which
form part of the storm water conveyance system, and which are located
within the corporate limits of the City of Decatur shall be exempt. Parking
lots and driveways shall not be exempt.
3. The SWSC will be waived for all tax-exempt properties from the
effective date of this Ordinance through September 30, 2015. Thereafter,
Base Fee $3.00
Usage Fee $0.67 x Number of ERUs
Total Monthly Fee $3.00 + $0.67xERUs
tax exempt properties shall be required to pay for stormwater services in
accordance with Section D above.
4. The ERU rate will be waived for all properties from the effective
date of this Ordinance through September 30, 2015.
5. The Public Works Director shall grant SWSC credits for properties
that reduce the impact of or eliminate stormwater runoff from said
property. Credits shall include:
a. Zero Discharge Credit: Stormwater service credits equivalent to
the impervious area(s) of the property from which no stormwater
enters the City’s stormwater system because stormwater is
contained entirely on the property and is never introduced into the
City’s stormwater system. The Zero Discharge Credit shall be
further defined in the Stormwater Credit Regulations.
b. Direct Discharge Credit: Stormwater service credits equivalent to
the impervious area(s) of the property from which no stormwater
enters the City stormwater system because stormwater flows away
from the property, never entering the City’s stormwater system.
The Direct Discharge Credit shall be further defined in the
Stormwater Credit Regulations.
c. Individual Residential Credit: Stormwater service credits will be
available for residential properties that implement stormwater
control measures such as rain gardens, on-site stormwater storage,
pervious pavement or vegetated filter strips. Such measures must
reduce runoff by at least 25% in order to qualify for a credit. The
Individual Residential Credit shall be further defined in the
Stormwater Credit Regulations.
d. Quantity Reduction Credit: Stormwater service credits will be
available for non-residential properties that maintain runoff
facilities or controls, such as detention or retention facilities, which
significantly restrict stormwater runoff rates released from their
property. Credits will be available for the detention of the 2-year
storm, 50-year storm and 100-year storm as defined by Illinois
State Water Survey’s Rainfall Distributions and Hydroclimatic
Characteristics of Heavy Rainstorms in Illinois (Bulletin 70). The
Quantity Reduction Credit shall be further defined in the
Stormwater Credit Regulations.
e. Water Quality Credit: Stormwater service credits will be available
for properties that hold an Industrial NPDES permit or use best
management practices to reduce the total suspended solids leaving
the property by 75%. The Water Quality Credit will be further
defined in the Stormwater Credit Regulations.
f. Education Credit: Stormwater service credits will be available for
all public and private primary, elementary and secondary schools
that provide stormwater education curricula to at least 25% of their
student body. The curricula shall meet the description of
“Classroom Education on Stormwater” as defined by the United
Stated Environmental Protection Agency and must be approved by
the Public Works Department. The Education Credit shall be
further defined in the Stormwater Credit Regulations.
g. Stormwater credits shall reduce the number of ERUs attributable to
the property.
6. The Stormwater Credit Regulations shall define the features of a
property that reduce stormwater runoff from the property. Such features
may include, but are not limited to, infiltrating stormwater onsite, and/or
installing stormwater Best Management Practices. The regulations shall
also define the process by which property owners may request stormwater
service credits.
7. Any credit allowed against the storm water service charge is
conditioned upon continuing compliance with the City of Decatur
Stormwater Credit Regulations and this Chapter.
(G) PAYMENT.
1. The SWSC shall be added to the municipal utilities bill sent by the
City to the owner and/or occupant of each lot, building and premises in
accordance with Chapter 64 of the City Code, and said SWSC shall be
separately denoted thereon, except as provided in subsection (2) below.
The SWSC shall be due and payable at the same time as the municipal
utilities bill on which said SWSC appears, as required by said Chapter 64,
Water Service. Penalties and late charges for delinquent payments listed
therein shall be fully applicable to delinquent payments of the SWSC.
The first dollars of each payment on a municipal utility bill shall be
applied to the SWSC, regardless of any direction to the contrary by a
payer.
2. Owners of lots, buildings or premises not provided water by the
City shall be billed separately for the SWSC. The timelines and late
charges for payment set out in said Chapter 64, and referred to in
subsection (1) above shall be fully applicable thereto.
(H) APPEALS: A property owner who believes a provision of this article has been
applied in error may appeal in the following manner:
1. The appeal must be filed in writing with the Public Works
Director. The following requirements shall apply:
a. For appeals involving the amount of impervious area on a
property, photographs and aerial imagery may be considered as
evidence.
b. For appeals involving the amount of drainage flowing away from
the City or not leaving the site the Appellant shall include a survey
prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer
containing information on the total property area, the impervious
surface area, and any storm water management features, such as
detention ponds or conditions which influence the hydrologic
response of the property to rainfall events, including but not
limited to the topography of the property.
c. Appeals involving credit eligibility and the amount of credits
applied to a property shall comply with City of Decatur
Stormwater Credit Regulations.
2. No appeal will be considered unless received not later than the
thirtieth (30th) day following the date of appellant’s bill for SWSC. The
Public Works Director shall conduct a technical review of the conditions
on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within sixty (60) days.
3. In response to an appeal, the Public Works Director may adjust the
storm water service charge and any late payment penalties applicable to a
property in conformance with the general purpose and intent of this article.
4. The decision of the Public Works Director may be appealed to the
City Manager. No such appeal will be considered, however, unless
received not later than the thirtieth (30th) day following the date of the
adverse decision. Appeals must be in writing and shall include a detailed
explanation of the basis for the appeal. The City Manager shall issue a
written decision on the appeal within sixty (60) days.
5. Appeal of the decision of the City Manager may be made pursuant
to the Illinois Administrative Review Act.
(I) PARTIAL INVALIDITY. The provisions of this Ordinance are severable, and
if any of the provisions shall be held unlawful by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions.
(Amended, Ordinance 2014-14, April 21, 2014)
28. ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY. The Public Works Director shall be responsible
for enforcing the provisions in this Ordinance. The Public Works Director is also hereby
authorized to promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to supplement this
Ordinance for effective enforcement, provided such rules and regulations shall not be valid until
they have been filed in the office of the City Clerk for not less than ten (10) days before their
respective dates. Said regulations may include a Stormwater Credit Manual. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009) (Amended, Ordinance 2014-14, April 21, 2014)
29. PENALTY. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act declared unlawful
under this Ordinance, to violate any provision of this Ordinance, to violate the provisions of any
permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance or to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
communication or notice to abate or take corrective action as required. Any person or entity
found to be in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance of the Code shall be fined not less
than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for
each offense, and each day upon which a violation occurs or is allowed to continue, or a
condition is not brought into compliance after notice, shall be viewed and may be prosecuted as a
separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties set forth above, the City may issue a
stop work order for any person in violation of any provision of this Ordinance. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2011-69; Ordinance No. 2011-04)
30. OTHER REMEDIES. The provisions or imposition of the penalty aforesaid shall
not preclude the institution of appropriate action to prevent, abate or stop acts, activities, work or
maintenance not in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. In addition to any other
remedy that may be provided otherwise, the provisions of this Ordinance may be enforced in any
appropriate action, by injunction or otherwise.
CHAPTER 39
SUB-SIDEWALK SPACE
1. PERMIT REQUIRED - TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT. No person, firm or
corporation shall use any space underneath the surface of any street or other public ground or
construct or maintain any structure thereunder without first obtaining a permit so to do from the
City, issued by the Public Works Director. No permit or any right or privilege thereunder shall
be transferred or assigned except upon consent of the said officer. Such permits are personal to
the permittee and do not run with the land, and do not create any right, title or interest in the
public ground so occupied.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-63, July 17, 2000)
2. APPLICATION. Applications for such permits shall be made to the Public Works
Director stating specifically the space desired, its breadth and depth, the use intended to be made
thereof and the structure to be built therein. No permits shall be issued hereunder for the use of
any space under the surface of the roadway of any street or other public ground.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-63, July 17, 2000)
3. PUBLIC LIABILITY INSURANCE. Before a permit is issued, the applicant must
obtain a public liability policy, with the City as a named insured, in the minimum amounts of
$1,000,000 per occurrence, and $1,500,000 aggregate, for bodily injury and property damage
combined, protecting and insuring the City against loss by reason of accidents arising out of
construction, operating and maintenance of said sub-sidewalk space, including the surface of the
Revised 10/11
Chapter 39
sidewalk over said sub-sidewalk space and the sidewalk in front of the premises involved. A
certificate of such insurance must be filed with the City. The policy shall have a clause that said
insurance cannot be terminated without a previous thirty (30) day notice to the City.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 89-35, April 7, 1989)
4. RELEASE OF LIABILITY. Any permittee who shall convey the abutting property
in fee may notify the City Manager in writing of such conveyance and of the name and address
of the purchaser thereof, in which case all liability under any bond theretofore given by such
permittee shall cease and determine, except as to acts happening or causes of action accruing
prior to the giving of such notice.
5. NEW BOND WHEN REQUIRED. Whenever the City Manager shall be of the
opinion that the sureties on any bond given for any permit issued hereunder have become
insufficient, a new bond for such permit shall thereupon be filed, with sureties to be approved by
the City Manager.
6. DISTURBING PIPES. No person shall ever use the space under any such sidewalk
in such a manner as to interfere with any sewer or water pipe or any other work lawfully in said
street, alley or public way except upon special consent of the City Manager, and no such permit
shall be granted until the applicant therefore has paid to the director of the department having
jurisdiction thereof a sum of money sufficient, in his judgment, to defray the cost and expense of
renewing, or rebuilding, or relaying such sewer or water pipe or public work, and making the
necessary connections therewith.
7. REQUIRING BACKFILL. In case of rebuilding or widening of a street, the City
may, without liability to itself, vacate such permit and require the owner to fill such sub-sidewalk
space with sand, at its own expense.
Chapter 39
8. FAILURE TO SECURE PERMIT. If any person, firm or corporation using any
such space, and any grantee of the abutting property, shall fail to take out a permit as herein
provided, then the Public Works Director shall proceed to remove every such structure and close
such space therein; provided, however, this action shall not apply to any person, firm or
corporation using any such space under special permit of the City so long as the conditions of
said permit are carried out by the user thereof.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-63, July 17, 2000)
9. SIDEWALKS TO BE KEPT CLEAR AND IN REPAIR. Every person, firm or
corporation using such space shall at all times keep such sidewalk in good condition and repair
and clear and free from obstructions or encumbrances.
10. REVOCATION. The City Manager may revoke any permit at any time if the
permittee fails or neglects to comply with the terms hereof or if the space is needed for the public
use.
11. COMPENSATION. The provisions hereof shall not preclude the City from
charging in the future a fee for the use of any space permitted hereunder.
12. PRECAUTIONS REQUIRED. No person, firm or corporation shall remove,
insecurely fix or cause or procure or suffer or permit to be removed, or to be insecurely fixed so
that the same can be moved in its bed, any grate or covering of any coal hole, vault or chute
under any street, sidewalk or other public place, provided, that nothing herein contained shall
prevent the owner or occupant of the building with which such coal hole, vault or chute shall be
connected from removing the grate or covering for the proper purpose of such opening, provided
he encloses such opening or aperture and keeps the same enclosed while such grate or covering
shall be removed, with a strong box or curb at least twenty-four (24) inches high firmly and
Chapter 39
securely made, and provided further that he shall not remove such grate or covering until after
sunrise of any day and shall replace such grate or covering before sunset.
13. SAFETY OF PUBLIC. Whenever any coal hole, vault or elevator under any
sidewalk or any aperture constructed in any sidewalk is not covered or firmly secured, or in the
opinion of the Public Works Director is unsafe or inconvenient for public travel, said Director
may order the same to be placed in a safe condition satisfactory to him; and if the same shall not
be done within two days from the service of notice on the owner or person in possession of the
premises, said Director may make such change and the expense thereof shall be paid by such
owner or person in possession of the premises.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-63, July 17, 2000)
14. LIABILITY OF PERMITTEE. The owner, permittee and the person, firm or
corporation in possession of any premises abutting on such space, vault, coal hole or aperture
shall be held responsible to the City for any or all damages occasioned to persons or property in
consequence of the aperture in the sidewalk being left exposed or uncovered or in consequence
of the covering thereof being left insecure or unfastened or in consequence of any defect of
construction thereof.
15. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this Chapter shall be fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than
Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each day on which a violation occurs or
continues shall be considered as a separate offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-69)
CHAPTER 40
CARE OF STREETS
1. COVERING VEHICLES. Any vehicle that is used to haul or convey any material
upon the streets of the City which would sift, spill, drop, leak or be scattered by wind or
otherwise, must be covered by a tarpaulin or by wooden or metal lids to prevent sifting, spilling,
dropping, leaking or scattering of any matter so hauled or transported.
2. COVERING MUST BE TIGHT. No person shall operate on any highway any
vehicle with any load unless said load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to
prevent said covering or load from becoming loose, detached, or in any manner a hazard to other
users of the highway.
3. NO VEHICLES ON FRESH OIL. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause any
automobile, truck, wagon, cart, tractor, or any other vehicle to go upon, across, or along any
street, avenue or public way in the City while said street, avenue or public way is being treated
with oil, asphalt, or other liquid material, until said oil, asphalt, or other liquid material shall
have penetrated, set, or hardened so that none of said oil, asphalt, or other material shall adhere
to the tires of said vehicles.
4. HORSES WITH CLEATS. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or cause to
be driven any horse or horses that have attached to their shoes, any metal, cleat, cork, ridge, or
lug, over, across, or along any street, avenue or public way in the City that has a surface that has
been treated with oil, asphalt or other liquid material. This prohibition shall not apply when said
streets, avenues, or public ways are frozen or covered with snow or ice in sufficient amount to
protect the oil or asphalt surface from damage. Revised 10/11
Chapter 40
5. VEHICLES WITH LUGS. No tractor, traction engine, motor truck or similar
vehicle shall be operated over, across, or along any street, avenue or public way in the City,
which has been treated with oil, asphalt or other liquid material, if any such vehicle has on the
periphery of any of the road wheels any block, stud, flange, cleat, ridge, lug or any projection of
metal or wood which projects radially beyond the tread or traffic surface of the tire; except that
this prohibition shall not apply to tractors equipped with what is known as crawler type tractors,
when the same do not contain any projection of any kind likely to injure the surface of the road,
nor to tractors and similar vehicles which have upon their road wheels V-shaped, diagonal or
other cleats arranged in such a manner as to be continuously in contact with the road surface.
The provisions of this paragraph shall also apply to any street, avenue or public way which has
been surfaced with sheet asphalt or any other type, class or kind of bituminous material.
6. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of
this Chapter shall be fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each day on which a violation occurs or
continues shall be considered as a separate offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-69)
CHAPTER 41
MISCELLANEOUS STREET REGULATIONS
1. BARBED WIRE FENCE. No person, firm or corporation shall erect or maintain in,
along or adjacent to any street, alley, sidewalk or public place at an elevation less than six feet
above the grade thereof nearest such device or thing, any barbed wire fence or spiked railing or
any guard or barricade to which there is attached any barbed wire or barbed or pointed
instrument, device or thing of any kind or description, designed, intended or liable to injure any
person coming on contact therewith.
2. FIRES ON PAVEMENTS. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn weeds,
leaves or rubbish or material of any kind upon any pavement in the City. (Amended, Ordinance
2012-52, July 30, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-87, September 19, 2005)
3. ADVERTISING DISTRIBUTION DEVICE PERMIT REQUIRED. No person,
firm or corporation shall place a device for the purpose of distributing advertising material upon
any street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or other public place without an Advertising Distribution
Device permit. The Public Works Director may issue a permit to place an advertising
distribution device on public streets, alleys, sidewalks, parkways or other public places. Said
permit shall designate where the device may be located. No more than one advertising
distribution device may be located on a single block face and no device may be located closer
than two hundred feet (200’) from another advertising distribution device. The fee for such
permit shall be $50.00 per year, and may not be pro-rated. All Advertising Distribution Device
Permits shall expire on the 31st day of December next following the effective date thereof.
(Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
Revised 11/2018
Chapter 41
4. EXCAVATED MATERIAL. In all pavement construction under any ordinance
hereinafter enacted all brick or other excavated material not used in the work shall remain the
property of the City unless the plans indicate otherwise. The contractor shall convey such
material to such point in the City as may be designated in the pavement construction plans. All
surplus material not so claimed or directed to be conveyed by the City shall be the property of
the contractor to be disposed of by him as he shall see fit. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July
30, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-
63, July 17, 2000)
5. BUILDINGS; SIGNS. No person shall make or cause to be made any enclosure,
fence, sign, archway, building or structure of any kind upon, over, into or across any street,
avenue, alley or sidewalk within the City, except (a) upon approval of the Building Inspections
Manager, subject to all applicable provisions of the Building Ordinance and the Building Code;
or (b) in accordance, with the provisions of City Code Chapter 41, Section 12. Any person or
persons granted such approval for any such enclosure, fence, sign, archway, building or structure
suspended over a street or extending into a street more than fifteen (15) inches beyond the
building line other than those permits issued under Chapter 41, Section 12 shall file with the City
a public liability insurance policy with the City as a named insured, indemnifying the City
against loss or damage to person or property in the minimum amount of One Million Dollars
($1,000,000) per occurrence, combined single limit, and Two Million Dollars ($2,000,000)
aggregate, with a provision that the same may not be canceled except after thirty (30) days prior
notice to the City. Approval for such structures or signs granted as herein provided shall be
considered a privilege only and shall not be deemed to create any vested right in the continuance
of such structures or signs, and such approval may be revoked in the same manner and by the
Chapter 41
same officer which granted the same. (AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 96-48, July 15, 1996) (AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2018-62,
November 5, 2018)
6. HANDBILLS. No person, firm or corporation shall, either directly or indirectly,
place or cause to be placed, broadcast, scatter or throw any poster, handbill, circular, leaflet,
pamphlet, newspaper or written or printed matter of any kind whatsoever in or upon any public
street, alley or other public ground so as to litter the same, nor in and upon any part of any
vehicle standing or parked in or upon or using any public street, alley or other public ground,
except upon consent of the owner of such vehicle; nor in or upon any porch, steps or yard of any
residence, private property or other premises unless the same be rolled or fastened or weighted
down so it shall not be blown about or scattered by the wind.
7. LIABILITY FOR INJURY. Any person who shall place or leave or cause to be
placed or left any encroachment, obstruction or encumbrance in or upon any street, alley, avenue
or sidewalk, shall in all cases be liable to the City and to private persons for all injury or damage
arising therefrom.
8. MERCHANDISE ON SIDEWALK. No person, firm or corporation while
receiving or delivering goods, wares or merchandise, shall permit the same to remain on any
sidewalk longer than thirty minutes and for this purpose shall occupy only so much of the outer
edge of the sidewalk as will leave an unoccupied space of at least four feet in width of such
sidewalk for the use of pedestrians. Sidewalk permittees are exempt. (Amended, Ordinance
2012-52, July 30, 2012)
9. PLACING MATERIALS ON PUBLIC STREETS. Except as may be permitted
by City Code, Chapter 56, “Refuse and Recyclables Removal” and regulated by promulgated
Chapter 41
rules, no person, firm or corporation shall place, throw, leave or cause to be placed, thrown or
left any materials, leaves, branches, landscape plant material debris, grass clippings, and any type
obstruction or encumbrance in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or other public place
except materials for construction as herein permitted, and except sidewalk sales permitees.
(Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
10. OFFENSIVE VEHICLES. No vehicle used for conveying animals, alive or dead,
from which vehicle offensive odors emanate, caused from said conveying, or lately having
conveyed such animals, shall be parked or stand in any public street or alley in the City except
after a thorough cleansing.
11. PARADES; PROCESSIONS.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall hold or conduct any procession or parade
through the streets of the City, other than a funeral procession, except upon issuance of a Major
Parade permit or a Minor Parade permit by the Chief of Police. As determined by the Police
Chief, a Major Parade permit may be issued to parades expected to draw 1,000 or more
spectators. As determined by the Police Chief, a Minor Parade permit shall be issued to those
parades drawing less than 1,000 spectators. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
B. Parades issued a Major Parade permit may use either the major parade route or
the minor parade route. Parades issued a Minor Parade Permit may use only the minor parade
route. Parades are not required to travel the entire distance of their assigned route. Parade permit
holders shall be required to notify the Police Chief and Public Works Director if the planned
route of the parade does not travel the entire distance of their assigned route. (Amended,
Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
Chapter 41
C. The Major Parade Route shall travel northbound on Franklin Street from Macon
Street to North Street, westbound on North Street from Franklin Street to North Main Street,
southbound on North Main Street from North Street to Macon Street, and east bound on Macon
Street from South Main Street to the point of beginning. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July
30, 2012)
D. The Minor Parade Route shall travel northbound on Water Street from Macon
Street to Prairie Street, westbound on Prairie Street from Water Street to Merchant Street,
southbound on Merchant Street from Prairie Street to East Main Street, eastbound on East Main
Street to Water Street, and southbound on Water Street from East Main Street to the point of
beginning. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
E. Parade Permit Fees. The fee for a Major Parade using the major parade route
shall be $250.00. The fee for a Minor Parade using the minor parade route shall be $100.00.
(Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
12. PERMITS FOR USE OF SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES.
A. DEFINITIONS.
(1) APPLICANT shall mean the person or entity who has applied for but not yet
been granted a permit allowing for the operation of an outdoor café or the placement of a
sidewalk sign in the B-4 Central Business District. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30,
2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(2) BUMP OUT shall mean the areas where the sidewalk is extended further into
the public right of way to provide for more pedestrian space. Bump outs are typically found at
the corners of each intersection or mid-block of a street. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July
30, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
Chapter 41
(3) ELECTRIC CONNECTION FEE shall mean the fee associated with
connecting to the electrical outlets located within the base of the City’s light poles in the public
right of way. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62,
November 5, 2018)
(4) FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS are those establishments as defined
and licensed by the Macon County Board of Health. (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November
5, 2018)
(5) LIQUOR ESTABLISHMENTS are those establishments holding a valid
liquor license issued by the City of Decatur. (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(6) OUTDOOR CAFÉ shall mean a use of public sidewalk by a food service
establishment or liquor establishment occupying and using a building, for the immediate serving
of food and beverages and adjacent to said building or on sidewalks contiguous to the sidewalk
adjacent to the building occupied by the establishment. The use will be characterized by the
outdoor use of tables, chairs, umbrellas, and other equipment. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52,
July 30, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(7) PERMIT AREA shall mean the sidewalk area designated on the permit
specifying the area of operation of an outdoor café or placement of a sidewalk sign. (Amended,
Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(8) PERMITTEE shall mean the person or entity owning or operating a food
service or liquor establishment who has a valid permit allowing for the operation of an outdoor
café or a person or entity owning property or having a leasehold interest in the B-4 Central
Business District as set forth in the City of Decatur Zoning Ordinances, who has a valid permit
Chapter 41
allowing for a Central Business District sidewalk sign. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30,
2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(9) PLAZA AREA shall mean those areas, public right of way, and sidewalks as
determined by the Public Works Director. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
(Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(10) SIDEWALK SIGN shall mean a sign located in the B-4 Central Business
District on a sidewalk or public property as allowed by a permit issued pursuant to this Section.
(Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
B. PERMITS REQUIRED.
(1) No person, firm or corporation shall use any street, alley, sidewalk, parkway
or other public place for the placement of signs or for the storage, sale or display of any goods,
wares or merchandise, except as expressly provided herein; provided that, the City Manager may
authorize sidewalk sale permits to be issued for the display and sale of goods and merchandise
on sidewalks in areas designated by such officer for periods of time not exceeding three (3) days.
A sidewalk sale permit shall designate what portions of the sidewalk shall be used for such
purpose. The fee for such permit shall be $25.00, and may not be pro-rated. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2007-63, July 16, 2007) (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an outdoor café without an
outdoor café permit.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any entity or person to place, cause to be placed, or
allow the placement of a sign on any street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or other public place
without a sidewalk sign permit. (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
Chapter 41
(4) The Public Works Director or designee may issue a permit for the use of
public sidewalks for outdoor cafés or sidewalk signs, subject to the conditions set forth herein.
The permits must be displayed in the window of the establishment or property at all times.
(Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5,
2018)
(5) Permits issued hereunder shall expire and terminate on the 31st day of
December next following the effective date thereof.
(i) The minimum fee for outdoor café permits shall be $150.00 with an
additional charge of $1.00 per square foot for every square foot over 100 square feet of outdoor
café space at a maximum fee of $1,000.00. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-53, July 30, 2012)
(Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(ii) The fee for sidewalk sign permits shall be $25.00. (Amended, Ordinance
2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(6) Outdoor café permittees only may connect electrical devices to an electric
outlet located near the base of most street light poles. The electric connection fee shall be $10.00
per month and electricity shall be extracted as approved by the Public Works Director. No
person, firm or corporation shall connect electrical devices to the electric outlet located
approximately 10 feet above the sidewalk on most street light poles, except during the months of
November, December and January for the purpose of decorative holiday lighting. (Amended,
Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(7) Permit areas shall be adjacent to said building, or on sidewalks contiguous to
the sidewalk adjacent to the building and shall be within the frontage area of the business or
property of permittee. If the proposed outdoor café area extends to areas abutting the property of
Chapter 41
another, the consent of that property owner shall be obtained in written form prior to approval of
permit and shall be part of the permit. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
(Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(8) Subject to the requirements of the Code, café permit holders shall, as part of
the right granted pursuant to the permit, be entitled to remove or exclude persons from the permit
area during hours of business operation. Such permittee is authorized to give notice to any such
person to prevent such entry. Neither cover charge nor minimum purchase may be required for
admittance to an outdoor cafe area in the public right-of-way. Permit holders shall comply with
all laws, statutes, and ordinances in the use and service of said public rights of way. (Amended,
Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
C. APPLICATION. The application for permits shall be made on City of Decatur
forms and submitted to the Public Works Director, together with the fee, and shall, at minimum
include the following: (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance
2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the property and
the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant, if different. (Amended, Ordinance
2012-52, July 30, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(2) For outdoor café permits, a scaled drawing showing, at a 30 inch height above
the permit area, the location of any tables, chairs or other furniture, or of any object or structure
whatsoever to be used in conjunction with such sale and service of food and which will be placed
in or around any of the permit areas, location of ingress and egress, the curb line and any existing
public or utility-owned equipment facilities in or adjacent to the area proposed which are visible
to the eye, including but not limited to trees, manhole covers and utility poles and openings.
Chapter 41
(Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5,
2018)
(3) For outdoor café permits, a copy of a valid permit to operate a food service
establishment from the Macon County Health Department. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July
30, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(4) For outdoor café permits, an operations plan specifying the proposed dates,
days and hours of operation of the outdoor café area, the hours of operation of the adjacent
restaurant, and maximum seating capacity for the outdoor café area. (Amended, Ordinance
2012-52, July 30, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(5) For outdoor café permits, photographs and catalog cuts of any proposed
temporary fencing products shall be submitted with the application and are subject to approval
by the Public Works Director. (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(6) An executed Indemnity Agreement in a form approved by the City.
(Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
(7) Certificates of insurance as per the requirements established herein.
(Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
(8) Any other information related to the requirements of this chapter that the
Public Works Director may require. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
D. REVIEW OF APPLICATION.
(1) The Public Works Director or designee shall review the application for a
permit and determine whether the permit shall be issued. The decision of the Public Works
Director shall be a final administrative decision. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
(Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
Chapter 41
(2) The applicant shall supply all of the information required on or by the
application, and any additional information as reasonably requested by the Public Works
Director as a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52,
July 30, 2012)
E. RULES AND REGULATIONS.
(1) Tables chairs, umbrellas, sandwich boards, and other permissible equipment
as approved by the permit, shall be located in the area so that the line of sight for traffic is not
obstructed and so that there remains open, at all times, a longitudinal walking space, the location
of which shall be determined by the Public Works Director or designee, of a minimum of four
(4) feet in width, which distance may be increased if the Public Works Director deems it
necessary for pedestrian safety, with a cross-slope not to exceed Americans with Disability Act
(ADA) requirements. All tables, chairs, signs and other objects must be removed when snow is
present on the sidewalk or as otherwise directed by the Public Works Director. (Amended,
Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(2) The permit for the specified use shall be limited to no earlier than 7 a.m. and
no later than 10 p.m. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance
2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(3) Permittees shall use permits issued in a reasonable manner with due regard
for the health and safety of persons and property. No physical alterations to public property shall
be made without the written permission of the Public Works Director. (Amended, Ordinance
2012-52, July 30 2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(4) No signs, banners, sandwich boards or other like advertising, except for one
(1) sandwich board per property, no larger than six (6) square feet in area on any one of two
Chapter 41
sides, no greater than four (4) feet in height free of any illumination or electric capability shall be
located in the permit area. Sign height will be calculated by measuring the vertical distance
above grade to the highest point of the sign. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
(Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(5) The Public Works Director may promulgate administrative rules which relate
to the requirements contained in this article. Upon reasonable notice of the same, the
administrative rules shall be binding upon and followed by, the permittee. (Amended, Ordinance
2012-52, July 30, 2012)
(6) For outdoor cafés only (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(i) Permittees shall keep the permit area free of litter, cans, bottles and spills
at all times. The permittee shall promptly collect and dispose of all litter, trash and other waste
materials associated with the outdoor café area, including material in the adjacent public right-ofway
or property originating from the outdoor café area. The permittee shall dispose of any such
waste in their own trash containers only. No litter is to be allowed to wash down the storm sewer
system. The permittee shall sweep the sidewalk café area daily and shall wash the area using
water at least weekly. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance
2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(ii) No permit will be allowed if seats or equipment in the outdoor café
result in the need for additional restrooms and unless such additional restrooms are provided by
the applicant as required per the State of Illinois Plumbing Code. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-
52, July 30, 2012)
(iii) Food preparation is prohibited on the public sidewalk except as allowed
by permit. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
Chapter 41
(iv) Live entertainment shall be allowed within the outdoor café permit area;
a “Downtown Entertainment Permit” is required per Section 18 of this Chapter. No fee is
required for this permit. This provision shall also include piped-in sound, so long as such sounds
otherwise do not create a nuisance. Any owner or operator licensed under the outdoor café
permit provisions hereof may serve alcoholic liquor for consumption on said public sidewalks
adjacent to the licensed restaurant, provided that (1) said restaurant is also properly licensed for
the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises, in which case the adjacent sidewalk
or sidewalks shall be considered an extension of such licensed premises and shall be subject to
all rules, regulations and restrictions applying to such premises; and (2) any alcohol served at an
outdoor table must be served in a glass or plastic cup. Beer cans or bottles are prohibited and
wine bottles must be presented in a sheath or ice bucket; and (3) the City is named as an
additional insured on the owner's or operator's dram shop insurance policy, with a Certificate of
Insurance furnished to the City showing such fact and providing 30 days notice to all insured
prior to cancellation. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance
2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(v) All alcoholic liquor consumed in an outdoor café will have a last call at
11:30 p.m. with all alcoholic liquor removed from the outdoor café by 12:00 a.m. (Amended,
Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(vi) The following types of furniture or other equipment may be utilized in an
outdoor café that is not located in a plaza area:
(1) Tables and chairs
(2) Umbrellas
(3) Waste receptacles
Chapter 41
(4) Busing carts
(5) Planters
(6) One (1) sandwich board sign
Said furniture and other equipment shall be portable, shall not be chained, bolted or
otherwise secured together as a unit, shall not be affixed to the surface of the permit area, and
shall be removed on a nightly basis within thirty minutes after cessation of service in the outdoor
café . (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
(vii) The following types of furniture or other equipment may be utilized in an
outdoor café that is located in a plaza area:
(1) Tables and chairs
(2) Umbrellas
(3) Waste receptacles
(4) Busing carts
(5) Planters
(6) One (1) sandwich board sign
(7) Fencing or other physical barriers on the boundary of the permit area.
(8) Portable bars.
(9) Portable heaters (Must be UL rated, sized for intended electrical
consumption, and inspected by City’s electrical inspector).
Said furniture and other equipment may be chained, bolted or otherwise secured
together as a unit, may be affixed or otherwise secured to the surface of the permit area to the
extent that said action is specifically authorized in the outdoor café permit, and shall not be
required to be removed on a nightly basis. At the discretion of the Public Works Director, the
Chapter 41
furniture and/or equipment may be ordered removed to protect public health, safety and welfare.
(Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
(viii) The maximum allowable dimension for tables shall be forty-eight (48)
inches in diameter, forty-eight (48) inches in width or length, and thirty-eight (38) inches in
height. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
(ix) Tables shall be freestanding with detached chairs or seating, unless it is
determined that another design meets the intent of these regulations and a specific exception is
specifically granted in writing by the Public Works Director. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52,
July 30, 2012)
(x) Umbrellas shall have a maximum diameter of nine (9) feet, a weighted base
and be fabric covered. When open, a seven (7) foot clearance from the lowest part of the canopy
to ground level is required. Advertising of any kind is not allowed on said umbrella. (Amended,
Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
(xi) The placement of portable heaters must be reviewed and approved by the
City’s Fire Inspector. No electrical cords shall extend over the public ADA portion of the
sidewalk. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
(xii) Liquor establishments without kitchens may have no more seating in a
sidewalk cafe area that equal to the number of seats inside their establishment, and they may
extend no further than the establishment. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
F. USE, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
(1) The use of a public sidewalk pursuant to the issuance of a permit under the
provisions of this Chapter and Section shall be subject to temporary suspension or termination at
any time by the City Manager in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare. Except for
Chapter 41
instances of bona fide emergencies, to the extent that a permit area is needed by the City for the
purposes for which it was dedicated, or any other public purpose, the Public Works Director,
Police Chief or Fire Chief may upon written notice reasonably calculated to advise the permittee
of such temporary suspension or termination and provide the permittee a reasonable amount of
time under the circumstances, to remove its furniture, sign and other impediments from the right
of way, and assume full possession and control of the permit area. The permittee shall remove all
furniture, signs and impediments from the right-of-way within the time specified by the notice. If
not removed by the permittee, the City shall be authorized to remove all furniture, signs and
other objects of permittee from the permit area. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
(Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(2) If such is not reclaimed by the permittee within seven (7) days after removal
by the City, the property shall be presumed abandoned and subject to disposal. (Amended,
Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(3) If permittee does not agree with the Decision to suspend or terminate, it may
appeal the Notice to the City Manager or designee in writing within 3 business days from the
date Notice was sent setting forth all defenses to the suspension or revocation. A decision will
be issued in writing by the City Manager or designee within 3 business days. (Amended,
Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
G. PUBLIC PROPERTY. The provisions of this section shall apply only to the
locating of outdoor cafes and signs on public property or public right-of-way and shall not apply
to any private property. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance
2018-62, November 5, 2018)
H. INDEMNIFICATION.
Chapter 41
(1) As an express condition of the issuance of the permit, each applicant shall
indemnify and hold harmless the City against all claims, injuries, demands, losses, liability, loss,
injury, death or damage whatsoever, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit, in
connection with or arising out of the use of the permit by anyone, except where the claim is the
result of the sole negligence of the City. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
(Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
(2) As an express condition of the issuance of the permit, the permittee shall,
within seven (7) days after the billing date, pay to the City all costs associated with damage to
the pavement or other City-owned facilities located in or adjacent to the permit area caused by
operation of the permit, or the cleaning of or trash removal from the permit area or adjacent
premises occasioned by the failure of the permittee to clean or remove such trash pursuant to an
outdoor café permit. Failure to do so shall be a violation of this Chapter, and subject the
permittee to a fine or fines, and/or revocation of the privileges granted herein. (Amended,
Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
I. INSURANCE. Every permittee shall obtain, and at all times thereafter during
the license year keep in full force and effect, general liability and property damage insurance,
with the City as an additional named insured and in amounts not less than $1,000,000 per
occurrence, $2,000,000 combined, single limit; said applicant shall file with the City a
Certificate of Insurance evidencing such fact, and said Certificate shall provide for not less than
30 days notice to all insured prior to cancellation. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30,
2012) (Amended, Ordinance 2018-62, November 5, 2018)
J. ENFORCEMENT.
(1) The City may inspect the permit area at any time.
Chapter 41
(2) Any violations of the provisions of this article shall be remedied within a
reasonable time as stated in the notice or if not stated in the notice, within seven (7) calendar
days from the date of delivery or post-mark on the notice.
(3) The permittee shall be subject to any and all penalty provisions and
procedures set forth in the Code and Ordinances of the City of Decatur. (Amended, Ordinance
2012-52, July 30, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009) (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2007-63, July 16, 2007) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2006-83, September 5, 2006)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-63, July 17, 2000)
13. FOOD AND BEVERAGE CARTS.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall use the public sidewalk, public right-ofway
or Central Park for the sale of food and/or beverage without the authorization of the City
Manager. A food and beverage cart permit shall designate where the cart shall be located. A
food and beverage cart vendor may submit up to two (2) locations for conducting business. No
food and beverage cart vendor may sell their food or beverage at any other location than what is
allowed by permit. Location(s) may be changed after 60 days with approval from the Public
Works Director. The fee for such permit shall be $150.00, and may not be pro-rated. A
maximum of three (3) permits shall be granted.
B. The Public Works Director may issue a permit for the use of the public
sidewalk, public right-of-way or Central Park for any food and beverage cart to the owner or
operator of said food and beverage cart, provided the same is or will be within ten days of the
issuance of a city permit, as defined and licensed by the Macon County Health Department,
subject to the following conditions (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012):
Chapter 41
(1) The food and beverage cart shall not be located in public parking spaces and
shall only occupy and use approved public locations in the Central Business District. Permittee
shall provide photographs of the location and condition of the sidewalk, pavement, lawn or other
surface before a permit is issued.
(2) No permittee shall be located in a restaurant/store/office frontage right-ofway
or inhibit customer traffic unless written approval has been received from said
restaurant/store/office owner/operator. Written approval must be submitted with application.
(3) Photographs and dimensions of the food and beverage cart shall be
submitted with the application and are subject to approval by the Public Works Director.
(4) No cart, table, chair or other object may be located within four (4) feet of
any intersection, as defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code, and such carts, tables, chairs and other
objects must be located so as to provide a minimum of four (4) feet of unobstructed passage.
Dimensions of the unobstructed pathway width shall be submitted.
(5) No permittee shall engage in the business of food and beverage cart vending
between the hours of 9:00 P.M. to 9:00 A. M. Permitted season of operation is from March 15 to
November 30. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-75, September 15, 2008)
(6) No permittee shall leave any food and beverage cart unattended. Permitees
shall remove the food and beverage cart from streets, sidewalks, or other public places when not
in operation. No permittee shall store any food and beverage cart on the public sidewalk, public
right-of-way or in Central Park at any time. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
(7) No permittee shall park any motor vehicle other than in a lawful parking
place in conformance with city and state parking regulations.
Chapter 41
(8) All permittees shall have available their own 20 gallon trash receptacle to
be available for their patron’s use.
(9) No permittee shall leave their location without first picking up, removing
and dispensing of all trash or refuse from the sales made by them. No permittee shall dispose of
trash or refuse in the public trash receptacles.
(10) No permittee shall solicit or conduct business with persons in motor
vehicles.
(11) No permittee shall sell anything other than food and beverage.
(12) Only the warming or cooling of food and beverage shall be permitted.
Cooking food shall not be permitted. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
(13) Generators shall be prohibited. The use of public electrical outlets shall be
prohibited without obtaining a permit from the Public Works Director as described elsewhere in
this chapter. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
(14) Carts shall be in good repair with no signs of visible damage/wear and
tear. They shall not detract from the visual aesthetics of downtown.
(15) Carts shall only have one (1) sign and be affixed to the cart.
(16) The sale/serving of items in glass containers is prohibited. Any item(s)
originally packaged in a glass container shall be served in a plastic or paper container.
(17) Loud music and loud noises shall be prohibited.
(18) No permittee shall deface, mar, mark, damage or destroy public sidewalks,
public right-of way or Central Park. All stains from wheels, spillage or other cause shall be
removed within two (2) days. All carts shall be provided with a protective pad under their cart
Chapter 41
and site to protect the public sidewalk, public right-of-way or Central Park property.
Photographs of the existing public right-of-way shall be submitted.
(19) An applicant for a permit for the sale and service of food and beverage as
herein provided shall obtain and at all times thereafter during a permit year keep in full force and
effect, general liability and property damage insurance, with the City as an additional named
insured and in amounts not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence, $2,000,000 aggregate; said
applicant shall file with the City a Certificate of Insurance evidencing such fact, and said
Certificate shall provide for not less than 30 days notice to all insured prior to cancellation.
C. As used in this section, the following phrases have the meaning herein ascribed
to each:
(1) Food and Beverage Cart – Means any table, pushcart, wagon or
other wheeled vehicle or devise which may be moved without the assistance of a motor
and which is not required to be licensed and registered by the Secretary of the State.
(2) Central Business District – Defined in the City’s Zoning Ordinance
as district B-4, and is generally bounded by Wood Street, Jackson Street, Cerro Gordo
Street and Church Street. The exact boundaries of the Central Business District are
shown on the Zoning District Map which is reviewed and approved annually by the City
Council, and is kept on file with the City Clerk. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July
30, 2012)
(3) Central Park – That area bounded on the north by the right-of-way
line of North Park Street, on the west by the right-of-way line of North Water Street, on
the south by the right-of-way line of South Park Street, and on the east by the right-ofway
line of North Franklin Street.
D. The City Manager may, by regulation, exempt fairs, festivals and community
and charitable events from the operation of this section, and may further, by regulation, prohibit
operations by such permittees during said events. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
14. POSTING OF POSTERS. That the posting, fastening or otherwise affixing
posters, placards, notices or advertisements of any kind or character on any pole located on any
Chapter 41
of the streets and alleys of the City of Decatur is hereby forbidden except such legal notices as
are required by law to be posted.
15. TEMPORARY BANNERS. The City Manager is authorized to issue permits for
temporary banner signs over the streets of the City or upon street light poles where banner
mounting brackets have been provided upon the following conditions:
A. The lowest part of said sign must be at least 25 feet above the street.
B. Said permit shall be issued to local religious, charitable or other nonprofit
organizations only.
C. The City must be protected from liability by adequate public liability
insurance.
D. Such permits shall be issued for limited periods only.
16. BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS AND CENTRAL PARK. The operation and
use of bicycles, roller skates, skateboards, scooters and all other similar devices propelled by
human power, but excluding wheelchairs, strollers or baby carriages, and push carts, be, and the
same is hereby prohibited, and no person shall use, operate or ride on such vehicles or devices, at
any point in that area commonly known as Central Park or on any sidewalk in the Central
Business District. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
For purposes of this section, "sidewalk" shall have the meaning ascribed to it in Chapter
34 of the City Code.
17. CENTRAL PARK FOUNTAIN. It is hereby prohibited to enter into or on the
fountain located in what is commonly known as Central Park with the exception of City
personnel or those at the direction of the City in the performance of their duties. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2007-63, July 16, 2007)
18. DOWNTOWN ENTERTAINMENT PERMITS.
Chapter 41
A. No person, firm or corporation shall allow outdoor entertainment in the Central
Business District that is likely to produce audible sound or noise at a level to be heard by
surrounding businesses or residents without first having obtained a permit therefor.
B. Applications. Before any permit as required by the preceding section shall be
issued, the person, firm or corporation desiring such permit shall make application to the City
Manager upon forms provided by the City. There is no permit fee.
C. Hours. Outdoor entertainment shall end with the last call or between the last
call and 12:00 a.m. midnight. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
D. Central Business District – Defined in the City’s Zoning Ordinance as district
B-4, and is generally bounded by Wood Street, Jackson Street, Cerro Gordo Street and Church
Street. The exact boundaries of the Central Business District are shown on the Zoning District
Map which is reviewed and approved annually by the City Council, and is kept on file with the
City Clerk. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
E. Exemptions. The City Manager may, by regulation, exempt fairs, festivals and
community and charitable events from the operation of this section. (Amended, Ordinance
2012-52, July 30, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-66, August 6, 2007)
19. HONORARY STREET SIGN PROGRAM. As a means to honor individuals,
organizations, entities and events that have had a significant lineage to the City or a significant
cultural, historical, or humanitarian impact on the community, the City of Decatur shall establish
an Honorary Street Naming Sign program as described below. All honorary street name signs
shall comply with the guidelines of this program and honorary street name signs shall not have
the effect of changing platted street names or official addresses. (Amended, Ordinance 2015-06,
March 2, 2015)
Chapter 41
A. Application Process - Honorary street name designation shall be limited to
individuals, organizations, entities and events that have had a significant lineage to or a cultural,
historical or humanitarian impact on the City as determined by the Decatur City Council. An
honoree must have a geographical relationship to the requested sign location, having either lived
or worked or performed other actions or activities in the area deemed to have been important to
the City of Decatur. Applicants shall be required to submit an application form to the City of
Decatur’s Economic and Community Development Department providing details as to the
proposed honoree’s lineage or cultural, historical or humanitarian impact on the city and an
explanation of the honoree’s relationship to the requested honorary street sign location as part of
the application process. Applications shall be reviewed by a five (5) member panel consisting of
one (1) member of the Decatur City Council, one (1) member from the Economic and
Community Development Department, one (1) member from an authorized city neighborhood
organization, one (1) member form the Decatur Police Department and one (1) member
appointed from the community at large. Applications will be forwarded to the Mayor and
Decatur City Council and scheduled for a vote only upon an affirmative panel recommendation o
if a majority of the Decatur City Council calls for it. The request will be considered “denied”
upon a negative panel recommendation or if a majority of the Decatur city Council does not call
for an application to be brought forward within 30 days of said panel recommendation being
issued. Current city employees are not eligible for an honorary street naming designation.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017) (Amended, Ordinance 2015-06, March 2,
2015)
B. Number of Signs - The Decatur City Council will designate a maximum of
five (5) honorary streets per year. If there is a street, or portion of a street (except intersecting
Chapter 41
streets), that has been designated with an honorary street name, no other such name shall be
given to the street or section of street. The city shall also have the ultimate authority to determine
how many signs shall be placed in an area and how much of the street will be designated with an
honorary name.
C. Cost - The person (s) or organization making the request shall be
responsible for the cost of creating and installing the sign.
D. Duration - The city replaces street name signs on an approximate ten (10)
year cycle. Honorary street name designations will be reviewed and considered by the City
Council for continuation as new street name signs are being placed in the area.
E. Notification – The City shall cause letters to be sent to residents and/or
businesses in the vicinity of the proposed honorary designation in advance notifying them that an
honorary designation has been proposed for their area and that they should continue using the
regular street name in all correspondence. The letters would also encourage said residents and/or
business owners to contact the city with questions. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-60, August
17, 2009)
20. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150)
nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500) for each offense, and each day on which a violation
occurs or continues shall be considered as a separate offense, and any license or permit issued
hereunder may be suspended or revoked following notice and opportunity to be heard, by the
City Manager or designee. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-52, July 30, 2012)
21. NUISANCES. Any violation of either Sections 1, 5, 6, 8, 9, 12, 13, 17, or 18 is
hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated as such in addition to any fine or penalty
Chapter 41
imposed. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-66, August 6, 2007) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-
63, July 16, 2007)
CHAPTER 41.1
ST A NDA R DS F O R T H E C O NST R U C T I O N O F
F A C I L I T I E S IN T H E P U B L IC R I G H T S-OF -W AY
1. PU R PO SE A ND SC O PE .
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish policies and procedures for
constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the City’s jurisdiction, which will provide public
benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the
City rights-of-way and the City as a whole.
B. Facilities Subject to This Chapter. This Chapter applies to all facilities on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of
the City. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of this Chapter may continue
to be maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except
as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
C. Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements. The City in its discretion and as limited
by law may require utilities or other services to enter into a franchise, license or similar
agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across,
or within the City rights-of-way. Utilities authorized by Federal or State law that are not
required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the City enter into such an
agreement. In such an agreement, the City may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent
with this Chapter.
D. Effect of Franchises, Licenses, or Similar Agreements.
Revised 10/11
(a) Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers. In the event that a utility other
than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or similar agreement with the City,
such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control the installation, operations
and maintenance of infrastructure as strictly described in such franchise agreement, during the
term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof. Installation, operation and
maintenance of infrastructure resulting from changed technology not in common usage or
reasonably contemplated for use as of the franchise agreement date shall be governed by the
requirements of this ordinance.
(b) Telecommunications Providers. In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency
between, the provisions of this Chapter and the provisions of any franchise, license or similar
agreement between the City and any telecommunications provider, the provisions of such
franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and control the installation, operations and
maintenance of telecommunications infrastructure as strictly described in such franchise
agreement, during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
Installation, operation and maintenance of telecommunications infrastructure resulting from
changed technology not in common usage or reasonably contemplated for use as of the franchise
agreement date shall be governed by the requirements of this ordinance.
(c) Other Service Providers. In the event State or Federal law allows for other service
providers of a similar type and use as a utility or telecommunication provider, the same rules
shall apply. Installation, operation and maintenance of infrastructure resulting from changed
technology not in common usage or reasonably contemplated for use as of the date of this
ordinance shall be governed by the requirements of this ordinance
E. Conflicts with Other Chapters. This Chapter supersedes all Chapters or parts of
Chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
F. Conflicts with State and Federal Laws. In the event that applicable Federal or State
laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this Chapter, the utility shall comply with
the requirements of this Chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating Federal or
State laws or regulations.
G. Sound Engineering Judgment. The City shall use sound engineering judgment when
administering this Chapter and may vary the standards, conditions, and requirements expressed
in this Chapter when the City so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability
of the City to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
2. DE F I NIT IO NS. As used in this Chapter and unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section.
Any term not defined in this Section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code §
530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
“AASHTO” - American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
"ANSI" - American National Standards Institute.
"Applicant" - A person or other legal entity applying for a permit under this Chapter.
"ASTM" - American Society for Testing and Materials.
"Backfill" - The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench or pit.
"Bore" or "Boring" - To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion of a pipe or
electrical conductor.
"Carrier Pipe" - The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
"Casing" - A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as: carrier pipes,
electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
"Clear Zone" - The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the pavement, available for
safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non
recoverable slope, and a clear run-out area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic
volumes and speeds, and on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO
Roadside Design Guide.
"Coating" - Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for protection against
external corrosion.
"Code" - The City Code of the City of Decatur
"Conductor" - Wire carrying electrical current.
"Conduit" - A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
"Construction” or “Construct" - The installation, repair, maintenance, placement, alteration,
enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of facilities.
“Construction Standards” – City of Decatur Construction Standards as prepared by the Public
Works Department, latest version.
"Cover" - The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
“Crossing Facility” - A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of a right-of-way.
“Public Works Director” - The City Public Works Director or the designee.
"Disrupt the Right-of-Way" - For the purposes of this Chapter, any work that obstructs the rightof-
way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right-of-way for its intended use.
Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement
(whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage to
vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include the parking of vehicles
or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
“Emergency” - Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of the public
using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate maintenance required for the health and
safety of the general public served by the utility.
"Encasement" - Provision of a protective casing.
"Engineer" - The City Engineer or the designee.
“Equipment” - Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to facilitate
construction of facilities.
"Excavation" - The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare by digging.
"Extra Heavy Pipe" - Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
"Facility" – Any and all structures, devices, objects, and materials including track and rails,
wires, pedestals, amplifiers, power supplies, transformers, conduits, grates, covers, pipes,
pressure regulators, cables, and appurtenances thereto located on, over, above, along, upon,
under, across, or within rights-of-way under this Chapter, except those owned by the City.
“Fiber-Optic or Optical Fiber” – A glass or plastic fiber designed to guide light along its length
by confining as much light as possible in a propagating form. Optical fibers are widely used in
the fiber-optic communication, which permits digital data transmission over longer distances and
at higher data rates than other forms of wired and wireless communications.
“Freestanding Facility” - A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel facility, such as an
antenna, transformer, pump, pressure regulator or meter station.
"Frontage Road" - Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to the highway
where it is precluded by control of access on highway.
“Hazardous Materials” - Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form,
concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the Public Works Director to
pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to
the ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to explosives, radioactive
materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents,
flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any Federal
or State law, statute or regulation.
"Highway Code" - The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as amended from time
to time.
"Highway" - A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban
roads or streets. “Highway” includes all highway land and improvements, including roadways,
ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures
and appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic. See also “Streets.”
"IDOT" - Illinois Department of Transportation.
"ILCC" - Illinois Commerce Commission.
"Jacking" - Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with or without
boring.
"Jetting" - Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create a cavity ahead of
the pipe.
"Joint Use" - The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or more utilities.
“Major Intersection” - The intersection of two or more major arterial highways.
"Occupancy" - The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
“Parallel Facility” - A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a rightof-
way.
"Parkway" - Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
"Pavement Cut" - The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for the
construction of a facility.
"Permittee" - That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to Sections 4 and 5 of this
Chapter.
“Practicable” - That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that which is simply
convenient.
"Pressure" - The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier pipe expressed in
pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
"Petroleum Products Pipelines" - Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid petroleum products
including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates, propane, butane, or coal-slurry.
"Prompt" - That which is done within a period of time specified by the City. If no time period is
specified, the period shall be 30 days.
"Public Entity" - A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government, whether at local,
State or Federal level.
“Public Utility” - A private business organization, subject to governmental regulation, that
provides an essential commodity or service, such as water, electricity, transportation, or
communication, to the public.
"Restoration" - The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area disrupted by the
construction of a facility.
"Right-of-Way" - Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for
utility purposes, including utility easements in which the City has the right and authority to
authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other than those of the City. "Right-ofway"
shall not include any real or personal City property that is not specifically described in the
previous two sentences and shall not include City buildings, fixtures, and other structures or
improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right-of-way.
"Roadway” - That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
"Sale of Telecommunications at Retail" - The transmitting, supplying, or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a consideration, other
than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is
not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for sale.
“Security Fund” - That amount of security required pursuant to this code.
"Shoulder" - A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral support to the
pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular stops and storage of snow
removed from the pavement.
"Sound Engineering Judgment" - A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted engineering
principles, practices and experience.
“Streets” – A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including rural or urban
roads or streets. “Streets” include all highway land and improvements, including roadways,
ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures
and appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic. See also “Highway.”
"Telecommunications" - This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, channel services,
telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private line services,
specialized mobile radio services, or any other transmission of messages or information by
electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser,
microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise,
"telecommunications" shall also include wireless telecommunications as defined in the Illinois
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, 35 ILCS 635/1 et seq.
"Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing
applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the
service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the
end-to-end communications. Retailer access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
inter-company facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used
as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall not be
included in gross charges as sales for resale. "Telecommunications" shall not include the
provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act
of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the City through an open
video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.D.F.
76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter amended.
“Telecommunications Provider” - Means any person that installs, owns, operates or controls
facilities in the public right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit telecommunications
in any form.
"Telecommunications Retailer" - Means and includes every person engaged in making sales of
telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
"Trench" - A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an underground facility.
"Utility" - The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as defined in this Chapter.
"Vent" - A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors from an
underground casing.
“City” - The City of Decatur, Illinois, a municipal corporation.
"Water Lines" - Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
"Wet Boring" - Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften the earth and to
provide a sluice for the excavated material.
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
3. A NNU A L R E G I ST R A T I O N R E Q U I R E D. Every utility that occupies right-of-way
within the City shall register on May 1 of each year with the Public Works Director, providing
the utility's name, address and regular business telephone and facsimile numbers, the name of
one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies
involving the utility's facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such
person, and evidence of insurance as required in this Chapter, in the form of a certificate of
insurance. A telecommunications provider that has registered under this Section shall be deemed
to have satisfied the registration requirement of this Code.
4. P ER M I T R E Q U I R E D; A P P L I C A T I O NS A ND F E E S. A. Permit Required.
No person shall construct (as defined in this Chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon,
under, across, or within any City right-of-way which:
(a) changes the location of the facility,
(b) adds a new facility,
(c) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this Chapter), or
(d) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over,
above, along, under across or within the right-of-way, without first filing an application with the
Public Works Director and obtaining a permit from the City therefore, except as otherwise
provided in this Chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service
connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way.
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
B. Permit Application. All applications for permits pursuant to this Chapter shall be
filed on a form provided by the City and shall be filed in such number of duplicate copies as the
City may designate. The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that
it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as “proprietary” or
“confidential” by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
C. Minimum General Application Requirements. The application shall be made by the
utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
(a) The utility’s name and address and telephone and facsimile numbers;
(b) The applicant’s name and address, if different than the utility, its telephone, facsimile
numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
(c) The names, addresses and telephone and facsimile numbers and e-mail addresses of
all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to the application;
(d) A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the facility
and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and detail of such description
shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special
emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
(e) Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the City:
(1) A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that
will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to
prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient
pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and
(2) An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential
emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous materials emergencies,
and the intended response by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to
the City and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance
with ILCC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this Section
unless the City finds that additional information or assurances are needed;
(f) Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the
certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply
with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
(g) Evidence of insurance as required in this Chapter;
(h) Evidence of posting of the security fund if required;
(i) Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of the City
Code of Decatur, and
(j) Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the City.
D. Supplemental Application Requirements for Specific Types of Utilities. In addition to
the requirements of Subsection c) of this Section, the permit application shall include the
following items as applicable to the specific utility that is the subject of the permit application:
(a) In the case of new electric power, communications or natural gas distribution system
installation, evidence that any "Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity" has been issued
by the ILCC that the applicant is required by law, or has elected, to obtain;
(b) In the case of natural gas systems, State the proposed pipe size, design, construction
class, and operating pressures;
(c) In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied;
(d) In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water pollution
requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution
Control and the Sanitary District of Decatur have been satisfied; or
(e) In the case of petroleum products pipelines, State the type or types of petroleum
products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design standard to be followed.
E. Applicant’s Duty to Update Information. Throughout the entire permit application
review period and the construction period authorized by the permit, any amendments to
information contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the
City within thirty (30) days after the change necessitating the amendment.
F. Application Fees
(a) No application fee is required to be paid by any telecommunications retailer that is
paying the City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to this Code or the
optional State telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
Telecommunications City Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, or by any electricity utility that is
paying the City electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity
Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
(b) The application fee for all other types of infrastructure constructed, operated and
maintained on the public right-of-way shall be $100.00 per individual location, unless an
alternative application fee is approved by the City Council.
5. A C T I O N O N P E R M I T A P P L I C A T IO NS. A. City Review of Permit
Applications. Completed permit applications, containing all required documentation, shall be
examined by the Public Works Director within a reasonable time after filing. If the application
does not conform to the requirements of all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and
regulations, the Public Works Director shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons
therefore. If the Public Works Director is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the
requirements of this Chapter and all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations,
the Public Works Director shall issue a permit therefore as soon as practicable.
B. Additional City Review of Applications of Telecommunications Retailers.
(a) Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the City that it intends to commence work governed by
this Chapter for facilities for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall
consist of plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose
and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to the City
not less than ten (10) business days prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation
and not less than twenty-five (25) business days prior to the commencement of work requiring
excavation. The Public Works Director shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which
the facility may be placed, used and constructed. A City of Decatur permit is required to be
issued prior to work commencing.
(b) In the event that the Public Works Director fails to provide such specification of
location to the telecommunications retailer within either (1) ten (10) business days after service
of notice to the City by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving
excavation for new construction or (2) twenty-five (25) business days after service of notice by
the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction,
the telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this
Chapter.
(c) Upon the provision of such specification by the City, where a permit is required for
work pursuant to this Chapter the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the City an
application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of
Subsection (A) of this Section.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
6. E FFE C T O F P E R M I T . A. Authority Granted. No Property Right or Other Interest
Created. A permit from the City authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in
accordance with this Chapter on City rights-of-way, and does not create a property right or grant
authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the
public rights-of-way.
B. Compliance with All Laws Required. The issuance of a permit by the City does not
excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of the City and all applicable
statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
7. R E V I SE D P E R M I T DR A W I NG S. In the event that the actual locations of any
facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set of
drawings or plans to the City within ninety (90) calendar days after the completion of the
permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of
the actual facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the
permit also deviates from the requirements of this Chapter, it shall be treated as a request for
variance in accordance with this Chapter. If the City denies the request for a variance, then the
permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it
conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefore.
8. I NSU R A NC E . (a) Required Coverage and Limits. Unless otherwise provided by
franchise, license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any
facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance policies
insuring the utility as named insured and naming the City, and its elected and appointed officers,
officials, agents, and employees as additional insured on the policies listed in paragraphs 1 and 2
below:
(1) Commercial general liability insurance, written on an occurrence basis by an insurer
acceptable to the City, including premises-operations, contractual liability, explosion, collapse,
and underground hazard (commonly referred to as “X,” “C,” and “U” coverage) and productscompleted
operations coverage with limits not less than:
(i) Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for bodily injury or death to each person;
(ii) Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for property damage resulting from any one
accident; and
(iii) Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for all other types of liability;
(iv) Ten million dollars ($10,000,000) for general aggregate and completed operations
aggregate.
(2) Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a combined single
limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000) for personal injury and property damage for each
accident;
(3) Worker’s compensation with statutory limits; and
(4) Employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000) for (a) Each Accident, (b) Disease – policy limit and (c) Disease – each employee.
(b) Excess or Umbrella Policies. The coverage required by this Section may be in any
combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or umbrella policy must
provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a following-form basis such that when
any loss covered by the primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or
umbrella policy becomes effective to cover any such loss.
(c) Copies Required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies required by
this Section to the City within ten (10) days following receipt of a written request therefore from
the City. Certificates of Insurance may be requested in lieu of polices and must evidence all
requirements set forth in this section.
(d) Maintenance and Renewal of Required Coverage. The insurance policies required by
this Section shall contain the following endorsement:
“It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to
renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the City, by registered mail or certified
mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the City Manager of such intent to
cancel or not to renew.” Within ten (10) days after receipt by the City of said notice, and in no
event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and furnish to the
City evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this Section.
(e) Self-Insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage
and limit requirements required by Subsection (a) of this Section. A utility that self-insures is
not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming
of additional insured under Subsection (a), or the requirements of Subsections (b), (c) and (d) of
this Section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the City evidence sufficient to
demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements
required under Subsection (a) of this Section, such as evidence that the utility is a “private self
insurer” under the Workers Compensation Act.
(f) Effect of Insurance and Self-Insurance on Utility's Liability. The legal liability of the
utility to the City and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance
policies or self-insurance required by this Section shall not be limited by such insurance policies
or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
9. I NDE M NI F I C A T I O N. By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a
utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the City and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and
against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses,
including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or
alleged to arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures
to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or
subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in
providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized,
allowed or prohibited by this Chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided,
however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence,
misconduct or breach of this Chapter by the City, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives.
10. SE C U R I T Y . A. Purpose. The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a
form and in an amount as set forth in this Section. The Security Fund shall be continuously
maintained in accordance with this Section at the permittee’s sole cost and expense until the
completion of the work authorized under the permit. The Security Fund shall serve as security
for:
(a) The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this Chapter;
(b) Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the City occasioned by the permittee’s
failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the
City issued pursuant to this Chapter; and
(c) The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or expenses that
the City may pay or incur by reason of any action or non-performance by permittee in violation
of this Chapter including, without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work
the permittee is required by this Chapter to perform that the City must perform itself or have
completed as a consequence solely of the permittee’s failure to perform or complete, and all
other payments due the City from the permittee pursuant to this Chapter or any other applicable
law.
B. Form. The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the City in the form, at the
permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to the City, or an unconditional
letter of credit in a form acceptable to the City. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this Subsection shall, at a minimum:
(a) Provide that it will not be canceled without prior written notice to the
City via certified mail and the permittee;
(b) Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the City of any
amounts covered by it; and
(c) Shall provide a location convenient to the City and within the State of Illinois at
which it can be drawn.
C. Amount. The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to provide for the
reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that
existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the Public Works Director,
and may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the City estimates are likely to be
incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of facilities
proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the City, with
each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations,
and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial completion of
restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Public Works Director may, in the exercise of
sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be
applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund
for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required
under the provisions of this Subsection (c) for any single phase.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
D. Withdrawals. The City, upon fourteen (14) days’ advance written notice clearly
stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under this Subsection, may
withdraw an amount from the Security Fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the
City for such amount within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if
the permittee:
(a) Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
(b) Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
(c) Fails to reimburse the City for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which the City
has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any action or non-performance by the
permittee; or
(d) Fails to comply with any provision of this Chapter that the City determines can be
remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
E. Replenishment. Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice from the
City that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund, the permittee shall restore the
Security Fund to the amount specified in this Section.
F. Interest. The funds deposited shall be placed in a non-interest bearing account.
G. Closing and Return of Security Fund. Upon completion of the work authorized under
the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the Security Fund, or such portion
thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets
necessary to compensate the City for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of
this Chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the Security
Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of the City to the extent
necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the City as a result of said
revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded
to the permittee.
H. Rights Not Limited. The rights reserved to the City with respect to the Security Fund
are in addition to all other rights of the City, whether reserved by this Chapter or otherwise
authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security
Fund shall affect any other right the City may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City
shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which may be
infringed or otherwise violated.
11. P E R M I T SU SP E NSI O N A ND R E V OC A T I ON. A. City Right to Revoke
Permit. The City may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter for one or
more of the following reasons:
(a) Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete Statements in the permit
application;
(b) Non-compliance with this Chapter;
(c) Permittee’s physical presence or presence of permittee’s facilities on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat
to the public health, safety, or welfare; or
(d) Permittee’s failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance with the
permit and approved plans.
B. Notice of Revocation or Suspension. The City shall send written notice of its intent to
revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter stating the reason or reasons for the
revocation or suspension and the alternatives available to permittee under this Section 11.
C. Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt of Notice of Revocation or Suspension. Upon
receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the City, the permittee shall have the
following options:
(a) Immediately provide the City with evidence that no cause exists for the revocation or
suspension;
(b) Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the City, the deficiencies Stated in the
written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the City within five (5) working
days after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
(c) Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across,
or within the public rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the City
providing written proof of such removal to the City within ten (10) days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation. The City may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the
time periods provided in this Subsection.
D. Stop Work Order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or suspension,
the City may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for
revocation set forth within Subsection a) of this Section.
E. Failure or Refusal of the Permittee to Comply. If the permittee fails to comply with
the provisions of Subsection (C) of this Section, the City or its designee may, at the option of the
City:
(a) correct the deficiencies;
(b) upon not less than twenty (20) days notice to the permittee, remove
the subject facilities or equipment; or
(c) after not less than thirty (30) days notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance,
deem them abandoned and property of the City.
The permittee shall be liable in all events to the City for all costs of removal.
12. C H A NG E O F O W NE R SH I P O R O W NER ' S I DE NT I T Y OR L E G A L
ST A T U S. A. Notification of Change. A utility shall notify the City no less than thirty (30)
days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-of-way or change in identity of
the utility. The new owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and
privileges enjoyed by the former owner under the permit, if any, and all applicable laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations, including this Chapter, with respect to the work and facilities
in the right-of-way.
B. Amended Permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended
show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or amended permit issued in its
name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms
and conditions of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the City's
right-of-way.
C. Insurance and Bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must be changed
to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
13. G E NE R A L C O NST R U C T I O N ST A NDA R DS. A. Standards and Principles.
All construction in the right-of-way shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws,
rules and The City of Decatur Construction Standards, and commonly recognized and accepted
traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable,
the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications:
(a) Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
(b) Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
(c) Highway Design Manual;
(d) Highway Standards Manual;
(e) Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
(f) Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm. Code §545);
(g) Flagger's Handbook; and
(h) Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
B. Interpretation of City of Decatur Construction Standards. If a discrepancy exists
between or among differing principles and standards required by this Chapter, the Public Works
Director shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply
and such decision shall be final. If requested, the Public Works Director shall state which
standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the
future. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
14. T R A F F I C C ONT R OL . A. Minimum Requirements. The City's minimum
requirements for traffic protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices and this Code.
B. Warning Signs, Protective Devices, and Flaggers. The utility is responsible for
providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting
all applicable Federal, State, and local requirements for protection of the public and the utility's
workers when performing any work on the public rights-of-way.
C. Interference with Traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is minimum
interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
D. Notice When Access is Blocked. At least forty-eight (48) hours prior to beginning
work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business or institution, the
utility shall notify the resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and
duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to
Section 20 of this Chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the
circumstances.
E. Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any deficiencies in
traffic protection requirements that are brought to the utility's attention by the City.
15. L OC A T I ON OF F A C I L I T I E S. A. Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways.
(a) Overhead Parallel Facilities. Overhead parallel facilities are discouraged and may not
be permitted. If permitted, an overhead parallel facility may be located within the right-of-way
lines of a highway only if:
(1) Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line and as nearly parallel
to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment will permit;
(2) Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb with a
minimum distance of two feet behind the face of the curb, where available;
(3) Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as practicable
with minimum distance of four feet outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not
within the clear zone;
(4) No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
(5) Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot of the right-of-way line
or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
(b) Underground Parallel Facilities. An underground parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
(1) The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than
eight (8) feet from and parallel to the right-of-way line;
(2) A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if other
locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable
may be installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
(3) In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility shall be
located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than five (5) feet from the rightof-
way line and any above-grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line or as near as practicable.
B. Facilities Crossing Highways.
(a) No Future Disruption. The construction and design of crossing facilities installed
between the ditch lines or curb lines of City highways may require the incorporation of materials
and protections (such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to
the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
(b) Cattle Passes, Culverts, or Drainage Facilities. Crossing facilities shall not be located
in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
(c) 90 Degree Crossing Required. Crossing facilities shall cross at or as near to a ninety
(90) degree angle to the centerline as practicable.
(d) Overhead Power or Communication Facility. An overhead power or communication
facility shall not interfere with traffic signalization, sign visibility or City of Decatur
enhancement. It may cross a highway only if:
(1) It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ILCC’s rules entitled,
“Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines” (83 Ill. Adm. Code 305);
(2) Poles are located within one foot of the right-of-way line of the highway and outside
of the clear zone; and
(3) Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
(e) Underground Power or Communication Facility. An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
(1) The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum maintenancefree
service life; and
(2) Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in the initial
installation.
(f) Markers. The City may require the utility to provide a marker at each right-of-way
line where an underground facility other than a power or communication facility crosses a
highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone
number. Markers may also be eliminated as provided in current Federal regulations. (49 C.F.R.
192.707 (1989).
C. Facilities to be Located Within Particular Rights-of-Way. The City may require that
facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within
particular highways.
D. Freestanding Facilities.
(a) The City may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility located within
a right-of-way.
(b) The City may require any freestanding facility located within a right-of- way to be
screened from view.
E. Appearance Standards.
(a) The City may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations in order to
preserve visual quality.
(b) A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require extensive
removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the highway user or impair the
aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
F. Above Ground Installation. Above ground facilities may be installed only if:
(a) No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
(b) New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
(c) The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ suitable design
and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed
without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, selfsupporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable.
G. Facility Attachments to Bridges or Roadway Structures.
(a) Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where
the utility has demonstrated that all other means of accommodating the facility are not
practicable. Other means shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater,
independent poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely
separated from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that
are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant
pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not permitted.
(b) A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge
or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate
routing. Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or
roadway structure will be based upon the following considerations:
(1) The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and an
evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the
facility;
(2) The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in the
transportation system;
(3) The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative practicability;
(4) The proposed method of attachment;
(5) The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed facility;
(6) The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
(7) The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
(8) The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk involved.
H. PUBLIC UTILITIES IN RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
(a) All public, quasi-public or private utility lines for telecommunications, electrical, gas,
cable TV or similar services shall be placed in easements and entirely underground in residential
subdivisions. Where public, quasi-public or private service lines are placed underground entirely
throughout a subdivided area, said conduits or cable shall be placed within easements or
dedicated public ways in a manner which will not conflict with other underground services.
(b) Utility Installation: All utility equipment boxes shall be located so as to not be
unsightly or hazardous to the public. Utility equipment exceeding a volume of 160 cubic feet in
size shall be placed a minimum of 25 feet away from the edge of the pavement when located
along a public roadway. When installed in a residential district, utility equipment shall be placed
within easements or public right of ways adjacent to rear or side yards. Utility equipment boxes
shall be grouped in clusters to the greatest extent possible. No more than four (4) utility
equipment boxes shall be placed in a cluster. Clusters shall not occupy more than 160 square feet
of surface area when a rectangular perimeter is measured around all boxes.
(c) No more than one cluster of utility boxes shall be located on a public utility easement
on a lot of record or public right of way adjacent to one lot of record. Utility boxes shall be one
hundred fifty feet (150') apart, unless clustered. If engineering techniques as approved by the
City do not allow a distance of one hundred fifty feet (150'), the City may approve a shorter
distance.
(d) All gas mains shall be placed within the street right of way or within easements.
(e) Underground work, either the installation of or the repair of existing sewer and water
systems, cannot commence until the appropriate public or quasi-public utilities are staked and the
Public Works Director.
16. C O NST R U C T I O N M E T H O DS AND M AT E R I AL S. All construction shall meet
the requirements of the City of Decatur Construction Standards except as may be modified
herein.
A. Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Construction Methods.
(a) Boring or Jacking. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
(1) Pits and Shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be accomplished from
pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Public Works Director from the edge of the
pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of
boring or jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking operations are
completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades.
Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely
support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.
(2) Wet Boring or Jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under the
roadway.
(3) Borings with Diameters Greater Than 6 Inches. Borings over six inches in diameter
shall be accomplished with an auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not
exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch.
(4) Borings with Diameters 6 Inches or Less. Borings of six inches or less in diameter
may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method.
(5) Tree Preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of any tree designated by
the Public Works Director to be preserved shall be bored under or around the root system.
(b) Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on rights-of-way
shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of Section 603 of IDOT's "Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction."
(1) Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum
consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only one half of any intersection may have an
open trench at any time unless special permission is obtained from the Public Works Director.
(2) Open Trench and Excavated Material. Open trench and windrowed excavated
material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the
roadway and the trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain
on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an
off-road location.
(3) The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the Public
Works Director to be preserved.
(c) Backfilling.
(1) Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities shall be
backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and materials in accordance with
IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.” When excavated material
is hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
(2) For a period of three years from the date construction of a facility is completed, the
utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to
construction of the facility. If so ordered by the Public Works Director, the utility, at its expense,
shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and
properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and
driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the Public Works Director.
(d) Pavement Cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be permitted on a
highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set
forth in this paragraph (4) is permitted under Section 21, the following requirements shall apply:
(1) Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled as soon as practicable in
accordance with City of Decatur Construction Standards for Trench Backfill and Bedding (Std
2050) or as designated by the Public Works Director and compacted in accordance with IDOT
standards.
(2) Restoration of pavement, in kind and in accordance with City of Decatur Construction
Standards, shall be accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous
mixture shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or
the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the City.
(3) All saw cuts shall be full depth.
(4) For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in
the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless
such work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and
unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
J.U.L.I.E. locate.
(5) City has the right to perform patching and be reimbursed by the utility if the utility
fails to do so within a reasonable period of time and after written notification to utility via fax,
mail or personal service.
(e) Encasement.
(1) Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any other
superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by one-piece fabrication or by
welding or jointed installation approved by the City.
(2) The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be located in the area established as clear
zone for that particular section of the highway.
(3) In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished between
bore pits unless continuous pipe or City approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway.
Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is
continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the City. Bell and spigot type pipe
shall be encased regardless of installation method.
(4) In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may be eliminated.
(5) In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with installations of more
than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if: (1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes
future maintenance or repair and (2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided;
(6) If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the facility shall
be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt the right-of-way.
(f) Minimum Cover of Underground Facilities.
(1) Cover shall be provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the
following table for minimum cover for the type of facility:
TYPE OF FACILITY MINIMUM COVER
Power or
Communication Line
30 Inches
(In General)
Communication Line
Installed by the Plowed
Method
24 Inches
Gas or Petroleum
Products
30 Inches
Water Line 42 inches.
Sanitary Sewer, Storm
Sewer, or Drainage
Line
Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection.
B. Standards and Requirements for Particular Types of Facilities.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
(a) Electric Power or Communication Lines.
(1) Code Compliance. Electric power or communications facilities within City rights-ofway
shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill.
Adm. Code 305 (formerly General Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled
“Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communications Lines,” and the National
Electrical Safety Code.
(2) Overhead Facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities shall use single
pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make
every reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed.
Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with
guy guards for maximum visibility.
(3) Underground Facilities.
(i) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is
given to boring in order to minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads.
(ii) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided between
jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if:
(a) the crossing is installed by the use of “moles,” “whip augers,” or other approved
method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable installation or
(b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted prior to roadway
construction.
(iii) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code.
(b) Underground Facilities Other than Electric Power or Communication Lines.
Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines may be installed by:
(1) the use of “moles,” “whip augers,” or other approved methods which compress the earth to
move the opening for the pipe;
(2) jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or toes of slopes
of the highway;
(3) open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if
prior to roadway construction; or
(4) tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible by other means.
(c) Gas Transmission, Distribution and Service. Gas pipelines within rights-of-way shall
be constructed, maintained, and operated in a City approved manner and in conformance with the
Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part
192 – Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards
(49 CFR 192), IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,” and all
other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
(d) Petroleum Products Pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within rights-of-way shall
conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping. (Liquid
Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4).
(e) Waterlines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines or Drainage Lines. Water lines,
sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or
exceed the recommendations of the current “Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois.”
(f) Ground Mounted Appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or
underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall be provided with a
vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width beyond the appurtenance in all
directions. The vegetation-free area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by
heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the Public Works Director. With the approval
of the Public Works Director, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of
vegetation free area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted black or
neutral color as approved by the Public Works Director to blend with the surroundings, per City
rules and regulations.
C. Materials.
(a) General Standards. The materials used in constructing facilities within rights-of-way
shall be those meeting the City of Decatur Construction Standards, accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT’s “Standards Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction,” the requirements of the Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards
established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
(b) Material Storage on Right-of-Way. All pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other
materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner
to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the
right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must
be obtained from the City.
(c) Hazardous Materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the City shall identify any
hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction of the new facilities or removal of
any existing facilities.
D. Operational Restrictions. (AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
(a) Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of the City, be
required to be discontinued when such operations would create hazards to traffic or the public
health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or restricted
when conditions are such that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way
or other property.
(b) These restrictions may be waived by the Public Works Director when emergency
work is required to restore vital utility services.
(c) Unless otherwise permitted by the City, the hours of construction are those set forth in
Chapter 48, Section 11 of the City Code of Decatur.
E. Location of Existing Facilities. Any utility proposing to construct facilities in the City
shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence and location of existing aboveground and
underground facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The
City will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the City or by J.U.L.I.E., a
utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding
weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage
Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.).
17. V E G E T A T I ON C ONT R OL . A. Tree Trimming Permit Required. Tree trimming
shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and
the issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this Chapter.
(a) Application for Tree Trimming Permit. Applications for tree trimming permits shall
include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent workers with supervision
who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate
an expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
(b) Damage to Trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen trees
will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for
assessment of damages. The City will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and
for trees removed without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for damaged trees or
unauthorized removal of trees. The City may require the removal and replacement of trees if
trimming or radical pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition.
B. Specimen Trees or Trees of Special Significance. The City may require that special
measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special significance. The required
measures may consist of higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
C. Chemical Use. Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be permitted
on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director
that such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
18. R E M OV A L , R E L OC A T I ON, OR M ODI F I C A T I ONS OF U T I L I T Y
F A C I L I T I E S. A. Notice. Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the City, a
utility shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the
position of any utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the
construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any City improvement in or upon, or the
operations of the City in or upon, the rights-of-way.
B. Removal of Unauthorized Facilities. Within thirty (30) days following written notice
from the City, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related
appurtenances within the public rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of
such facilities or appurtenances from the public rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and
subject to removal in the following circumstances:
(a) Upon expiration or termination of the permittee’s license or franchise, unless
otherwise permitted by applicable law;
(b) If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a license or
franchise, if required;
(c) If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a required permit
in violation of this Chapter; or
(d) If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by the
permittee’s license or franchise.
C. Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities. The City retains the right and
privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-way of the City, as the City
may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety
emergency. If circumstances permit, the City shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to
cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a
facility. The cost to restore the facilities shall be borne totally by the utility.
D. Abandonment of Facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the public rightsof-
way of the City, the utility shall notify the City within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of
such notice the City may direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Public
Works Director determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health,
safety and welfare. In the event that the City does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility
to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the City, the abandoning utility shall be deemed
to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or
person. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
19. C L E A NU P A ND R E ST O R A T I ON. Upon completion of all construction or
maintenance of facilities, the utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and
terrain in a timely manner and to the satisfaction of the City. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and
methods approved by the Public Works Director. Such cleanup and repair may be required to
consist of backfilling, re-grading, reseeding, re-sodding, or any other requirement to restore the
right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the
commencement of the project. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
20. M A I NT E NA NC E A ND E M E R G E NC Y M A I NT E NA NC E . A. General.
Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way are to be
maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory to the City and at the utility's expense.
B. Emergency Maintenance Procedures. Emergencies may justify non-compliance with
normal procedures for securing a permit: (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
(a) If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right-of-way, the
utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or
the public on the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a
hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require
the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate signs and lights
shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no
other means of access to the facility is available.
(b) In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the Public Works
Director or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to what
steps have been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the
necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement
of traffic, the City police shall be notified immediately.
(c) In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly
as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling public.
C. Emergency Repairs. The utility must file in writing with the City of a description of
the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after an emergency repair.
21. V A R I A NC E S. A. Request for Variance. A utility requesting a variance from one
or more of the provisions of this Chapter must do so in writing to the Public Works Director as a
part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of this Chapter from
which a variance is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
B. Authority to Grant Variances. The Public Works Director shall decide whether a
variance is authorized for each provision of this Chapter identified in the variance request on an
individual basis. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
C. Conditions for Granting of Variance. The Public Works Director may authorize a
variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
(a) One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain features or
an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the
provision unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
(b) All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would conform with
the provision from which a variance is requested are impracticable in relation to the requested
approach.
D. Additional Conditions for Granting of a Variance. As a condition for authorizing a
variance, the Public Works Director may require the utility requesting the variance to meet
reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this
Chapter but which carries out the purposes of this Chapter.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
22. P E NA L T I E S. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than One
Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). There may be
times when the City will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the
utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this Chapter. Unless the utility
shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the
utility shall bear the City's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying,
relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative
agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the City.
Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-69, October 31, 2011)
23. E NF O R C E M E NT . Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any
additional or further remedies that the City may have for enforcement of this Chapter.
24. SE V E R A B I L I T Y . If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of
this Chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and
such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
25. E FFE C T I V E DA T E . This Ordinance shall take effect ten (10) days after its
passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form.
Chapter 41.2
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
(Adopted, Ordinance 2018-29, July 16, 2018)
1. PURPOSE. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations, standards and
procedures for the sitting and collocation of small wireless facilities on rights-of-ways
within the City’s jurisdiction, or outside the rights-of-way on property zoned by the City
exclusively for commercial or industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Small
Wireless Facilities Deployment Act as amended.
2. DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
Antenna- communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio
frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
Applicable code- building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a
recognized national code organization or local amendments to those codes, including the
National Electrical Code.
Applicant- any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
Application- a request submitted by an applicant to the City for a permit to collocate small
wireless facilities, and a request that includes the installation of a new utility pole for such
collocation, as well as any applicable fee for the review of such application.
Central Business District- Defined in the City’s Zoning Ordinance as district B-4, and is
generally bounded by Wood Street, Jackson Street, Cerro Gordo Street and Church Street.
The exact boundaries of the Central Business District are shown on the Zoning District
Map which is reviewed and approved annually by the City Council, and is kept on file with
the City Clerk.
Collocate or collocation- to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless
facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole.
Communications service- cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 555(6), as amended;
information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; telecommunications
service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; mobile service, as defined in 47
U.S.C. 153(53) as amended; or wireless service other than mobile service.
Communications service provider- a cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5), as
amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended;
a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(51), as amended; or a wireless
provider.
FCC- the Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
Fee- a one-time charge.
Historic District or historic landmark- a building, property, or site, or group of buildings,
properties, or sites that are either (i) listed in the National Register of Historic Places or
formally determined eligible for listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the
individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and
determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with Section VI.D.1.a.i
through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at 47
CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site,
or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the City pursuant to a preservation program
that meets the requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation program by the
Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
Law- a federal or State statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or local
ordinance or resolution.
Micro wireless facility- a small wireless facility that is not larger in dimension than 24
inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and that has an exterior
antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
Municipal utility pole- a utility pole owned or operated by the City in public rights-ofway.
Permit- a written authorization required by the City to perform an action or initiate,
continue, or complete a project.
Person- an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association,
trust, or other entity or organization.
Public safety agency- the functional division of the federal government, the State, a unit
of local government, or a special purpose district located in whole or in part within this
State, that provides or has authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or
other emergency services to respond to and manage emergency incidents.
Rate- a recurring charge.
Right-of-way- the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public
sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use. Right-of-way does not
include City owned aerial lines.
Small wireless facility- a wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications:
(i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet in volume or,
in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed
elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet; and (ii) all
other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility is
cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated
ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric
meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based
enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable
runs for the connection of power and other services.
Utility pole- a pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a communications
service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, or similar function.
Wireless facility- equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications
between user equipment and a communications network, including: (i) equipment
associated with wireless communications; and (ii) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or
fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment,
regardless of technological configuration. Wireless facility includes small wireless
facilities. Wireless facility does not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under,
or within which the equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or
fiber-optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or
fiber-optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with
an antenna.
Wireless infrastructure provider- any person authorized to provide telecommunications
service in the State that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment,
wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless
services provider but is acting as an agent or contractor for a wireless services provider for
the application submitted to the City.
Wireless provider- a wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider.
Wireless services provider- any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis using
licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided using
wireless facilities.
Wireless services provider- a person who provides wireless services.
Wireless support structure- a freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either
guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or proposed structure designed to
support or capable or supporting wireless facilities. Wireless support structure does not
include a utility pole.
3. REGULATIONS OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
A. Permitted Use. Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and
subject to administrative review, except as provided in paragraph (9) regarding
Height Exceptions or Variances, but not subject to zoning review or approval if they
are collocated (i) in rights-of-way in any zoning district, or (ii) outside rights-of-way
in property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
B. Permit Required. An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from the City to
collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be received and processed, and
permits issued shall be subject to the following conditions and requirements.
1) Application Requirements. A wireless provider shall provide the following
information to the City, together with the City’s Small Cell Facilities Permit
Application, as a condition of any permit application to collocate small wireless
facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure:
a) Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility pole, make-ready
analysis prepared and sealed by a structural engineer, licensed in the State of
Illinois;
b) The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility pole would
be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate surroundings
depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed small wireless
facility would be mounted or location where utility poles or structures would
be installed. This should include a depiction of the completed facility;
c) Specifications and drawings prepared and sealed by a structural engineer,
licensed in the State of Illinois, for each proposed small wireless facility
covered by the application as it is proposed to be installed;
d) The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other wireless
equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
e) A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each small wireless
facility covered by the application, if approved; and
f) Certification that the collocation complies with the Collocation Requirements
and Conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant’s knowledge.
g) In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be attached to an
existing pole owned by an entity other than the City, the wireless provider shall
provide legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner of such pole to
the proposed collocation.
2) Application Process. The City shall process applications as follows:
a) The first completed application shall have priority over applications received
by different applicants for collocation on the same utility pole or wireless
support structure.
b) An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole
or wireless support structure, or replacement of an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and
shall be deemed approved if the City fails to approve or deny the application
within 90 days after the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the City in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 75 days after
the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after
submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the
deemed approved notice by the City. The receipt of the deemed approved
notice shall not preclude the City’s denial of the permit request within the time
limits as provided under the Ordinance.
c) An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the installation
of a new utility pole shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and
deemed approved if the City fails to approve or deny the application within 120
days after the submission of a completed application.
However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a
deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the City in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 105 days after
the submission of a completed application.
The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after
submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the
deemed approved notice by the City. The receipt of the deemed approved
notice shall not preclude the City’s denial of the permit request within the same
time limits as provided under this Ordinance.
d) The City shall deny an application which does not meet the requirements of the
Ordinance.
If the City determines that applicable codes, ordinances or regulations that
concern public safety, or the Collocation Requirements and Conditions
contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be
replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of the
provider.
The City shall document the basis for denial, including the specific code
provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and send the
documentation to the applicant on or before the day the City denies an
application.
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the City and resubmit the
revised application once within 30 days after notice of denial is sent to the
applicant without paying an additional application fee. The City shall approve
or deny the revised application within 30 days after the applicant resubmits the
application or it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application
within 30 days of denial shall require the applicant to submit a new application
with applicable fees, and recommencement of the City’s review period.
The applicant must notify the City in writing of its intention to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be submitted with
the revised application.
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in
the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the cure requires
the review of a new location, new or different structure to be collocated upon,
new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless
facility.
3) Pole Attachment Agreement. Within 30 days after an approved permit to
collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the Public Works
Director, or designee, and the applicant shall enter into a Master Pole Attachment
Agreement, provided by the Public Works Department for the initial collocation
on a municipal utility pole by the applicant. For subsequent approved permits to
collocate on a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the Public Works
Director, or designee, and applicant shall enter into a License Supplement of the
Master Pole Attachment Agreement.
4) Completeness of Application. Within 30 days after receiving an application, the
City shall determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant.
If an application is incomplete, the City must specifically identify the missing
information. An application shall be deemed complete if the City fails to provide
notification to the applicant within 30 days after all documents, information and
fees specifically enumerated in the City’s permit application form are submitted by
the applicant to the City.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the City sends the notice of
incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
5) Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
a) An express written agreement by both the applicant and the City; or
b) A local, State or federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes
the delay.
6) Consolidated Applications. An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless
facilities within the jurisdiction of the City shall be allowed, at the applicant’s
discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the
collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities if the collocations each involve
substantially the same type of small wireless facility and substantially the same type
of structure.
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the City may remove
small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat separately small
wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been provided
of that do not qualify for consolidated treatment or that are denied. The City may
issue separate permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated
application.
7) Duration of Permits. The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than
5 years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless the City
makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified utility pole
do not comply with the applicable City codes or any provision, condition or
requirement contained in this Ordinance.
If the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act, as amended, is repealed as
provided in Section 90 therein, renewals of permits shall be subject to the applicable
City code provisions or regulations in effect at the time of renewal.
8) Means of Submitting Applications. Applicants shall submit applications,
supporting information and notices to the City by personal delivery to the City’s
Decatur Public Works Department at the City’s designated place of business, by
regular mail postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means,
including electronic mail.
4. COLLOCATION REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS.
A. Public Safety Space Reservation. The City may reserve space on municipal utility
poles for future public safety uses, for the City’s electric utility uses, or both, but a
reservation of space may not preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility unless
the City reasonably determines that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate
both uses.
B. Installation and Maintenance. The wireless provider shall install, maintain, repair,
and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and good repair and in
compliance with the requirements and conditions of this Ordinance. The wireless
provider shall ensure that its employees, agents, or contracts that perform work in
connection with its small wireless facilities are adequately trained and skilled in
accordance with all applicable industry and governmental standards and regulations.
C. No interference with public safety communication frequencies. The wireless
provider’s operation of the small wireless facilities shall not interfere with the
frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety communications.
1) A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency
that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety agency’s
communications equipment.
2) Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance with
industry standards and the FCC’s regulations addressing unacceptable interference
to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency.
3) If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has
been given written notice of the interference by the public safety agency, the
wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in a manner
consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures for interference with
public safety spectrum established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through
47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675.
4) The City may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such
interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of Federal
Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the interference as
required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
D. The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on City utility poles
that are part of an electric distribution or transmission system within the
communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole.
However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be
located in the communications space on the City utility pole and on the top of the pole,
if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes
for work involving the top of the pole.
For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms “communication space”, “communication
worker safety zone”, and “electric supply zone” have the meanings given to those terms
in the National Electrical Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers.
E. The wireless supplier shall comply with all applicable codes and local code provisions
or regulations that concern public safety.
F. The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards that are generally
applicable for decorative utility pole, or reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic
requirements that are set forth in a City ordinance, written policy adopted by the City,
a comprehensive plan or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the
rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark, in a historic district or the Central
Business District.
G. Alternate Placements. Except as provided in this Collocation Requirements and
Conditions Section, a wireless provider shall not be required to collocation small
wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required
to collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with respect
to an application for the collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new
utility pole, the City may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an
existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within 100 feet of the
proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the
alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate location and
structure does not impose technical limits or additional material costs as determined by
the applicant.
If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the City, the applicant shall provide
written certification describing the property rights, technical limits or material cost
reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in this paragraph.
H. Height Limitations. The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more
than 10 feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure on which the small
wireless facility is collocated.
New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small
wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
1) 10 feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other than a utility pole
supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on the date the application is
submitted to the City, that is located 300 feet of the new or replacement utility
pole or wireless support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within
the jurisdictional boundary of the City, provided the City may designate which
intersecting right-of-way within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless
support structure shall control the height limitation or such facility; or
2) 45 feet above ground level.
I. Height Exceptions or Variances. If an applicant proposes a height for a new or
replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on which the small wireless
facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall apply for a variance in
conformance with the procedures, terms and conditions set forth in Zoning Ordinance
of the City of Decatur.
J. Contractual Design Requirements. The wireless provider shall comply with
requirements that are imposed by a contract between the City and a private property
owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles and
ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
K. Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing. The wireless provider shall comply with
applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances concerning the
location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way if the requirements
include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses wireless provider requests for
exception or variance and do not prohibit granting of such exceptions or variances.
L. Undergrounding Regulations. The wireless provider shall comply with local code
provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements that prohibit the
installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles on a right-of-way
without prior approval if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process
that addresses request to install such new utility poles or modify such existing utility
poles and do not prohibit the replacement of utility poles.
M. Collocation Completion Deadline. Collocation for which a permit is granted shall
be completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit, unless the City and the
wireless provider agree to extend the period or a delay is caused by make-ready work
for a municipal utility pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability
at the site, provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within 60 days
after issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the
additional time to complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the
permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the City grants an extension in
writing to the applicant.
5. APPLICATION FEES. Application fees are imposed as follows.
A. Applicant shall pay an application fee of $650 for an application to collocate a
single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure,
and $350 for each small cell wireless facility addressed in a consolidated
application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing utility
poles or wireless support structures.
B. Applicant shall pay an application fee of $1,000 for each small wireless facility
addressed in an application that includes the installation of a new utility pole for
such collocation.
C. Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local ordinance,
applications pursuant to this Section shall be accompanied by the required
application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
D. The City shall not require an application, approval or permit, or require any fees
other charges, from a communications service provider authorized to occupy the
rights-of-way, for:
1) Routine maintenance.
2) The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are
substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider
notifies the City at least 10 days prior to the planned replacement and
includes equipment consistent with subsection d. under the Section titled
Application Requirements; or
3) The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement of
micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between
existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
4) Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the City to work within
rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane
closures.
6. EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY. Nothing in this Ordinance authorizes a person
to collocate small wireless facilities on:
A. Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by the City or
another unit of local government that is not located within the rights-of-way, or a
privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure without the consent of the
property owner;
B. Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest preserve district, or
conservation district for public park, recreation or conservation purposes without
the consent of the affected district that are under the jurisdiction and control of a
different unit of local government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
C. Property owned by a rail carrier registered under Section 18c-7201 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter rail service, or
an electric utility as defined in Section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act, without
the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail service, or electric utility. The
provisions of this Ordinance do not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such
utility’s wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained
consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of Section 16-108.5 of the Public
Utilities Act.
For the purpose of this subsection, “public utility” has the meaning given to that
term in Section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this Ordinance shall
be construed to relieve any person from any requirement (a) to obtain a franchise
or State-issued authorization to offer cable service or video service or (b) to obtain
any required permission to install, place, maintain, or operate communications
facilities, other than small wireless facilities subject to this Ordinance.
7. PRE-EXISTING AGREEMENTS. Existing agreements between the City and the
wireless providers that relate to collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way,
including the collocation of small wireless facilities on City utility poles, that are in effect
on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the City’s
utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the City before June 1, 2018, subject to
applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into after June 1,
2018, shall comply with this Ordinance.
A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the City on the effective date of
the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the City makes available under this
Ordinance for the collocation of small wireless facilities or the installation of new utility
poles for the collocation of small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application
submitted two or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the City that it
opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement remains in effect, subject
to applicable termination provisions, for small wireless facilities the wireless provider has
collocated on the City’s utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the City before
the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option under this paragraph.
8. ANNUAL RECURRING RATE. A wireless provider shall pay to the City an annual
recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a City utility pole located in a rightof-
way that equals (a) $200 per year or (b) the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to
the wireless provider’s use of space on the City utility pole.
If the City has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs, the rate shall be $200
payable on the first day after the first anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of
intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
9. ABANDONMENT. A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period
of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility shall remove the
small wireless facility within 90 days after receipt of written notice from the City notifying
the wireless provider of the abandonment.
The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the City
to the owner at the last known address of the wireless provider. If the small wireless facility
is not removed within 90 days of such notice, the City may remove or cause the removal
of such facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal utility
poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law
for removal or cost recovery.
A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the City if it sells or transfers small
wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the City. Such notice shall include the name
and contact information of the new wireless provider.
10. DISPUTE RESOLUTION. The Circuit Court of Macon County shall have exclusive
jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small wireless
facilities on municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the City shall allow the
collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than $200 per year
per municipal utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
11. INDEMNIFICATION. A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the City harmless
against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from
or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the City improvements or
right-of-way associated with such improvements by the wireless provider or its employees,
agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this Code and
the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act, as amended. A wireless provider has no
obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as may be due
to or caused by the sole negligence of the City or its employees or agents. A wireless
provider shall further waive any claims that they may have against the City with respect to
consequential, incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of
liability.
12. INSURANCE. The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider’s own cost and
expense, the following insurance:
A. Property insurance for its property’s replacement cost against all risks;
B. Workers’ compensation insurance, as required by law;
OR
C. Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities on the City
improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection against limits
consistent with its requirements of other users of City improvements or rights-ofway,
including coverage of bodily harm and property damage.
The wireless provider shall include the City as an additional insured on commercial
general liability policy and provide certification and documentation of inclusion of
the City in a commercial general liability policy prior to the collocation of any
wireless facility.
A small wireless provider may self-insure all or portion of the insurance coverage
and limit requirement required by the City. A wireless provider that self-insures is
not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for
the name of additional insureds under this Section. A wireless provider that elects
to self-insure shall provide to the City evidence sufficient to demonstrate its
financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage limits required by the City.
13. SEVERABILITY. If any provision of this Ordinance or application thereof to any person
or circumstances is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity shall not
affect other provisions or applications of this Ordinance that can be given effect without
the invalid application or provision, and each invalid provision or invalid application of
this Ordinance is severable.
CHAPTER 42
CABLE SERVICE AND
COMPETITIVE VIDEO SERVICE
1. TITLE. This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Cable Service and
Competitive Video Service Chapter.
2. DEFINITIONS
Affiliate means another Person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is
under common ownership or control such Person.
Cable Operator means any Person or group of Persons (1) who provides Cable Service
over a Cable System and directly or through one or more Affiliates owns a significant
interest in such Cable System, or (2) who otherwise controls or is responsible for,
through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a Cable System.
Cable Service means (a) the one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video
programming, or (ii) other programming service, and (b) subscriber interaction, if any,
which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other
programming service and as that term is defined in 47 U.S.C. Sec. 522(6) .
Cable System means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and
associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to
provide Cable Service which includes video programming and which is provided to
multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include (i) a facility
that serves only to retransmit the television signals of 1 or more television broadcast
stations; (ii) a facility that serves subscribers without using any Public Right-of-Way;
(iii) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the
provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, except that such facility
shall be considered a Cable System, other than for purposes of 42 U.S.C. § 541 (c), to
the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to
subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand
services; (iv) an open video system that complies with 42 U.S.C. § 573; (v) any
facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system; (vi)
any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system;
or (vii) the facilities of a Competitive Video Service Provider under this Chapter.
Revised 10/11
City Council means the elected City Council for the City of Decatur, Illinois.
Commission means the Illinois Commerce Commission.
Competitive Video Service means video programming provided by a Competitive
Video Service Provider and provided through wireline facilities located at least in part
in the public rights-of-way without regard to delivering technology, including internet
protocol technology. This definition does not include video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d).
Competitive Video Service Agreement means the agreement executed by the
Municipality and a Competitive Video Service Provider pursuant to this Chapter.
Competitive Video Service Provider means an entity providing video services that has
not executed a Franchise Agreement with the Municipality as of the effective date of
this Chapter and is not a Cable Operator, or an Affiliate, successor, or assignee of such
Cable Operator.
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof (including a renewal of an
authorization which has been granted subject to 47 U.S.C. § 546), issued by the
Franchising Authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit,
license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes the
construction or operation of a Cable System.
Franchise Agreement means the agreement executed by the Franchising Authority and
a Cable Operator pursuant to this Chapter.
Franchising Authority means the City of Decatur, Illinois.
Gross Revenues means all consideration of any kind or nature, including without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions (services or goods)
received by the Provider from the provision of Service within the service area or
Holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or video
service within the holder’s cable service or video service area within the City.
1. Included Items: Subject to paragraph (2), the term “Gross Revenues”
shall include the following:
a. All charges and fees paid by subscribers for the provision of
Service, including fees attributable to Service when sold
individually or as part of a package or bundle, in which case the
portion of the revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue
unless the Operator, Provider or Holder can reasonably identify
the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and
records that are kept in the regular course of business, or
functionally integrated, with services other than the Service;
b. All revenue derived from the Provider’s Service pursuant to
compensation arrangements for advertising sales and home
shopping (including Home Shopping Network and any
comparable shopping from home network) sales attributable to
the local service area. Advertising commissions paid to third
parties (excluding any refunds, rebates, or discounts the Provider
may make to advertisers) shall not be netted against advertising
revenue included in Gross Revenues. The allocation of
advertising and home shopping compensation shall be based on
the number of subscribers in the Municipality divided by the total
number of subscribers in relation to the relevant region or
national compensation arrangement; and
c. All revenue collected by the Provider, arising from or attributable
to the provision of Service by the Provider within the
Municipality including, but not limited to: fees charged
Subscribers for any basic, optional, premium, per-channel or perprogram
service including, but not limited to pay-per-view and
video on demand charges; franchise fees; installation and reconnection
fees; converter rentals and other cable service or video
service equipment and/or sales; late payment fees or charges,
insufficient funds check charges, and other charges assessed to
recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments or
administrative fees including, but not limited to service order and
service termination charges; upgrade, downgrade or other changein-
service fees, including but not limited to activation,
installation, and repair charges; pro rata advertising revenues; pro
rata revenues from home shopping commissions; and any pro rata
value (at retail price levels) of any non-monetary remuneration
received by the Provider in consideration of the performance of
advertising or any other service of the system, including fees
attributable to Service when sold individually or as part of a
package or bundle, or functionally integrated, with services other
than the Service.
d. The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b).
2. For the purposes of this Chapter, the term “Gross Revenues” shall not
include the following:
a. Any revenue not actually received, even if billed, such as bad
debt net of any recoveries of bad debt; subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-
801(c)(1)(vi).
b. Refunds, rebates, credits or discounts to subscribers or the
Municipality to the extent not already offset by clause (a.) and to
the extent such refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to
the Service;
c. Any revenues received by the Provider or its Affiliates from the
provision of services or capabilities other than the Service,
including telecommunications services, information services, and
services, capabilities, and applications that may be sold as part of
a package or bundle, or functionally integrated, with the Service;
d. Any revenues received by the Provider or its Affiliates for the
provision of directory or Internet advertising, including yellow
pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic
publishing;
e. Any requirements or charges for managing the public rights-ofway
with respect to a Franchise or Competitive Video Service
Agreement under this Chapter, including payments for bonds,
security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification,
penalties, or liquidated damages;
f. Any amounts attributable to the provision of Service to customers
at no charge, including the provision or such Service to the public
institutions without charge;
g. Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability imposed on
the customer or the transaction by a Federal, State, or local
government or any other governmental entity, collected by the
Provider, and required to be remitted to the taxing entity,
including sales and use taxes and utility user taxes;
h. Any forgone revenue from the provision of Service at no charge
to any Person, except that any forgone revenue exchanged for
trades, barters, services, or other items of value shall be included
in Gross Revenue;
i. Sales of capital assets or surplus equipment;
j. Reimbursement by programmers of marketing costs actually
incurred by the Provider operator for the introduction of new
programming; and
k. The sale of Services for resale to the extent the purchaser is
required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser’s
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it
will resell the service within the City and pay the fee permitted by
220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
3. In the case of Service that may be bundled or integrated functionally with
other services, capabilities, or applications of the Provider, the portion of
the Provider’s revenues that shall be included in Gross Revenues shall be
that amount attributable to the Service as reflected on the books and
records of Provider kept in the regular course of business in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles and Federal
Communications Commission or Illinois Commerce Commission rules,
regulations, standards, and orders, as applicable.
4. Revenue of an Affiliate shall be included in the calculation of Gross
Revenues to the extent the treatment of such revenue as revenue of the
affiliate has the effect (whether intentional or unintentional) of evading the
payment of fees herein and permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) or which
would otherwise be paid for Service.
Holder means a person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable
or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
Municipality means the City of Decatur, Illinois.
PEG means public, education and governmental.
PEG Access Support Fee means the amount paid under this Chapter and 220 ILCS 5/21-
801(d) by the holder to the City or by a Provider to the City for the service areas within
its territorial jurisdiction.
Person means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust,
corporation or limited liability entity.
Provider means either a Cable Operator or a Competitive Video Service Provider.
Public Right-of-Way means any municipal street, alley, water or public right-of-way
dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements wherein the
City has acquired the right and authority to locate or permit the location of utilities
consistent with a Provider’s facilities. “Public Right-of-Way” shall not include any real
or personal City property that is not specifically described in the previous sentence, and
shall not include City buildings, or other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the public right-of-way.
Service means either a Cable Service or Competitive Video Service or the provision of
cable service or video service to subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the
person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service
from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
Service provider fee means the amount paid under this Chapter and 220 ILCS 5/21-801
by the holder to the City for the service areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
Video service means video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which is
provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public right-of-way
without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol technology. This
definition does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile
service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. §332(d) or any video programming provided solely
as part of, and via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic
mail, or other services offered over the public Internet.
3. GRANT OF AUTHORITY
A. In accordance with Chapter 37 of the Municipal Code and upon executing a Franchise
Agreement, a Cable Operator is authorized to occupy or use the Public Right-of-Ways within the
geographical boundaries of the Municipality to construct, operate, maintain, repair, and upgrade
existing facilities and install new facilities for the purpose of providing Cable Service for the
citizens of the Municipality. The Cable Operator may enter private property only as permitted
by the owner of such private property for the purpose of constructing, operating, maintaining,
repairing, and upgrading facilities.
B. In accordance with Chapter 37 of the Municipal Code and upon executing a
Competitive Video Service Agreement, a Competitive Video Service Provider is authorized to
occupy or use the Public Right-of-Ways within the geographical boundaries of the Municipality
to construct, operate, maintain, repair, and upgrade existing facilities and install new facilities for
the purpose of providing Competitive Video Service within the geographical boundaries of the
Municipality. Additionally, the Competitive Video Service Provider may enter private property
only as permitted by the owner of such private property for the purpose of constructing,
operating, maintaining, repairing, and upgrading facilities.
C. A Provider must comply with state and federal law and agree in its respective
Franchise Agreement or Competitive Video Service Agreement to comply with any applicable
requirements set forth in Chapter 37 of the Municipal Code. To the extent the provisions of this
Chapter 42 conflict with any of the other provisions of Chapter 37, the provisions of this Chapter
42 shall control.
4. LEVEL PLAYING FIELD. Any incumbent Cable Operator providing Cable Service
in the Municipality on the effective date of this Ordinance may immediately opt out of its
existing Franchise Agreement with the Municipality and enter into a Franchise Agreement
under Section 3 A.
5. FEES FOR OPERATION OF CABLE SERVICE AND COMPETITIVE VIDEO
SERVICE.
A. As compensation for rights granted under this Chapter, Cable Operators shall
pay to the Municipality a franchise fee of five percent (5%) of the Cable Operator’s Gross
Revenues.
B. As compensation for rights granted under this Chapter, Competitive Video Service
Providers shall pay to the Municipality a fee of five percent (5%) of the Competitive Video
Service Provider’s Gross Revenues.
C. The Municipality shall have the right to audit and to re-compute any amounts
determined to be payable in satisfaction of the fees set forth in this Section. Any additional
amount due the Municipality as a result of the audit shall be paid by Provider within thirty (30)
days after the Provider receives a written notice from the Municipality. The notice which the
Municipality sends to Provider shall include a copy of the audit report. Provider shall pay the
cost of the audit if the Municipality determines that the annual payment to the Municipality for
the preceding year is thereby increased by more than five percent (5%).
D. In the event that payment of any fee set forth in this Section, which has been
recomputed pursuant to Subsection (D) above is not made on or before the expiration of thirty
(30) days following written notice by the Municipality, Provider shall be charged and shall pay,
in addition to the amount due, interest on the amount due equal to the prevailing prime rate plus
two hundred (200) basis point of interest compounded daily from the due date for payment of the
recomputed amount. The prevailing prime rate shall be the prime rate of the First National Bank
of Decatur, Illinois.
E. Any fee payable by a Provider shall be reduced dollar for dollar by any municipal
telecommunications, messages or similar taxes levied by the Municipality on the Provider or its
customers with respect to the Services and paid by or through the Provider to the Municipality.
6. RIGHT OF WAY PROVISIONS. Cable Operators operating Cable Systems and
Competitive Video Service Providers providing Competitive Video Service in the Municipality
shall abide by any applicable Right-of-Way provisions set forth in Chapters 37 and 39 of the
Municipal Code, including this Chapter 42. To the extent the provisions of this Chapter 42
conflict with any of the other provisions of, the provisions of this Chapter 42 shall control.
7. PERMITS TO OPERATE SYSTEMS IN THE MUNICIPALITY.
A. No Person shall offer to subscribers a Cable Service or Competitive Video Service
within the Municipality except pursuant to this Chapter. A Cable Operator, however, that has
not elected under Section 4 to enter into a Franchise Agreement under Section 3 A. may
continue to provide Cable Service under its existing agreement until the expiration of such
agreement.
B. All Franchise Agreements and Competitive Video Service Agreements granted by
ordinance pursuant to this Chapter shall be nonexclusive. The City Council reserves the right to
issue as many permits as it deems advisable in the public interest.
C. The Franchise Agreements or Competitive Video Service Agreements shall take
effect and will be in force from and after the earliest period allowed by law, and upon the filing
by the Provider with the Municipality of its acceptance, in writing, of each and all of the terms
and provisions of the Franchise Agreement or Competitive Video Service Agreement; provided,
however, if the Provider shall fail to file such written acceptance within thirty days after the
passage of the ordinance by the City Council, then the ordinance granting the Franchise
Agreement or Competitive Video Service Agreement shall be null and void.
D. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Chapter is for
any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, or in conflict
with rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, then such portion shall
be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision of this Chapter, and such holding shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
E. Any Franchise Agreements or Competitive Video Service Agreements executed
pursuant to this Chapter may be revoked, after a full due process hearing, by a simple majority
vote of the City Council upon the recommendation of the Municipality, for violation of material
provisions of this Chapter, after giving the Provider ninety days notice in writing of intention to
revoke such permit, unless such violation is corrected during the period of notice, or unless the
Provider has made a reasonable attempt to correct the violation during that time and is unable to
correct to correct such violation despite such reasonable attempts.
F. The term of each Franchise Agreement and Competitive Video Service Agreement
shall be determined by the City Council, the effective date to be pursuant to Subsection C.
above.
G. All renewals shall be in accordance with federal law, if applicable.
8. SERVICE RATES TO SUBSCRIBERS: CUSTOMER SERVICE.
A. Providers may set their own service rates and conditions of service subject to the
terms of a Franchise Agreement or Competitive Video Service Agreement.
B. An up-to-date copy of all the Provider’s rates, rules, regulations and policies having to
do with subscriber service must be made available to customers, or on the Provider’s Web site,
and provided to the Municipality upon request.
C. Providers shall institute reasonable consumer service standards consistent with
Federal regulations (47 C.F.R. §76.309(c)) and as may be required in any Competitive Video
Service Agreement or Franchise granted by the Municipality. A verified and continuing pattern
of noncompliance with such customer service standards shall constitute a material breach of an
agreement entered into pursuant to this Chapter 42.
9. SCOPE.
A. This is an enabling ordinance authorizing the use of the Municipality’s Public Rightof-
Way for the provision of Cable Service and Competitive Video Service in the Municipality,
but it does not take the place of any license or permit that may be additionally required of the
Provider under Chapters 37 and 39 of the Municipal Code or any other provision of the
Municipal Code or other applicable law, either currently or at some later date.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the Provider to obtain any and all such licenses or
permits necessary to the operation and conduct of its business activities.
C. Failure of the Provider to obtain and conform to the material provisions of any and all
such franchises, licenses, or permits, and to make prescribed payments if required as a
condition of their issuance, shall be considered a violation of this Chapter, and subject the
Provider to the penalties set forth in Section 10.
10. PENALTY.
A. In addition to the provisions of Section 7. (E), having to do with revocation of
permits, any Person who willfully violates a provision of this Chapter shall be fined not less
than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for
each offense, and each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall be considered as a
separate offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-69, October 31, 2011)
B. The collection by Municipality of any damages, monies or penalties shall not affect
any other right or remedy available to Municipality, nor shall any act, or failure to act, by
Municipality be deemed a waiver of any right available to Municipality.
11. PUBLIC AND COMMUNITY BENEFITS.
A. A Provider shall designate a sufficient amount of capacity on its network to allow
the provision of a comparable number of public, educational, and governmental (“PEG”)
channels or hours of programming, at the Municipality’s discretion, as specified in any
agreement entered into pursuant to this Chapter 42 that have been activated and provided,
provided such programming is submitted in a manner and form that is capable of being
accepted and transmitted by the Provider and compatible with the Provider’s technology.
B. Any programming made available under this Section shall be solely for
noncommercial public, educational and governmental purposes and the content shall be the sole
responsibility of the Municipality.
C. Providers shall use such programming technology of its choosing as will enable the
Provider to provide emergency notification as may be necessary in accordance with the Federal
Emergency Alert System in the event of a public safety emergency.
12. SERVICE TO SCHOOLS AND PUBLIC BUILDINGS.
A. Providers offering Service in the Municipality collectively must offer one free
installation and free monthly basic Service to one outlet at each public and parochial school,
municipal government building, fire station, police station, and library building that is passed
by Providers’ systems. Each such Provider shall have the responsibility to offer a free
installation and free monthly basic Service to a share of such schools, governmental, or library
buildings. Each such Provider’s share shall be proportionate to the total number of such
Providers, unless other negotiated compensation has been provided to the Municipality.
B. Such Providers shall meet as necessary and determine who will provide Service to
which school or public building under Section 12 A. If Providers are unable to reach agreement
as to who will provide free Service to which school, governmental, or library building, the
Municipality will confer with the Providers and determine the assignments in a reasonable
manner. This obligation will apply to a new Provider of Service once that Provider’s Service is
available on the section of its system that passes the school or public building assigned to that
Provider. Until such time, the incumbent Provider of Service to that location will provide
Service to such school or public building.
13. INDEMNIFICATION. The Provider shall indemnify and save harmless the
Municipality and all contractors, officers, employees and representatives thereof from all
claims, demands, causes of action, copyright action, liability, judgments, costs and expenses or
losses for injury or death to persons or damage to property owned by, and Worker’s
Compensation claims against any parties indemnified herein, arising out of, caused by, or as a
result of the Provider’s construction, lines, cable, erection, maintenance, use or presence of, or
removal of any poles, wires, conduit, appurtenances thereto, or equipment or attachments
thereto. The Provider, however, shall not indemnify (1) the Municipality for any liabilities,
damages, cost and expense resulting from the willful misconduct or gross negligence of the
Municipality, its officers, employees and agents or (2) third parties for any activity or function
conducted in connection with any access channel or any emergency messages under Section 11
C.
14. INSURANCE. Unless otherwise specified in an agreement entered into pursuant
to this Chapter, providers shall comply with the insurance requirements of Chapters 37 and 39
of the Municipal Code, as well as the requirements of any agreement entered into pursuant to
this Chapter 42.
15. ASSIGNMENT.
A. A Provider may not assign or transfer its Franchise Agreement or Competitive Video
Service Agreement or any interest therein, without the prior consent of the Municipality, which
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed.
B. A change in the actual working control of the Provider shall be considered a “transfer”
and shall not take place without the prior written consent of the Municipality. Such consent shall
not be unreasonably withheld or delayed.
C. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, no consent shall be required, however, for (1) a
transfer of an agreement or any interest therein to an Affiliate or (2) a transfer in trust, by mortgage,
hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title or interest of the Provider in the Franchise
Agreement or Competitive Video Service Agreement or the system in order to secure
indebtedness.
D. Any request for consent to a transfer of its Franchise Agreement or Competitive
Video Service Agreement or change in control of the Provider shall be handled by the
Municipality in accordance with applicable federal and state law.
E. In the event of a transfer of a Franchise Agreement or Competitive Video Service
Agreement, the transferee or assignee must agree, in writing, to be bound by the terms of the
Franchise Agreement or Competitive Video Service Agreement subject to applicable law.
16. HOLDERS.
A. Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed.
(1) Fee Imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable service or video
service in the City.
(2) Amount of Fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five percent (5%) of
the holder’s gross revenues.
(3) Notice to the City. The holder shall notify the City at least ten (10) days prior to the
date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video service in the City.
(4) Holder’s Liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service provider fee to
the City. The holder’s liability for the fee shall commence on the first day of the calendar month
following thirty (30) days after receipt of the ordinance adopting this Section by the holder. The
ordinance adopting this Section shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on
the holder’s application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to the City.
(5) Payment Date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a quarterly
basis, forty-five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered
paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for
the calculation of the fee.
(6) Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable service or video
service providers that have an existing franchise agreement with the City in which a fee is paid.
(7) Credit for Other Payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an
existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under
that agreement may deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
Section 16(A)(2).
B. PEG Access Support Fee Imposed.
(1) PEG Fee Imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any holder
providing cable service or video service in the City in addition to the fee imposed pursuant to
16(A).
(2) Amount of Fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby shall be
one percent (1%) of the holder’s gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of gross revenues
that incumbent cable operators pay to the City or its designee for PEG access support in the City.
(3) Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the City or to the entity
designated by the City to manage PEG access. The holder’s liability for the PEG access support
fee shall commence on the date set forth in Section 16(A)(4).
(4) Payment Due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on a quarterly
basis, forty-five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered
paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for
the calculation of the fee.
(e) Credit for Other Payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an
existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been
due, all monetary payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term
of the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an
incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited against the fees that
that operator owes under Section 16 (B)(2).
C. Applicable Principles.
All determinations and calculations under this Section shall be made pursuant to generally
accepted accounting principles.
D. No Impact on Other Taxes Due from Holder.
Nothing contained in this Section shall be construed to exempt a holder from any tax that is
or may later be imposed by the City, including any tax that is or may later be required to be paid
by or through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A State-issued
authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the City’s
simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone
service provided by the holder. A State-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of
the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of government’s 911 or E911 fees, taxes or
charges.
E. Audits of Cable/Video Service Provider.
(1) Audit Requirement. The City will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on
other cable service or video service providers to submit to an audit of its books and records. The
holder shall comply with the same requirements the City imposes on other cable service or video
service providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder’s books and records and to re-compute any
amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the City. If all local franchises
between the City and cable operator terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by
the City pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are
correct.
(2) Additional Payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be paid within
thirty (30) days after the City’s submission of an invoice for the sum.
F. Late Fees / Payments.
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances adopted by
this City pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
17. SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this Ordinance, or the application of any provision of this Ordinance, is
held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall not affect other provisions of
this Ordinance, or their application, that can be given effect without the unconstitutional or
invalid provision or its application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of
such provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this Ordinance.
18. EFFECTIVE DATE. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect ten days from
and after its passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form.
CHAPTER 43
FIREARMS
1. SALE TO MINOR UNDER 16 YEARS FORBIDDEN. No person, firm or
corporation shall sell, give, loan, hire, barter, furnish, or offer for sale, or give, loan, hire, barter
or furnish to any minor under the age of sixteen (16) years within the City, without the written
consent of the parent or legal guardian of said minor, any gun, pistol, revolver, fowling piece or
other firearm or any toy gun, toy pistol, toy fowling piece or other toy firearm in which any
explosive substance can be used; or any bowie knife, dirk, dagger, slingshot or metallic knuckles,
or other deadly weapon of like character.
2. REGISTRY OF SALE REQUIRED. Every person, firm or corporation dealing in
deadly weapons of the kind mentioned in the preceding section at retail within this City shall
keep a register of all such weapons sold, loaned, rented or given away by him. Such register
shall contain the date of sale, renting, loaning or giving away; name and age of person to whom
weapon is sold, loaned, rented or given; the price of such weapon and the purpose for which it is
purchased or obtained. The said register shall list the following information:
(a) Date of sale
(b) To whom sold, loaned, rented or given
(c) Age of purchaser or person obtaining weapon
(d) Kind and description of weapon
(e) For what purpose purchased or obtained
(f) Price of weapon
(g) Number of weapon Revised 10/11
Chapter 43
Such register shall be kept open for the inspection of the police at all reasonable times
during business hours.
3. EXCEPTIONS. The provisions hereof are not intended to prevent the use of firearms
by minors on the premises of a duly licensed shooting gallery, gun club or rifle club where said
minors have the written consent of their parents or guardians therefor.
4. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this Chapter shall be fined not less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor more than
Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense and each day a violation occurs or continues
shall be considered a separate offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-70, October 31, 2011)

CHAPTER 44
FIRE PREVENTION AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CONTROL
ARTICLE I. FIRE PREVENTION AND CONTROL
1. CODE ADOPTED. The same having been duly placed and remained on file as
required, and subject to the additions, modifications, changes and deletions set out herein, the
2015 International Fire Code and Appendices (a) through (g), expressly excluding Appendices
(h) through (m), ("Code") is hereby adopted by reference. (Amended, Ordinance 2018-63,
November 5, 2018, Effective January 1, 2019)
2. WORDS AND PHRASES. The Code adopted hereby may be cited and known as the
Fire Prevention Code and is so referred to herein. Whenever in said Code the words, "name of
jurisdiction" appear in brackets, said Code is modified by removal of said brackets and
substitution of the words "the City of Decatur, Illinois" in lieu of the words contained therein,
and said Code shall be taken and construed as if such were expressly so set out therein.
Whenever in said Code reference is made to the board of appeals such shall be taken to mean and
shall be construed to refer to the Construction and Housing Board of Appeals of the City.
Whenever in this Chapter reference is made to "flammable" or "combustible", said words
shall be defined as in the rules and regulations duly promulgated by the Office of the State
Fire Marshal.
3. DELETIONS FROM CODE. The following appendices of said Code are deleted
there from and the provisions thereof are not adopted:
Appendices H, I, J, K, L, M (Amended, Ordinance 2018-63, November 5, 2018,
Effective January 1, 2019)
4. AMENDMENTS TO CODE. The following numbered sections of said Code are
hereby modified and amended as herein indicated:
Revised January, 2019
That Appendices (a) through (g) shall be adopted as 2015 International Fire Code,
expressly excluding Appendices (h) through (m) deleted in Section 3 above.
Section 609. Commercial Kitchen Hoods. All commercial kitchen exhaust hood
extinguishing systems and associated portable fire extinguishers in place to protect
commercial cooking appliances shall be UL 300 compliant on or before January 1, 2009. For
the purposes of this Code, commercial cooking appliances may be defined as those appliances
used to prepare foods sold for money or to raise money, or as regular part or service in
commercial enterprise. The determination of use for commercial purposes shall be determined
by the authority having jurisdiction.
903.4.2 substitute “…exterior of the building” for “…interior and exterior of the
building”.
907.4 substitute “…initiation is required” for “…initiation is installed”.
907.4.2 substitute “…fire alarm system is required” for “…fire alarm system is
installed”.
Section 8. New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building
numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible
from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their
background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or Alphabet letters. Numbers
shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7
mm). The code enforcement official may require additional numbers as needed. (Reference:
2015 International Fire Code Section 505.1 Premises Identification).
Section 912.2.1 of the 2015 International Fire Code shall be amended, so that as so
amended, the Fire Department Connection Visible Location, will provide as follows: The
location of any Fire Department connection shall be indicated with a strobe located
approximately ten feet above grade and within ten feet of the vertical axis of the Fire Department
Connection. (Amended, Ordinance 2018-63, November 5, 2018, Effective January 1, 2019)
5. FIREWORKS. The manufacture, storage, display, possession, and discharge of
fireworks shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in addition to those provisions
relevant thereto set out in the Code. (Amended, Ordinance 2018-82, December 17, 2018,
Effective January 1, 2019)
(a) No person, firm or corporation shall manufacture, store, display, possess or
discharge fireworks without a permit therefore issued by the City.
(b) Fireworks shall mean and include any combustible or explosive composition, or any
substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include
blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or toy guns in which explosives are
used, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, dago bombs, chasers and devices of
like construction and any device containing any explosive substance, except the term
"fireworks" shall not include auto flares, wire sparklers, snakes, glow worms, trick
noisemakers and paper caps containing not in excess of .25 grain (16.2 mg.) of explosive
content per cap and toy pistols, toy guns or other devices for use of such caps, the sale and use of
which shall be permitted at all times.
(c). Revocation: Any permit issued hereunder may be revoked or suspended by the City
Manager upon two (2) days notice in writing to the person issued the permit of the opportunity
to be heard, for any violation by the permittee of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code
or the regulations duly adopted thereunder, and such suspension or revocation may be in
addition to any fine imposed. For any third or subsequent violation of Chapter 44 occurring
within twelve (12) months of the date of the first violation, the person issued the permit shall be
revoked, and the person issued the permit shall be ineligible to receive a permit for the display
or discharge of fireworks for a period of twelve (12) months.
(d). Liability of Certain Persons: No licensee, owner, permit holder, possessor,
manager, or other person in control or in charge of any place or premises holding a permit
issued hereunder shall permit the violation of any provision of statute or the City Code. It shall
not be a defense to a prosecution brought hereunder that the defendant did not have actual
knowledge of the violation.
(e). Display permit approvals: Approval for display permit shall be made in writing at
least 15 days in advance of the date of the display or discharge of fireworks.
(f). Fireworks permit fees: Fireworks permit applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
fee of Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00), for a permit to display fireworks.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2016-82, November 21, 2016)
6. CODE OFFICIAL. The Chief of the Fire Department is hereby designated the code
official and reference to such official herein or in said Code, shall be the same as if said officer
was expressly referred to. Whenever reference is made in said Code to the Department of
Building Inspections or similar reference, such shall be taken to mean and shall be construed to
refer to the Inspections Division of the Economic and Community Development Department.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
7. PERMIT APPLICATION FEE. Whenever by the provisions of Code or
ordinance a permit is required to be obtained from the code official, application for the same
shall be made at the office of the Financial Management Department upon forms there
furnished containing such information as may reasonably be required by the code official.
ARTICLE II. BASIC FIRE CONTROL MEASURES AND REGULATIONS
1. AUTHORITY AT FIRES AND OTHER EMERGENCIES. The code official or
duly authorized representatives, as may be in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency
involving the protection of life and property, is empowered to direct such operations as may be
necessary to extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks or other hazardous
conditions or situations or to take any other action necessary in the reasonable performance
of their duty. The code official may prohibit any person, vehicle or object from approaching
the scene and may remove or cause to be removed from the scene any person, vehicle or object
that may impede or interfere with the operations of the fire department. The code official
may remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle or object from hazardous areas. All
persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall do so immediately and shall not re-enter the area
until authorized to do so by the code official.
2. INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE DEPARTMENT OPERATIONS. It shall be
unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or
restrict the mobility of or block the path of travel of any fire department emergency vehicle in
any way, or to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or
hamper any fire department operation.
3. COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS. A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to
comply with any lawful order or direction of the code official or to interfere with the compliance
attempts of another individual.
4. VEHICLES CROSSING FIRE HOSE. A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled
over any unprotected fire hose of the fire department when laid down on any street, alleyway,
private drive or any other vehicle roadway without the consent of the code official in
command of said operation.
5. DEFINITION OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Authorized
emergency vehicles shall be restricted to those that are defined and authorized under the laws
of the State of Illinois.
6. OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED
EMERGENCY VEHICLES. Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle, giving
audible or visual signal, the operator of every other vehicle shall immediately drive the same to a
position as near as possible and parallel to the right-hand edge or curb of the street or roadway,
clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized
emergency vehicle or vehicles have passed, unless otherwise directed by the code official or a
police officer.
7. VEHICLES FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS. It shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle, other than one on official business, to follow closer than 300 feet
from any fire apparatus or other authorized vehicle traveling in response to a fire alarm or to drive
any vehicle within the block or immediate area where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a
fire alarm.
8. UNLAWFUL BOARDING OR TAMPERING WITH FIRE DEPARTMENT
EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT. A person shall not, without proper authorization from the code
official in charge of said fire department emergency equipment, remove equipment or cling to,
attach oneself to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any fire department emergency
vehicle, whether the same is in motion or at rest; or sound the siren, horn, bell or other soundproducing
device thereon; or manipulate or tamper with, or attempt to manipulate or tamper with
any levers, valves, switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps or any equipment or protective
clothing on, or a part of, any fire department emergency vehicle.
9. DAMAGE, INJURY - FIRE DEPARTMENT EQUIPMENT, PERSONNEL. It
shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt or conspire to damage or
deface, any fire department emergency vehicle at any time or to injure, or attempt or conspire to
injure, fire department personnel while performing departmental duties.
10. EMERGENCY VEHICLE OPERATION. The driver of any emergency
vehicle, as defined in Section 6 of this ordinance, shall not sound the siren thereon or have the
front red lights on or disobey any existing traffic regulation, except when said vehicle is
responding to an emergency call or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire.
Tactical strategies such as, but not restricted to, “move-ups” do not constitute an emergency call.
The driver of an emergency vehicle may:
(a) Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of existing traffic
regulations;
(b) Proceed past a red or stop signal or other sign, but only after slowing
down as may be necessary for safe operation;
(c) Exceed the prima facia speed limit so long as the action does not endanger
life or property;
(d) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions; or
(e) The exemptions herein granted to an emergency vehicle shall apply only
when the driver of any such vehicle in motion sounds an audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust
whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one
lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance
of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle.
11. BLOCKING FIRE HYDRANTS AND FIRE DEPARTMENT
CONNECTIONS. It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct or
restrict the access to any fire hydrant or any fire department connection for the
pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire hydrants and fire department
connections located on public or private streets and access lanes or on private property. If,
upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation, obstructions or encroachments
are not removed, the code official shall proceed to remove the same. Cost incurred in the
performance of necessary work shall be paid from the municipal treasury on certificate of the
code official and with the approval of the chief administrative official; and the legal authority
of the municipality shall institute appropriate action for the recovery of such costs.
12. HYDRANT USE APPROVAL. A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant
intended for use of the fire department for fire suppression purposes, unless such person first
secures a permit for such use from the code official and the water company having jurisdiction.
This section shall not apply to the use of such hydrants by a person employed by, and authorized
to make such use by, the water company having jurisdiction.
13. PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY. The code official shall recommend to the chief
administrative official of the municipality the location or relocation of new or existing fire
hydrants and the placement or replacement of inadequate water mains located upon public
property and deemed necessary to provide an adequate fire flow and distribution pattern. A fire
hydrant shall not be placed into or removed from service until inspected and approved by the
code official. New water mains in the City of Decatur water distribution system shall be a
minimum of (8) inches in diameter or sized to deliver the required quantity of water at
adequate pressure including fire flow where applicable.
14. YARD SYSTEMS. All new and existing ship yards, oil storage plants, lumber
yards, amusement or exhibition parks, and educational or institutional complexes and similar
occupancies and uses involving high fire or life hazards, and that are located more than one
hundred fifty (150) feet from a public street or that require quantities of water beyond the
capabilities of the public water distribution system, shall be provided with properly placed fire
hydrants. Such fire hydrants shall be capable of supplying fire flows as required by the code
official and shall be connected to a water system in accordance with accepted engineering
practices. The code official shall designate and approve the number, color coding, painting,
and location of fire hydrants. The code official may require the installation of sufficient fire
hose and equipment housed in accordance with the approved rules and may require the
establishment of a trained fire brigade when the hazard involved requires such measures.
Private hydrants shall not be placed into or removed from service until inspected and approved
by the code official.
15. MAINTENANCE OF FIRE SUPPRESSION EQUIPMENT. A person shall not
obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant or fire appliance required
to be installed or maintained under the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code, except for the
purposes of extinguishing a fire, training or testing, recharging or making necessary repairs or
when permitted by the code official. Whenever a fire appliance is removed as herein permitted, it
shall be replaced or re-installed as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been
accomplished. Defective and non-approved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced or
repaired as directed by the code official.
16. SALE OF DEFECTIVE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS. A person shall not sell, trade,
loan or give away any form, type or kind of fire extinguisher that is not approved by the code
official, or that is not in proper working order, or the contents of which do not meet the
requirements of the code official. The requirements of this section shall not apply to the sale,
trade or exchange of obsolete or damaged equipment for junk when said units are permanently
disfigured or marked with a permanent sign identifying the unit as junk.
17. STREET OBSTRUCTIONS. A person or persons shall not erect, construct,
place or maintain any bumps, fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or metal horses or any
other type of obstruction in or on any street, within the boundaries of the municipality. The
word street, as used in the ordinance, shall mean any roadway accessible to the public for
vehicular traffic, including, but not limited to, private streets or access lanes, as well as all
public streets and highways within the boundaries of the municipality unless approved by the
authority having jurisdiction.
18. SMOKING ON BUSES.
A. The smoking of a pipe, cigar, cigarette or tobacco or other substance on any motor
coach or bus of the City is prohibited.
B. The carrying or possession of any ignited, flaming, smoking or smoldering substance
on any motor coach or bus of the City while such vehicle is in service, whether parked or
moving, is prohibited.
19. SHREDDED BARK. No person, firm or corporation shall place, or caused to be
placed, shredded bark within two (2) feet of any commercial building, or exterior wall thereof, if
constructed with combustible materials.
20. EMERGENCY LIGHTS: Emergency lights shall be required for all new
construction of public buildings as well as permit required renovations in all common use restrooms,
dressing rooms, and locker rooms. (1008.3.3 item 5 shall include all public restrooms regardless of
size). (Amended, Ordinance Number 2018-63, November 5, 2018, Effective January 1, 2019)
21. FIRE DEPARTMENT KEY BOXES
(A) Unless exempted by written order of the Decatur Fire Department, and in order to
eliminate forced entries into structures and to avoid costly and time-consuming efforts in gaining
access to locked structures during times of emergency, the following structures shall be equipped
with a key lock box system at or near the main entrance or at any other such location which may
be required by the Fire Chief or any other representative of the Fire Department:
(1) All newly constructed commercial and industrial structures and places of assembly
protected by an automatic fire alarm system or automatic suppression system or any such
structure secured in a manner that restricts access during an emergency;
(2) All newly constructed multi-family residential structures that have restricted access
through locked doors and have a common corridor for access to the living quarters;
(3) All newly constructed health care facilities; and
(4) All existing structures undertaking additions, alterations or repairs which shall cause
the same to conform with the then current provisions of any of the building or property
maintenance codes adopted by the City.
(B) All structures subject hereto shall be required to install a key lock box system prior to
the issuance of any occupancy permit which shall then be functional at all times thereafter.
(C) The Fire Chief shall designate the type of key lock box system to be implemented and
shall have the authority to require all structures to use the designated system.
(D) The owner or operator of any structure subject hereto shall, at all times, keep a key in
the lock box that will permit access to the structure.
(E) The owner or operator of any structure subject hereto shall notify the Fire Department
of any changes to the key lock box system.
(F) The Fire Chief shall be authorized to implement rules and regulations governing the use
of any key lock box system. (IFC 2015 Section 506) (Amended, Ordinance 2018-63,
November 5, 2018, Effective January 1, 2019)
22. RULES AND REGULATIONS. The fire official may promulgate, publish and
enforce reasonable rules and regulations to provide for procedures and practices and to otherwise
implement the provisions, and to carry out the intent and purposes hereof.
ARTICLE III. CONTROL OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND
ENVIRONMENTALLY DAMAGING SUBSTANCES
1. DEFINITIONS PERTAINING TO HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:
The following terms as used in this Article shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them herein, unless the context otherwise requires.
(a) Clean-up. Clean-up includes all the activities necessary to contain,
collect, analyze, treat and disperse, remove and dispose of hazardous materials
and/or environmentally damaging substances, and to restore the site to preincident
condition.
(b) Clean-up Contractor. A person, company or corporation that
performs clean-up activities at hazardous materials release sites.
(c) Cost defined . All expenses incurred by the City for any fire
fighting, medical treatment, remedial, removal, or clean-up activities
involving a hazardous materials or environmentally damaging substances
release, threatened release or fire. Costs include but are not limited to
contractual services, wages, salaries, damaged or destroyed equipment, spill
control supplies, protective clothing, fire fighting or vapor suppressing foam,
medical care and medical supplies. Costs include expenses incurred by the City
for the supervision and verification of remedial and clean-up activities.
Costs shall not include the expense of actual fire suppression services and
emergency medical service which are normally or usually provided to the
public by the Fire Department, except as those costs directly relate to hazardous
materials or environmentally damaging substances, such as remedial activities
by the Fire Department Hazardous Material Response Team and fire
fighting foam operations at petroleum, alcohol, organic oils, flammable or
combustible liquid spills.
(d) Environmentally damaging substances. Any substance spilled or
released into the environment in sufficient quantity so as to cause actual or
potential human health problems if not dealt with by remedial action, or to
contaminate air, land or water.
(e) Facility. Any building, structure, installation, equipment, pipe or
pipeline including but not limited to any pit, pond, lagoon, impoundment,
ditch, landfill, storage container, motor vehicle, rolling stock or air craft or any
site where hazardous materials or environmentally damaging substances have
been deposited, stored, disposed of, placed or otherwise came to be located.
(f) Hazardous Materials. Substances or materials in quantity and
forms that may pose an unreasonable risk to health, safety or property when
stored, transported or used in commerce. Such materials include but are not
limited to: explosives, blasting agents, poisons, flammable and combustible
liquids, flammable and non-flammable gases, corrosives, oxidizers, organic
peroxides, flammable solids, radioactive materials, etiological agents.
Hazardous Materials also includes hazardous substances and hazardous
wastes.
(g) Hazardous Substances. Any substance designated under the Clean
Water Act and Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation,
Liability Act (CERCLA) (42 USC Sec. 9601 et. seq.), as now or hereafter
amended, as posing a threat to the waterways and the environment when
released.
(h) Hazardous Waste. Discarded material under Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) (42 USC Sec. 6901 et. seq.)
regulated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency because of
public health and safety concerns.
(i) Incident defined. A fire, a release or threatened release of
hazardous materials or environmentally damaging substances.
(j) Person. Any individual, business, firm, partnership, corporation,
association, trust, estate, joint venture or other legal entity, or their legal
representative or agent.
(k) Placarded Vehicle. A vehicle, that when transporting hazardous
materials, is required by the United States Department of Transportation to be
marked with placards to warn emergency responders of the hazardous cargo,
pursuant to the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act, 49 USC Sec. 1801 et.
seq.
(l) Release . Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting,
escaping, emptying, discharging, injecting, leaching, dumping, disposing,
exploding or burning of hazardous materials or environmentally damaging
substances into or on any land, air, water, well, stream, sewer, or pipe such
that hazardous materials or any constituent or environmentally damaging
substances thereof, that may enter the environment.
(m) Remedial Action. Any action consistent with a permanent
remedy of a release or threatened release of hazardous materials or
environmentally damaging substances into the environment. The term
includes, but is not limited to actions at the location of a release such as
diking, damming, trenching, covering, diverting, foaming, neutralizing,
isolating, burning, closing, plugging, moving, repairing, transferring,
recycling, etc. The actions required may also include the evacuation,
sheltering or feeding of people provision of alternative water supplies and
other activities to protect the public's health and welfare and the
environment.
(n) Responsible Party or Parties. The Responsible party includes the
following:
(1) The owner and operator of a facility or vessel from
which there is a fire or release or threatened release of hazardous
materials or environmentally damaging substances;
(2) Any person who at the time of disposal, transport, storage,
or treatment of hazardous materials or environmentally damaging
substances owned or operated the facility or vehicle used for such
disposal, transport, treatment or from which there was a fire, release or
threatened release of such hazardous materials or environmentally
damaging substances;
(3) Any person who by contract, agreement or otherwise
has arranged with another party or entity for transport, storage,
disposal or treatment of hazardous materials or environmentally
damaging substances owned, controlled or possessed by such person at a
facility owned and operated by another party or entity from which there is
fire, release or threatened release of hazardous materials or
environmentally damaging substances;
(4) Any person who accepts or accepted any
hazardous materials or environmentally damaging substances for
transport to disposal, storage or sites from which there is a fire, release
or threatened release of hazardous materials or environmentally
damaging substances;
(5) In the case of an abandoned facility or vehicle any
person owning or operating the abandoned facility or any person who
owned or operated or otherwise controlled activities at the
abandoned facility immediately prior to abandonment;
(6) In the case of a land trust owning or operating a facility
or vehicle the person owning the beneficial interest in the land trust.
2. UNLAWFUL RELEASES PROHIBITED.
No person shall cause threaten, or allow the release of hazardous materials or
environmentally damaging substances, unless such release is in accordance with an appropriate
permit granted by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or other State or Federal agency
having primary authority over the release and such release is in such a place and manner as will
not create a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, property, or the environment.
Any prohibited release is hereby declared a public nuisance.
3. RESPONSE AUTHORITY. The Fire Department shall have the authority to
respond to and control all activities at any fire, release or threatened release involving hazardous
materials or environmentally damaging substances and perform such remedial or fire fighting
activities as are deemed necessary to control any incident within the City, or in areas that
threaten the City or the water supply of the City.
4. LIABILITY FOR COSTS. Each responsible party or parties shall be liable to
the City for all costs incurred by the City resulting from a fire, release or threatened release
involving hazardous materials or environmentally damaging substances, except that the City
shall not recover more than the actual costs incurred. This section shall not limit citation or
prosecution under Article IV of this Chapter.
5. PAYMENT FOR INCURRED COSTS. Each responsible party shall remit
payment to the City Director of Financial Management Department within thirty (30) days upon
written notification of cost by the Director of Financial Management.
6. NOTIFICATION OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS REQUIRED. Any
person using, producing, researching and/or storing hazardous materials shall notify the Fire
Department. The notification shall include an accurate site safety plan, a list of all hazardous
materials including quantities, container types and sizes and a material safety data sheet on
each hazardous material at the facility. A notebook containing all the above information shall
also be kept at the facility, to be used by facility personnel and responding Fire Department
personnel. The note book shall be placed in a prominent location, so that it can be easily located
during an emergency response or inspection.
7. WARNING PLACARDS ON HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
FACILITIES. Any person using, researching, producing or storing hazardous materials
shall place warning placards inside and on the outside of the structure in a prominent location.
The content of the placard shall be determined by the Fire Department utilizing the National Fire
Protection Association Standard 704M Hazardous Materials Placard System to determine the
warning numbers on the placard. The placard for the outside of the facility shall be thirty (30)
inches square, constructed of a weather resistant material, mounted square on point in a
location approved by the Fire Department. Smaller placards may be required by the Fire
Department inside the facility to mark special hazards. Placards shall not be removed or moved
without the permission of the Fire Department. Permission shall be requested from the Fire
Department to remove placards from any facility that no longer contains hazardous materials.
8. HAZARDOUS USE OF COMBUSTIBLES. No person, firm, corporation or other
entity shall keep, store, transport, transfer, sell, deliver or use within the corporate limits of the
City of Decatur, any petroleum product, gasoline, volatile oils, or other volatile combustibles or
compounds in such a manner or under such circumstances as to jeopardize life or property, or in
violation of any provisions of City Code, Fire Prevention Code or State of Illinois Rules and
Regulations for Flammable or Combustible Liquids.
9. TANK VEHICLES. The driver or operator or attendant of any tank vehicle,
whenever transferring flammable or combustible liquids to or from such vehicle, shall remain
outside the same and in constant attendance thereat at all times during such operation. No person
shall carry or possess any ignited, smoking, smoldering or flammable substance in the vicinity
of such operation or expose the same to open flame, during the course thereof. Tanks of delivering
vehicles and of storage tanks or marketing or servicing stations shall be so equipped as to permit
the same to be connected in such a manner as to prevent the escape of liquid other than into the
tanks being filled. No delivery or transfer of Class I or II flammable liquid into the tanks of
marketing or service stations shall be made except through such a connection as required
hereby. During the making and breaking of connections, the motors of delivering vehicles
shall be shut down.
10. COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS. Combustible liquids may be stored in, and dispensed
from, aboveground storage tanks, but only in compliance with rules and regulations duly
promulgated by the Office of the State Fire Marshal; provided that, not more than 2,500
gallons of combustible liquid may be stored at any one time in any one tank or vessel, anything
in said rules and regulations to the contrary notwithstanding. This section does not apply to an
approved bulk, processing or industrial plant or refinery which is in compliance with NFPA 30.
11. FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS. The dispensing of flammable liquids from above
ground storage containers shall be limited to no more than 500 U.S. Gallons shall receive
approval by the local code official and the Office of the State Fire Marshal. This section does
not apply to an approved bulk, processing or industrial plant or refinery which is in compliance
with NFPA 30.
ARTICLE IV. REGULATIONS, CITATIONS AND PENALTIES
1. RULES AND REGULATIONS. The code official may promulgate, publish and
enforce reasonable rules and regulations to provide for procedures and practices and to otherwise
implement the provisions, and to carry out the intent and purposes of this Chapter.
2. VIOLATIONS NOTICE AND COMPLAINT. Whenever a fire officer witnesses or
has knowledge based on reasonable grounds of a violation by any person of any section of this
Chapter, or of Section 12 of Chapter 48 of this Code, such person may be issued a Violation
Notice and Complaint by the Fire officer as set forth in Chapter 29 of this Code.
3. PAYMENT OF VIOLATION NOTICE AND COMPLAINT
A person cited by a fire officer for a violation of any section of this Chapter, or Section
12 of Chapter 48, as herein provided, may terminate any further proceedings by the City due to
said violation by making payment to the City at the Office of the City Treasurer. Payment is
considered as being made only when the City Treasurer is in receipt of the full amount.
(a) If a person is given a citation for a violation as herein provided, no complaint may
be filed by an attorney on behalf of the City in any court having jurisdiction thereof seeking to
prosecute and fine such person for said violation sooner than ten (10) days after such citation is
issued, and no complaint may be filed if the citation is timely paid.
(b) The City Treasurer may accept payment of a citation issued hereunder after the
ten day period provided for herein, and upon such acceptance no prosecution for the cited
violation may be filed or pursued by the City.
4. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation or other entity that violates any
provision hereof, or any provision contained in the Code adopted by reference hereby shall be
fined not less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars
($500.00) for each offense and each day a violation occurs or continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
CHAPTER 44.1
FIRE RESCUE AND RESPONSE ADVISORY BOARD
(REPEALED, Ordinance 2016-04, January 19, 2016)
CHAPTER 46
EMERGENCIES AND DISASTERS
1. DEFINITIONS. As used in this Chapter the following words shall have the
following meanings respectively set out for each:
a. Disaster. An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or loss of
life or property, resulting from any natural or manmade cause including but not limited to fire,
flood, earthquake, wind, storm, water contamination, epidemic, air contamination, extended
periods of severe and inclement weather, infestation, critical shortage of fuel or energy,
explosion, mob action, riot or hostile military or paramilitary action.
b. Emergency. A combination of circumstances requiring immediate action to suppress
or prevent the spread of disease or to remove imminent danger to persons or property, and
includes disasters.
c. Curfew. The general prohibition against any person or persons being upon the streets,
alleys, ways or public places in the City, or specified parts thereof, or moving from place to place
by whatever means, excepting those having a continuing responsibility to the public during the
emergency or disaster, and those that may be specifically exempted for a particular purpose by
the authority charged with enforcing said prohibition.
2. DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY. In the event of the occurrence of facts
appearing to constitute an emergency the Mayor, or the City Manager, or any officer of the City
lawfully acting in the stead of either if they then not be immediately available, may declare or
Revised 10/11
Chapter 46
proclaim the existence of such emergency by signing a statement of the existing facts
constituting the emergency and at that time, or within a reasonable time thereafter, when
circumstances admit, taking oath as to the truth of said statement. Such statement shall be filed
with the City Clerk as soon as practicable.
3. EMERGENCY POWERS. Upon the proclamation or declaration of an emergency
or at anytime during the continuation thereof, to the extent deemed necessary to meet said
emergency and to protect and conserve the public health, safety and welfare, the authority
responsible for the same shall have the power and authority:
a. To suspend the provisions of any regulatory ordinance or statute prescribing
procedures for the conduct of the government or affairs of the City, if strict compliance therewith
would prevent, hinder or delay action necessary to cope with the emergency;
b. To utilize all available resources of the City as are reasonably necessary to cope with
said emergency;
c. To enforce a curfew throughout the City or any part or parts thereof with such
conditions as to application, time or otherwise as deemed necessary, or to control ingress and
egress to or from the City, or any part or parts thereof, the movement of persons there within, or
the occupation of premises there within;
d. To suspend or limit the sale, dispensing, delivery or transportation of alcoholic liquor,
firearms, ammunition, explosives, corrosives, flammables or combustibles;
e. To recommend and enforce evacuation of all or a part of the population of any stricken
or threatened area if necessary for the preservation of life or other emergency mitigation,
response or recovery, and to prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destination in
connection therewith;
Chapter 46
f. To exercise any power or perform any function of the corporate authority of the City;
g. To close commercial establishments, places of amusement or accommodations,
premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquors and other places of public resort;
h. To control, restrict and regulate the use, sale or distribution of food, fuel, clothing, and
other commodities, materials, goods or services;
i. To perform and exercise such other functions, powers and duties as may be necessary
to promote and secure the safety and protection of the community and its population.
4. TERMINATION OF EMERGENCY POWERS. Said proclamation or declaration
and the powers and authority attached thereto shall extend until terminated by the issuing
authority, but in no event beyond adjournment of the next regular or special meeting of the
Council subsequent to the issuance thereof, except that said limitation shall not prevent issuance
of additional proclamations or declarations.
5. NOTICE. Upon issuance thereof notice of such proclamation or declaration, or of
exercise of any power or authority responsive thereto, shall be as widely disseminated as the
conditions of the time admit, but in no event less than communication of the substance thereof by
the most direct means then available to such news media as may then be reached, whether by
telephone, hand delivery or otherwise, and by posting a copy thereof at the Civic Center or at the
place from which the emergency operations are being centrally controlled.
6. ESDA ESTABLISHED. There is hereby created and established the City of Decatur
Emergency Services and Disaster Agency, in accordance with "The Illinois Emergency Services
and Disaster Act of 1975", as amended, said agency to consist of the City Manager who shall
serve as coordinator and such additional members as may be selected by the coordinator.
Chapter 46
7. DUTIES. The ESDA shall have such duties and powers and perform such functions
as are prescribed by law and ordinance.
8. COORDINATOR. The coordinator shall be responsible for the organization,
administration, training and operations of the ESDA. The City Manager, as coordinator, shall
appoint another member of the ESDA or some other individual to serve as coordinator when the
City Manager is absent from the City or is unable for any reason to serve as coordinator.
9. PENALTY. Any person violating any provision of this ordinance or refusing to obey
or respond to any lawful order issued in exercise of any power or authority ordained hereby shall
be fined not less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars
($500.00) for each offense and each day a violation occurs or continues shall be considered a
separate offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-70, October 31, 2011)
10. CONSTRUCTION. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to impair any
other power or authority of the City or the departments thereof but shall be construed together
therewith and in addition thereto, liberally, to secure, protect, promote and enhance the general
public health, safety and welfare.
CHAPTER 47
CONTROL OF ANIMALS, FOWL AND DOGS
1. DEFINITIONS. Whenever used herein, the following words shall have the meaning
set after them as follows:
(a) Dog - means all members of the family Canidae.
(b) Owner - means any person having a right of property in a dog or other animal or who
keeps or harbors a dog or other animal or who has it in his care, or acts as its custodian, or who
knowingly permits a dog or other domestic animal to remain on or about any premise occupied
by him.
(c) Own - have a right of property in, or keep, or harbor, or act as custodian of, or have
the care of, or knowingly permit, or encourage, to remain on or about premises occupied by the
owning person.
(d) Run at Large - suffering or permitting, or causing an animal to be at any place within
the City, at any time, outside an escape-proof building or other enclosure without such animal
being under direct, effective physical control of the owner thereof, or his agent, or a member of
the immediate family of said owner unless within an area specifically designated by the City as
an animal exercise run when said animal is under the control of a competent person.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-47, May 21, 2007)
(e) Direct, effective, physical control - means mechanical exercise of authority over a
dog or other animal by the person in control of the animal, by means of a leash, cord, rope, strap
or chain which shall be fastened to the collar or harness of the animal and of sufficient strength
to control the dog or animal.
Revised 03/2019
(f) Registration Certificate - a document or writing furnished by the Finance Department of the
City of Decatur through veterinarians upon proper registration and upon payment of the registration
fee herein imposed, unless exempt from payment of the registration fee.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2007- 17, March 19, 2007)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2006-14, March 20, 2006)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 89-42, May 1, 1989)
(g) Registration Tag - a tag, disk, plate of suitable and durable material furnished by the
Finance Department through veterinarians. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-17)
(h) Vicious, dangerous or fierce - an animal which has once bitten a person, or an animal
which, by barking, or snarling, or growling, or snapping at a person, or rushing at or upon, or
chasing a person, or by any other overt action, displays an inclination to do harm to, or to
frighten, a person, and includes an animal which attacks or worries or mutilates, or wounds, or
kills a dog, or a cat, or a domestic animal.
(i) Administrator - means a veterinarian licensed by the State of Illinois and appointed by
the Macon County Board pursuant to the State of Illinois "Animal Control Act" as amended.
(j) Cat - means all members of the family feline.
(k) Wild Animal - means any monkey, raccoon, skunk, fox, life threatening snake or
reptile, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, bear, wolf, coyote, or any other animal or reptile which
can normally be found in the wild state.
(l) Public Safety Agency - a functional division of a public agency which provides fire
fighting, police, medical, or other emergency services.
(m) Educational Institution – property owned by an Illinois State Board of Education
accredited entity which is used wholly for the instruction and recreation of students for grade 12
or under. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2006-14, March 20, 2006) (Amended, Ordinance No.
2019-09, March 18, 2019)
2. RUNNING AT LARGE. No owner or person shall permit any domestic animal of
the species of horse, mule, pony, donkey, or burro, or any domestic fowl including, geese,
chicken, turkey or duck, to run or go at large at any time within the City.
3. FARM ANIMALS PROHIBITED. No person, firm or corporation shall keep any
cattle, sheep, swine, or goats at any place upon any premises within the City except temporarily
in stock yards for sale or shipment and except temporarily in packing plants for slaughter.
Educational institutions may keep lowline cattle, sheep, goats, llamas and alpacas upon premises
owned by the educational institution. The minimum lot area for keeping a full-sized horse or
animal of the equine family is one (1) acre for one equine and one (1) additional acre for each
additional equine and in no case shall an equine be kept unless one (1) twelve foot by twelve foot
stall enclosed with three (3) solid walls is provided for sheltering each equine kept on such lot.
The minimum lot area for keeping a miniature horse, pony or other small animal of the equine
family, llamas, alpacas and lowline cattle is one-half (1/2) acre for one animal and one-half (1/2)
additional acre for each additional animal and in no case shall such animal be kept unless one (1)
eight foot by eight foot stall enclosed with three (3) solid walls is provided for sheltering each
animal kept on such lot. The minimum lot area for keeping sheep and goats is one-quarter (1/4)
acre per animal and one-quarter (1/4) additional acre for each additional animal and in no case
shall such animal be kept unless one (1) eight foot by eight foot stall enclosed with (3) solid
walls is provided for sheltering no more than (3) such animals kept on such lot. Lots and shelters
must be enclosed and comply with all City of Decatur ordinances. No part of the animal shelter
shall be within 75 feet of any dwelling house occupied by human beings, except any dwelling
house occupied by the owner or person in control of said animal(s). (Amended, Ordinance No.
2016-49, July 5, 2016) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2019-09, March 18, 2019)
4. KEEPING CHICKENS, FOWLS OR RABBITS. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to keep on any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him in the
City, any rabbits, chickens, ducks, pigeons, geese, or other domestic fowl unless such animals or
fowl are kept in an enclosure no part of which is within 75 feet of any dwelling house occupied
by human beings, except any dwelling house occupied by the owner or person in control of said
animal or fowl. Said animal or fowl shall not be located in the front yard or side yard as defined
by the City of Decatur Zoning Ordinance. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-32, August 6, 2018)
5. SANITATION. All coops, hutches, doghouses, kennels, pens, enclosures or areas in
which any such animal or fowl is kept must be maintained in a sanitary manner without the
accumulation of dirt, offal, or urine and in such a manner as to prevent any disagreeable odor.
6. SALE OF FOWL. No person, firm or corporation shall sell or cause to be sold
chickens, ducklings or other fowl younger than eight weeks of age in quantities of less than 10 in
a single purchase.
7. ANIMALS AS PRIZES PROHIBITED. No person, firm or corporation shall give
away or cause to be given away any live vertebrate animal as a prize for, or as an inducement to
enter any contest, game or other competition, as an inducement to enter a place of amusement or
to attract trade to a place of amusement.
8. CRUELTY TO ANIMALS. It shall be unlawful for any person to be cruel to any
animal in any of the following ways:
(a) By over-loading, over-driving, over-working, beating, torturing, tormenting,
mutilating, abusing or killing any animal or causing or knowingly allowing the same to be done.
(b) By cruelly working any animal, including old, maimed, infirm, sick or disabled
animals, or causing or knowingly allowing the same to be done.
(c) By failing to provide any animal in his or her charge or custody, as owner or
otherwise, with proper and necessary food, drink, shelter, heat, air, sanitation or veterinary care.
(d) By abandoning, or leaving an animal without proper care or feeding, or turning out to
die any animal, including old, maimed, infirm, sick or disabled animals.
(e) By cropping an animal's ears, docking an animal's tail or performing similar surgeries
except by a licensed veterinary by the State of Illinois.
(f) By tying, confining, or restraining any animal or bird in such a manner that it chokes
the animal or bird or prevents it from moving about freely, or such that it forces the animal or
bird to stand, lie or sit in its own excrement.
9. KEEPING POISONOUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED. No person, firm or
corporation shall keep within the City any poisonous reptile, arachnid or other insect, including,
but not limited to, poisonous snakes, scorpions, and spiders, except in a zoo.
10. WILD ANIMALS PROHIBITED. No person shall own, keep, or maintain any
wild animal except when such animal is confined in a legally licensed zoological park, circus,
scientific or educational institution, research laboratory, veterinarian hospital, or animal refuge.
It is no defense to this section that the owner or keeper of any animal or reptile which is
prohibited has attempted to domesticate such animal or reptile.
11. RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED. No owner shall permit or suffer a dog or
cat to run at large within the City at anytime.
12. IMPOUNDING. Any dog or cat found running at large at any time within the City
shall be taken up and impounded as hereinafter provided.
13. DOG OR CAT IN ESTRUS. The owner of any dog or cat shall during the period
the female is in estrus or heat confine said animal in a building or secure enclosure in such a
manner so that the female cannot come into contact with male dogs or cats, except for the
purpose of a planned breeding.
14. RABIES INOCULATION-DOGS.
A. No person shall own within the City a dog over the age of four months which has not
been inoculated against rabies.
B. No person shall fail to annually vaccinate a dog within 30 days following the previous
year's vaccination date.
15. RABIES INOCULATION-CATS.
A. No person shall own within the City a cat over the age of four months which has not
been inoculated against rabies.
B. No person shall fail to annually vaccinate a cat within 30 days following the previous
year's vaccination date.
16. VICIOUS DOG PROHIBITED. No person shall keep within the City a vicious or
dangerous or fierce animal. Exempt from this section are trained police dogs maintained by
police officers for use in police or official duties.
17. NUISANCE ANIMALS. No person shall own within the City any animal which
excessively or continuously make noises, including, but not limited to, barking, howling,
whining, caterwauling, crowing or neighing; molests passers-by; chases vehicles; habitually
attacks other domestic animals; trespasses on school grounds or private property in such a
manner as to damage property or disturbs the peace and quiet of any person or neighborhood by
the aforesaid actions. Such an animal is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be taken up
and impounded as hereinafter provided. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2015-48, September 8, 2015)
18. BITING ANIMALS. Any animal which shall bite a person, scratch a person, or
injure a person so as to cause an abrasion or laceration or puncture of the skin of such person, is
hereby declared to be a nuisance and such animal shall be taken up and impounded as hereinafter
provided.
19. REGISTRATION. No person shall own a dog or cat four months or more of age
within the City unless said dog or cat has been registered in accordance with State Law and the
provisions of this Chapter.
20. REGISTRATION PROCEDURES.
A. All dogs and cats kept and maintained within the corporate limits of the City of
Decatur shall be registered by the owner or owners thereof. Such registration shall be valid for
one year from the date of vaccination. The registration fee for dogs and cats registered within
thirty (30) days of inoculation against rabies shall be Fifteen Dollars ($15.00) if the dog or cat is
spayed or neutered and Fifty Dollars ($50.00) if the dog or cat is not so altered. The owner or
owners thereof shall remit the required registration fee for each dog or cat owned at the time of
inoculation. The veterinarian who inoculated the dog or cat shall collect the registration fees.
The veterinarian shall remit the registration fees collected to the Finance Department. If the
vaccination is obtained out of county, the registration fee must be paid to the Finance
Department. The registration fee for any dog or cat registered more than thirty (30) days after
the date of inoculation against rabies shall be double the original fee. Exempt from the
registration fee are trained public safety agency owned dogs maintained by public safety officers
for use in official public safety duties fulltime, with proof of such certification by the public
safety agency's Chief or designee.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-71, October 31, 2011)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-17, March 19, 2007)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2006-14, March 20, 2006)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2003-11, March 3, 2003)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 89-42, May 1, 1989)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 93-80, November 15, 1993)
B. Upon payment of the annual registration fee to the veterinarian, unless exempt for
such payment, a registration certificate will be issued by the veterinarian who shall remit the
original to the Finance Department. A copy of said certificate shall be kept by the owner and the
D.V.M. inoculating the dog or cat. The Registration Certificate shall be appropriately numbered
and serially filed by the Finance Department.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-17, March 19, 2007)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2006-14, March 20, 2006)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 89-42, May 1, 1989)
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs or cats the owners of which are
not residents within the City and are temporarily within the City for a period of less than thirty
(30) days.
21. REGISTRATION TAG.
A. At the time an animal is registered as herein provided, the veterinarian who
inoculated the dog or cat shall issue a registration tag furnished by the Finance Department
bearing a number corresponding with the number on said registration certificate. The
registration tag must be obtained at the Finance Department when a vaccination is obtained out
of county after presenting proof of rabies vaccination. Registration tags shall be of suitable,
durable material and of a size suitable to be affixed to a collar worn by the registered animal.
Registration tags shall be varied either in color or in shape from registration period to registration
period so that tags issued for a registration period may be readily distinguished from tags issued
for prior periods in near proximity of time.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-17, March 19, 2007)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 89-42, May 1, 1989)
B. Duplicate registration tags shall be issued by the Finance Department in the event the
original tag is lost or destroyed, upon presentation of evidence of the prior payment of
registration fee, unless exempt, for the animal for the current registration period along with an
application for such duplicate registration tag and the payment of a fee equivalent to the City's
cost for the duplicate tag.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2006-14, March 20, 2006)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 89-42, May 1, 1989)
22. TAG WORN. Each registered animal shall be provided by the owner with a suitable
collar or harness to which the registration tag for that animal shall be securely attached. Both
collar or harness and registration tag shall be worn by such animals at all times. Any dog or cat
found within the City, whether running at large or otherwise, without a registration tag thereon
shall be impounded as herein provided.
23. NON-TRANSFERRABLE. Neither registration certificates nor registration tags
shall be transferable. There shall be no refund for any reason of registration fee.
24. IMPOUNDMENT. Animals taken up under the foregoing provisions hereof shall
be impounded in some suitable place provided by the City by contract or otherwise.
25. ANIMAL BITING ANY PERSON OR SUFFERING RABIES.
A. When the owner of any dog or other animal knows of or has been notified that such
dog or other animal has bitten or has so injured any person as to cause an abrasion of the skin of
such person, or is suffering from rabies, he shall forthwith deliver said dog or animal to a police
officer or any person duly authorized by the City to enforce this Chapter within 24 hours,
whereupon said dog or animal shall be securely confined for a period of ten (10) days under the
observation of a licensed veterinarian.
Upon appearance of any symptoms of rabies, said dog or other animal shall be confined
until death and then its head shall be removed in such a manner as not to injure the brain and
delivered to the Administrator for examination. At the end of the confinement period such dog
or other animal shall be examined by the Administrator or other licensed veterinarian, and if no
symptoms have appeared such dog or other animal shall be returned to the owner or keeper.
B. It is unlawful for any person having knowledge that any person has been bitten by a
dog or other animal to refuse to promptly notify the Administrator, a police officer or other
person duly authorized by the City to enforce this Chapter. It is unlawful for the owner of such
dog or other animal to euthanize, sell, give away or otherwise dispose of any such dog or other
animal known to have bitten a person until it is released by the Administrator or his authorized
representative.
C. It is unlawful for any veterinarian or other person who discovers any dog or other
animal within the City suffering with or showing symptoms of rabies to refuse or fail to report
such fact immediately to the Administrator, a police officer or other person duly authorized by
the City to enforce this Chapter. Any person who discovers such an animal shall give their
name, address and location where the dog or other animal may be found.
D. All dogs or other animals taken up under the provisions of this Chapter shall be
impounded as provided by ordinance, except that the owner of such dog or other animal, in lieu
thereof, may at his own expense, deliver such dog or other animal to a licensed veterinarian
within the City for observation. Such dog or other animal shall be confined for observation,
provided that the veterinarian shall, before returning any such dog or other animal to the owner,
notify the Administrator.
26. ENFORCEMENT.
A. It shall be the duty of police officers, and other persons so authorized by the City, by
contract or otherwise, to investigate violations of this Chapter and to enforce the provisions of
this Chapter. Such enforcement shall include the issuance of warnings, the issuance of citations,
taking and impounding of animals in violation hereof, and any other means necessary to enforce
and effectuate the purposes of this Chapter.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 90-35, March 19, 1990)
B. No person shall in any way interfere, attempt to interfere or cause another person or
animal to interfere or attempt to interfere with any authorized person engaged in the performance
of his or her duties under this Chapter.
27. OTHER ANIMALS. All provisions of this Chapter with regard to suppression of
rabies, confinement of animals, impoundment, or running at large shall also apply to animals
other than dogs or cats, except when such animals are confined in a zoological park, circus,
scientific or educational institution, research laboratory, veterinary hospital or animal refuge.
28. DEAD ANIMALS PROHIBITED. No person shall fail to immediately remove
a dead animal found upon property under his possession or control.
29. VIOLATION NOTICE AND COMPLAINT. (Amended, Ordinance No 2011-71)
A. Whenever a police officer or other person duly authorized by the City to enforce this
Chapter witnesses or has knowledge, based on reasonable grounds, of a violation by any person
of any section of this Chapter, except section 25, such person may be issued a Violation Notice
and Complaint as set forth in Chapter 29 of this Code.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-71; Ordinance No. 98-56)
B. The Finance Department may issue a Violation Notice and Complaint for violations
of Sections 14, 15 and 19 of this Chapter as set forth in Chapter 29 of this Code.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-71, October 31, 2011)
30. PAYMENT OF VIOLATION NOTICE AND COMPLAINT.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-71, October 31, 2011)
A person cited for a violation of any section of this Chapter as herein provided may
terminate any further proceedings by the City due to said violation by making payment to the
City at the office of the City Treasurer. Payment will be considered as being made only when
the City Treasurer is in receipt of the full amount. If a person is cited for more than one violation
of this Chapter on a single Violation Notice and Complaint the fine must be paid for each
violation listed in order to terminate any further proceedings.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-71, October 31, 2011)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2003-11, March 3, 2003)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 93-80, November 15, 1993)
31. PENALTY.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions hereof, shall
be fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than Five Hundred
($500.00) for each offense, and every day on which a violation occurs or continues shall be
considered a separate offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-71; Ordinance No. 93-80)
B. The Circuit Court of Macon County may enter an Order that any vicious, dangerous,
fierce, or biting animal as defined by this Chapter be humanely dispatched.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 91-55, July 15, 1991)
32. CITY-DESIGNATED ANIMAL EXERCISE RUN
The City of Decatur designates “Fido Fields” located in Fairview Park and Nelson Park
dog park as animal exercise runs. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-23, May 21, 2018)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-47, May 21, 2007)
33. APPEAL PROCEDURE. A person cited for a violation of any section of this
Chapter may appeal the issuance of the citation in writing within 30 (thirty) days of the date of
issuance of the citation. Such written appeal must be received by the City of Decatur
Administrative Court Clerk by said 30th day. Appeals will not be accepted on citations for which
more than 30 days have elapsed from the date of issuance of the citation. An administrative
hearing shall be held, pursuant to Chapter 29 of City Code. The City shall serve notice of the
hearing in a manner reasonably calculated to give actual notice, as outlined in Chapter 29,
Section 5, of City Code. All parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the
hearing. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply, and hearsay evidence shall be admissible.
The hearing shall be open to the public and recorded. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall
be a final and appealable administrative decision. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2015-48, September
8, 2015)
CHAPTER 48
NUISANCES
1. MEANINGS OF WORDS. Unless otherwise expressly provided herein, words and
phrases used in this Chapter shall have and be given the same meaning and definition as set out
in the Environmental Protection Act of the State of Illinois and the regulations duly promulgated
thereunder.
2. NUISANCES DECLARED. In all cases in this Chapter where no provision is made
defining what are nuisances and how the same may be abated, removed or prevented, in addition
to those declared herein, those offenses known to the common law and to the statutes of Illinois
as nuisances, may, in case the same exist within the jurisdiction of the City, be treated as such
and proceeded against as provided in this Code or any other provision of law applicable thereto.
3. ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE. In all cases where a nuisance shall be found in any
building or premises within the jurisdiction of the City, the director of any department of the City
having knowledge thereof is hereby authorized to serve or cause to be served a written notice
upon the owner or occupant or person in charge thereof, if such person can be found, requiring
such person to abate the same within a reasonable time; provided that, notice of any violation of
Section 8 of this Chapter may be served by publication one time in a newspaper of general
circulation within the City of Decatur. Such notice may, but need not, specify the manner of
abatement. If the person so notified shall neglect or refuse to comply with such notice, or
whenever the owner, occupant or person in charge is unknown or cannot be found, such nuisance
may be abated by the City without notice, and the expense thereof is recoverable from the person
who may have created, continued or suffered such nuisance to exist, and is a lien on the premises
Revised 04/2017
on which such nuisance was found, in addition to any fine or penalty. If the violator abates the
nuisance before the court date or administrative hearing date, the City’s Legal Department, at its
discretion, may allow the violator to pay the fine in full before the court date or administrative
hearing date. (Amended, Ordinance No. 92-20, March 30, 1992) (Amended, Ordinance No.
2012-62, August 20, 2012)
4. DISCLOSURE OF PRINCIPAL. Every agent or other person having charge,
control or management or who collects or receives the rents of any lands, premises, or other
property in the City, shall disclose the name of the person for whom such agent or other person is
acting upon demand of any inspector or agent of the City.
5. USE OF PREMISES. No person owning or in possession, charge or control of any
building or premises shall use the same, or permit the same to be used, for any business or
employment or any purpose, if such use shall, from its boisterous nature, disturb or destroy the
peace of the neighborhood or shall be dangerous or detrimental to health, or shall be the occasion
of any nuisance.
6. SEWER SERVICE LINES. All lawful privy vaults, septic tanks, cesspools and
sewer service lines shall be so maintained that they shall not become foul or emit offensive odors
prejudicial to the public health, and further that the contents thereof shall not be permitted to leak
from nor be closer than two feet to the surface of the earth. A privy vault, cesspool or sewer
service line located, maintained or permitted to become foul or filled in violation hereof is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as such by the City Manager.
7. ABANDONED EXCAVATION. Any well, cistern, hole, pit, pool or similar
structure, or abandoned excavation or shaft that is open and easily accessible to children or
passers-by and/or of sufficient depth or steepness to endanger their safety, or any undrained and
abandoned excavation or pool, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Amended, Ordinance No.
2004-77, September 20, 2004)
8. WEEDS. Weeds, grass or other underbrush which have grown to a height of ten (10)
inches or more or allowed to flower, trees and bushes which need trimmed, and bushes and trees
which need to be removed, are hereby declared to be a nuisance, and any owner, lessee, occupant
or agent having control of any lot of ground or any part thereof within the City shall cut or cause
the same to be cut within five (5) days after being notified to do so by the City. Such owner,
lessee, occupant or agent of any lot of ground, or part thereof, shall also cut, or cause to be cut,
upon notice as provided in this section, any weeds, grass or underbrush, trim or cause to be
trimmed nuisance trees or bushes, or remove or cause to be removed nuisance trees or bushes
described herein which are growing or located between the prolongation of the side lot lines
thereof, and between the rear or front lot line thereof, as the case may be, and the edge of any
sidewalk, roadway or alley under the jurisdiction or control of the City and abutting such lot of
ground, or part thereof; “sidewalk”, "roadway" and "alley", as used herein, shall have the
meanings ascribed thereto in The Illinois Vehicle Code; provided, however, that no such owner,
lessee, occupant or agent shall be responsible for cutting any weeds, grass or underbrush,
trimming nuisance trees or bushes, or removing nuisance trees or bushes on public right-of-way
if such are growing or located (1) on ground which has a slope greater than one to one and a
height which exceeds three feet from the bottom of the slope to the top of the slope, or (2) on
ground which is inaccessible to grounds maintenance equipment customarily used by residential
households due to unusual topographical conditions or structures erected prior to February 15,
1991. If such person shall fail to comply with said notice, such weeds, grass or other underbrush
may be cut or caused to be cut, nuisance trees or bushes may be trimmed or caused to be
trimmed or removed or caused to be removed by the City and the expense thereof shall be repaid
to the City by the owner or person in control of said premises. Charges for weed, grass or other
underbrush cutting on private property, or trimming or removal of nuisance trees or bushes, shall
be a lien upon the premises. Notice shall be given in the following manner: (Amended,
Ordinance 2013-02; January 7, 2013) (Amended, Ordinance 2014-39; August 4, 2014)
(a) For lots with an occupied structure as determined by active water service and/or
usage, the notice to abate the violation of the growth of weeds, grass or other underbrush which
have grown to a height of ten (10) inches or more or allowed to flower, or notice to trim or
remove nuisance bushes or trees, may be given to the owner, lessee, occupant or agent having
control of the lot of ground or any part thereof including the prolongation of the lot lines by
personal service or by posting a sign or citation on the premises of the property in question
regarding the violation. The sign or citation shall be posted in a conspicuous place near the front
of the lot or near the main entrance to the structure. The text of the notice shall contain a
reference to the provision of this Code violated, the address of the property, the date of posting,
and such other information respecting the nature of the violation as the Economic and
Community Development Department deems advisable. It shall be unlawful for anyone to
deface, tamper with, or remove the sign or citation from the property where it is posted unless
authorized by the Economic and Community Development Department. All notices shall state
that the removal of the weeds shall be performed within the time specified from the date of the
notice. The time limit to abate the growth of the weeds or other underbrush which have grown to
a height of ten (10) inches or more or allowed to flower or to trim or remove nuisance bushes or
trees, shall be no less than five (5) days after personal delivery of the notice or the posting of the
sign or citation on the property. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(Amended, Ordinance 2013-02; January 7, 2013) (Amended, Ordinance 2014-39, August 4,
2014)
(b) For vacant lots or lots with an unoccupied structure, as determined by active water
service, the notice to abate the violation of the growth of weeds, grass or other underbrush which
have grown to a height of ten (10) inches or more or allowed to flower, or the notice to trim or
remove nuisance bushes or trees, shall be published by the City in a newspaper of general
circulation within the City limits once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks during the months
of March through September for each year a notice informing all owners, lessees, occupants or
agents having control of any vacant lot or a lot with an unoccupied structure or any part thereof
and including the prolongation of the lot lines within the City that the growth of weeds, grass or
underbrush which have grown to a height of ten (10) inches or more or allowed to flower and the
existence on any such lot, or the growth of nuisance bushes or trees, is contrary to the ordinances
of the City of Decatur. The notice shall further inform the public that should the weeds, grass or
underbrush grow to more than ten (10) inches in height, or should the nuisance bushes or trees
need trimmed or removed, the City of Decatur may cut or cause to be cut the weeds without
further notice and the owner, lessee, occupant or agent having control of said lot shall be liable to
the City for its costs and shall be a lien against the property. This Notice shall be a display
advertisement. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-02, January 7, 2013) (Amended, Ordinance No.
2001-16, March 19, 2001) (Amended, Ordinance No. 91-23, February 4, 1991) (Amended,
Ordinance No. 90-34, March 19, 1990)
9. NATIVE PLANT LANDSCAPE AREAS. The City of Decatur seeks to prevent
erosion of soil into Lake Decatur which serves as the main water source for the citizens of
Decatur and surrounding areas. In order to reduce erosion, a lot or parcel of ground or any part
thereof within the specific locations set forth below in the City may be improved with Native
Plant Landscaping Areas under the terms and conditions set forth in this Section.
A. DEFINITIONS. As used in this Section, unless the context requires otherwise:
(1) “City” means the City of Decatur, Illinois.
(2) “Garden” means a cultivated area dedicated to growing vegetables, fruits, flowers,
ornamental grasses, groundcovers, shrubs and similar plants that are planted in a well-defined
location.
(3) “Native Plants” are those grasses, including prairie grasses, sedges (solid, triangularstemmed
plants resembling grasses), forbs (flowering broadleaf plants), trees and shrubs that are
plant species native to or naturalized to the State of Illinois, excluding prohibited species, as
defined by the Illinois Noxious Weed Law 505 ILCS 100 et.seq. and any Administrative
Regulations implementing the Act and all species of running (monopodial) bamboo. Native
plants do not include weeds.
(4) “Native Plant Landscape Area” means a designated area comprised of native plants
that are being or have been planted in a designated area. A Native Plant Landscape Area does
not include gardens.
(5) “Natural Area” means an area that has been purposely left to grow in a natural state
and can maintain itself in a stable condition without human intervention and contains trees,
shrubs, and native plants, excluding weeds and turf grass areas that contain more than fifty (50)
percent turf grass. Flowers and non-native plants can be allowed provided that common weeds
are not the predominant vegetation.
(6) “Ornamental Grasses” means grasses that are not indigenous to the State of Illinois
that are intended to add beauty to a garden. Ornamental grasses do not include turf grasses or
weeds.
(7) “Thinning” means the prescribed burning of Native Plant Landscape Areas pursuant
to and under the guidelines as set forth in the Illinois Prescribed Burning Act 525 ILCS 37 et.
seq. and any Administrative Regulations implementing the Act.
(8) “Turf grass” means commercially available cultured grass varieties, including
bluegrass, fescue and ryegrass blends, commonly used in regularly mowed or manicured lawn
areas.
(9) “Weeds” means noxious weeds as defined and designated pursuant to the Illinois
Noxious Weed Law, 505 ILCS 100 et. seq. as amended from time to time, or any volunteer
plants such as but not limited to garlic mustard (Alliaria petiolata), spotted knapweed (Centaurea
maculosa) or burdock (Arctium minus). The Forestry Division of the Public Works Department
of the City may proscribe additional plants that are prohibited.
B. LOCATION. Native Plant Landscape Areas may only be located on a lot or parcel
of ground that abuts and has at least seventy-five (75) feet of frontage on Lake Decatur and must
be set back not less than ten (10) feet from the side lot lines and the rear lot lines without
approved native landscape growth containment barriers in place and two (2) feet from the side
lot lines with approved native landscape growth containment barriers in place. Said setbacks
shall not apply if said lot lines abut Lake Decatur. No Native Plant Landscape area may be
located in the front yard of a property.
(1) All setback areas shall be composed of regularly mowed turf grass, garden beds,
trees, shrubs, mulch, wood chips, rock and/or gravel and be maintained as set forth in Section 8
of this Chapter.
(2) Native Plant Landscape Areas shall be planted through transplanting or seed by
human or mechanical means. Soil erosion must be controlled while the ground is bare of plant
growth that is sufficient to inhibit erosion and is the sole responsibility of the owner or occupant.
(3) Native Plant Landscape Areas shall not be placed within any front yard areas,
drainage utility easements, road right-of-ways, or immediately adjacent to any driveway or road
intersection when it would interfere with motorists’ view of the street or roadway.
C. MAINTENANCE. Native Plant Landscape Areas must be cut or thinned at least
once annually between January 15 and April 30 to a height no greater than ten (10) inches.
Thinning must be conducted under the terms and conditions set forth by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency and the Chief of the City Fire Department with all costs to be
paid by the owner or occupant of the property and under the following conditions:
(1) Authorization to conduct a prescribed burn must first be obtained from the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency by obtaining an I.E.P.A Prescribed Burn Permit.
(2) A City of Decatur Prescribed Burn Permit must also be obtained.
(3) Both permits must be on hand during the time of the prescribed burn and be readily
available for inspection upon request from any Decatur Fire Department Fire Officer or City
Official. The IEPA permit shall include a copy of the prescription for the burn from a certified
prescribed burn manager. The prescription shall obtain, as a minimum, the following:
(a) Site description
(b) Map of the area to be burned
(c) Desired outcome
(d) Personnel and equipment to be used on the prescribed burn
(e) Training level of personnel conducting the burn
(i) Personnel conducting the prescribed burn must be in compliance
with:
(ii) NFPA 1051 - Standard for Wildland Fire Fighter Professional
Qualifications
(iii) NFPA 1143 – Standard for Wildland Fire Management
(4) The following conditions must also be met at the time of the burn:
(a) At least one certified prescribed burn manager must be present on site with a
copy of the prescription while the burn is being conducted.
(b) The Decatur Fire Department shall be notified prior to commencing the burn
and at the conclusion of the burn.
(c) A reasonable effort shall be made to notify all adjoining property owners and
occupants of the date and time of the prescribed burn.
(d) The burn must be conducted no earlier than 8:00 a.m. and must be completed
by 5:00 p.m. on the same day.
(e) Burning shall be conducted only when wind speed and direction and other
meteorological conditions are such that smoke and other pollutants will not cause adverse
effects to any public road, or off site structure.
(f) Burning must be attended at all times.
(g) A water source such as a garden hose and/or bucket shall be readily available.
(h) Burning shall not be closer than 25 feet to any structure.
(5) If any of these provisions are not met, the person responsible for the burn is subject
to a $150.00 City of Decatur Fire Prevention Violation Citation.
(6) The Decatur Fire Department reserves the right to extinguish any fire, including
prescribed burns, if the fire is judged to be a nuisance.
If the Native Plant Landscape Area is not maintained in accordance with the terms of this
Section, the provisions set forth in Section 8 of Chapter 48 shall apply.
D. PERMIT. An owner or occupant of a lot or parcel of land must apply for a permit to
install Native Plant Landscape Areas or maintain already existing Native Plant Landscape Areas.
Application for a permit shall be on a form as provided by the City and issued by the Forestry
Division of the Public Works Department of the City. A landscape plan shall be required with
the application and include the following information:
(1) Name and address of owner and occupant and landscape architect/designer.
(2) Date of plan preparation and date and description of all revisions.
(3) Name of project or development.
(4) One (1) scale drawing of the site based upon a survey of property lines with
indication of scale and north point. This site map shall also include the name and alignment of
proposed and existing adjacent on-site streets, the locations of all proposed utility easements and
rights of way, locations of existing and proposed buildings, topographic contours at two-foot
contour intervals, existing and proposed location of parking areas, location of water bodies,
locations of proposed sidewalks and percent of the site not covered by impervious surface.
(5) Two (2) scale drawings of the proposed project area to a minimum scale of one inch
equals fifty (50) feet of proposed landscaping for the site based upon a survey of property lines
with indication of scale and north point; existing and proposed topographic contours using mean
sea level datum at two foot contour intervals; details of proposed planting beds and foundation
plantings; delineation of both sodded and seeded areas; location and identification of proposed
landscape or manmade materials used to provide screening from adjacent and neighboring
properties with a separate cross section drawing of which shall be provided at legible scale
illustrating the effectiveness of proposed screening; location and identification of trees; details of
fences, tie walls, planting boxes, retaining walls, tot lots, picnic areas, berms and other landscape
improvements including a separate drawing of typical sections of these details in legible scale;
location of landscape islands and planter beds with identification of plant materials used
including separate drawings of typical section of these areas in legible scale.
(6) A table containing the common names and botanical names, average size of plant
materials, root specifications, quantities, special planting instructions and proposed planting
dates of all plant materials included in the Landscape Proposal.
(7) A description of how the Native Plant Landscape Area will be maintained including
all activities necessary to sustain the plantings in the Native Plant Landscape Area.
(8) Such other information as may be requested by the City Manager or his designee.
E. REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
(1) The Permit shall expire and be of no force and effect if the Native Plant Landscape
Area is not completed pursuant to the approved Landscape Plan within three (3) months of
issuance of the permit.
(2) The Permit may be revoked by the Forestry Division of the Public Works
Department if the Native Plant Landscape Area does not meet the specifications as set forth in
the Application for Permit.
F. ENFORCEMENT. The Forestry Division of the Public Works Department of the
City shall be responsible for the enforcement of this Section.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-19, April 17, 2017)
10. STORAGE, DISPOSITION AND USE OF PESTICIDES AND OTHER
CHEMICALS. No person, owning or in possession, charge, or control of any building or
premises shall store, dispose of or use any pesticide, herbicide or other substance in such a
manner as to cause injury to human beings, wildlife or other animals, or in such a manner as to
cause injury to vegetation or crops of others or in such a manner as to contaminate any surface or
groundwater. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-64, July 16, 2007)
11. DEPOSIT OF GARBAGE. No person, firm or corporation shall deposit or cause or
permit to be deposited any garbage, debris or other waste at any place within the City of Decatur,
except at a properly licensed sanitary landfill.
12. GARBAGE ON PREMISES. No owner or occupant of any premises within the
City of Decatur shall deposit or cause or permit to be deposited, or leave or permit to remain
after receiving notice, any garbage, debris or other waste on said premises except as elsewhere
provided for the collection of same by a licensed garbage hauler. (Amended, Ordinance No.
2004-77, September 20, 2004)
13. HOURS OF CONSTRUCTION. The erection, including excavation, demolition,
alteration or repair of any building in any "R" or "O-1" zone as established by the Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Decatur, or within one hundred (100) feet of any part of said zones, is
hereby prohibited except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. except in case of
necessity for public safety.
14. BURNING OF WASTE.
A. No person shall cause or allow the burning of garbage, landscape waste or other waste
within the corporate limits of the City of Decatur, except for fires set by a public official in the
performance of the official’s duties and fires used for recreational purposes such as campfires.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-77, September 20, 2004)
B. Fuel for recreational fires shall consist only of seasoned dry firewood. No recreational
fire shall be used for waste disposal purposes or be permitted to become a nuisance by reason of
the emission of smoke, fumes, fly ash, dust or soot. (Amended, Ordinance No. 99- 49, April 26,
1999)
C. Contractors may obtain a permit to burn vegetation for commercial and residential
development. Fire Code Official has full discretion for amount and method of burning. Permit
fee $1,000.00. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2012-30, May 7, 2012)
15. STORAGE OF MACHINERY. It shall be unlawful to use any premises in any
residential, office or commercial zone of the City as established by Zoning Ordinance of the City
of Decatur for the storing or leaving of worn out, wrecked, abandoned, or inoperable
automobiles, trucks, motor homes, van campers, camping trailers and trailers, appliances, or
machinery of any kind or any parts thereof, or any appliances or other machinery inoperable due
to lack of connection to a power source. (Amended, Ordinance No. 89-40, May 1, 1989)
16. TRASH AND DEBRIS. The storing, placing, leaving or permitting to remain of
ashes, refuse, old bricks, concrete, branches, brush, trash or the storing, placing, leaving or
permitting to remain of any materials which may harbor rats, in any residential, office or
commercial zone of the City as established by the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Decatur is
hereby declared to be a nuisance. Firewood stored on the exterior of any structure shall be cut to
nominal length (18" - 24") and stacked a minimum of 12" above grade. (Amended, Ordinance
2014-67, December 1, 2014) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-36, May 2, 2005) (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2004-77, September 20, 2004)
17. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this Chapter shall be fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than
Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each day on which a violation occurs or
continues shall be considered a separate offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-93; Amended,
Ordinance No. 2011-70)

CHAPTER 49
REMOVAL OF GARBAGE, JUNK, RUBBISH OR TRASH
1. NOTICE. The Director of Economic and Community Development, or his or her
designee be, and they are hereby, authorized and directed to cause written notice to be
mailed to the record owner, occupant or person in charge of any property within a
residential zoning district of the City of Decatur upon which there is an accumulation
of garbage, junk, rubbish or trash, which appears to the Manager to constitute a
danger to the health, safety and welfare of individuals living in the area or the public
in general, directing the owner, occupant or person in charge of the property so
notified to remove or cause the removal of the accumulated garbage, junk, rubbish or
trash within ten days.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-11, March 13, 2000)
2. 72 HOUR NOTICE. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1 of this Chapter, if
any accumulation of garbage or rubbish appears to the director to be foul or offensive, appears to
serve as a breeding place for insects or a feeding place or harborage for rats or vermin, the
director may give written notice to the owner, occupant or person in control of the property,
directing said person to remove the accumulation within 72 hours.
3. HEARING. The notice shall inform the owner, occupant or person in control of the
property that, upon written request filed with and received by the Economic and Community
Development Department not later than 72 hours after the mailing of said notice, he may be
Revised 02/2017
Chapter 49
given an opportunity to appear and be heard before the City Manager or his designee at a time
and place established by the City Manager on the question of whether or not the accumulation of
garbage, junk, rubbish or trash constitutes a danger to the health, safety or welfare of individuals
in the area or the public at large.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-11, March 13, 2000)
4. REMOVAL OF GARBAGE. If the accumulated garbage, junk, rubbish or trash has
not been removed during the period established in the notice for removal or any written
extension thereto granted by the director or the City Manager, the City may enter upon the
property and cause the accumulation to be removed and collect from the owner, occupant or
person in control of the property the reasonable costs of removal.
5. LIEN. The costs so incurred is a lien upon the real estate affected superior to all other
liens and encumbrances except liens for general taxes; provided that within 90 days from the
date on which the removal of the accumulated garbage, junk, rubbish or trash by the City or its
contractor is completed the municipality files a notice of lien in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out (1) a description of the real
estate sufficient for identification thereof, (2) the amount of money representing the cost and
expense incurred or payable for the service, and (3) a brief description of the work performed
and the dates on which it was performed.
6. RELEASE OF LIEN. Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner of or
person interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by
the municipality and the release may be filed of record as in the case of filing notice of lien.
7. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this Chapter shall be fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than
Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each day on which a violation occurs or
continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-93, December 19, 2011)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-70, October 31, 2011)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-47, June 15, 2009)
CHAPTER 49.1
BLIGHT OR CONSERVATION AREAS
1. LEGISLATIVE DECLARATION. It is hereby found and declared:
(a) Within the City of Decatur there exist blighted or conservation areas where a major portion
of the buildings and structures are detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the occupants and the
welfare of the City because of age, dilapidation, overcrowding or faulty arrangement, or lack of
ventilation, light, sanitation facilities, adequate utilities or access to transportation, commercial
marketing centers or to adequate labor supplies.
(b) Such blight or conservation areas are usually situated in the older and centrally located
areas of the City, and once existing, spread unless eradicated.
(c) As a result of these degenerative conditions the properties embraced in a blight or
conservation area fall into a state of non-productiveness or limited productiveness, and fail to produce
their due and proper share of taxes.
(d) The conditions in a blight or conservation area necessitate excessive and disproportionate
expenditures of public funds for crime prevention, public health and safety, fire and accident
protection, and other public services and facilities and constitute a drain upon the public revenue.
These conditions impair the efficient, economical and indispensable governmental functions of the
City.
(e) In order to promote and protect the health, safety, morals and welfare of the public it is
necessary to provide for the eradication and elimination of blight or conservation areas and the
construction of redevelopment projects and commercial projects in these areas.
Revised 02/2017
(f) The eradication and elimination of blight or conservation areas and the construction of
redevelopment projects financed by private capital, with financial assistance from the City of Decatur
and other governmental bodies, in the manner provided in this Chapter, is hereby declared to be a
public use essential to the public interest.
2. DEFINITIONS. As used in this Chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:
(a) "Real property" means lands, lands under water, structures, and any and all easements,
franchises and incorporeal hereditaments, estates and rights, legal and equitable, including terms for
years and liens by way of judgment, mortgage or otherwise.
(b) "Blight area" means any improved or vacant area of not less in the aggregate than one (1)
acre located within the City of Decatur where, if improved, industrial, commercial and residential
buildings or improvements, because of a combination of five (5) or more of the following blighting
conditions:
age;
dilapidation;
obsolescence;
deterioration;
illegal use of individual structures;
presence of structures below minimum code standards;
excessive vacancies;
overcrowding of structures and community facilities;
inadequate utilities;
excessive land coverage;
deleterious land use or layout;
depreciation or lack of physical maintenance;
lack of community planning;
diversity of ownership of such land; or
tax or special assessment delinquencies on such land which exceed the fair value thereof,
are detrimental to the public safety, health, morals or welfare, or if vacant, the sound growth of the area
is impaired by (1) a combination of two (2) or more of the following blighting conditions:
obsolete platting of the vacant land;
diversity of ownership of such land;
tax or special assessment delinquencies on such land which exceed the fair value thereof; or,
deterioration of structures or site improvements in neighboring areas to the vacant land,
or, (2) the area immediately prior to becoming vacant qualified as a blighted improved area.
(c) "Commercial project" means any building or buildings or building addition or other
structures to be newly constructed, renovated or improved and suitable for use by a commercial
enterprise or an entity engaged in providing housing and ancillary services, and includes the sites and
other rights in the land on which such buildings or structures are located.
(d) "Conservation area" means any area located within the City of Decatur, of not less, in the
aggregate, than one (1) acre in which 50% or more of the structures have an age of 35 years or more.
Such an area is not yet a blight area but because of a combination of three (3) or more of the following
blighting conditions:
dilapidation;
obsolescence;
deterioration;
illegal use of individual structures;
presence of structures below minimum code standards;
abandonment;
excessive vacancies;
overcrowding of structures and community facilities;
lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities;
inadequate utilities;
excessive land coverage;
deleterious land use or layout;
depreciation of physical maintenance;
lack of community planning,
diversity of ownership of such land; or
tax or special assessment delinquencies on such land which exceed the fair value thereof,
is detrimental to the public safety, health, morals or welfare and such an area may become a blight
area.
(e) "Commercial redevelopment plan" or "redevelopment plan" means the comprehensive
program for the clearing or rehabilitation and physical development of a blight or conservation area,
and includes an analysis and projection of the steps necessary for the elimination or rehabilitation of a
blight or conservation area and the protection of adjacent areas, and all administrative, funding and
financial details and proposals necessary to effectuate the plan.
(f) "Redevelopment area" means the blight or conservation area of not less in the aggregate
than one (1) acre, to be developed in accordance with the redevelopment plan.
3. BLIGHT OR CONSERVATION AREA.
(A) The City Council may, by ordinance or resolution, designate blight or conservation areas
within the City. Such ordinance or resolution shall contain the findings of the Council, consistent with
Section 2 hereof, that led to the designation of such area.
(B) Before the Council designates any area as provided in subsection (A) hereof, the Plan
Commission shall hold a public hearing regarding such area. Notice of such hearing shall be given in
a newspaper of general circulation in the City not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days
prior to said hearing. In addition, notice of said hearing shall be given by mail addressed to all owners
of record of property located within said area. At said hearing, the Director of Economic and
Community Development, or such officer's designee, shall report on the factors listed in Section 2
hereof as they apply to said area. Property owners and the public generally may appear and be heard.
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
4. REDEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(A) The City Council may, by ordinance or resolution, adopt and publish a commercial
redevelopment plan for any blight or conservation area designated as herein provided.
(B) Before the Council adopts any commercial redevelopment plan, the Plan Commission shall
hold a public hearing regarding such plan. Notice of such hearing shall be given as provided in
Section 3 hereof. Property owners and the public generally may appear and be heard.
(C) The public hearing required hereby may be held simultaneously with the hearing required
by Section 3.
5. POWERS OF COUNCIL. In eliminating any blighting conditions in any blight or
conservation area or in carrying out a final commercial redevelopment plan, the Council may:
(a) Acquire by purchase, gift, condemnation or otherwise as provided in this Chapter the fee
simple title to all or any part of the real property in any blight or conservation area;
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2000-54, June 19, 2000)
(b) Clear any area acquired, by demolition or removal of existing buildings and structures;
(c) Renovate or rehabilitate any structure or building acquired, or if any structure or building
or the land supporting it has not been acquired, to permit the owner to renovate or rebuild the structure
or building in accordance with the redevelopment plan;
(d) Construct or acquire by gift or purchase any commercial project and rent or lease such
commercial projects to commercial or housing concerns or entities engaged in providing housing and
ancillary services;
(e) Sell and convey commercial projects, including without limitation the sale and conveyance
subject to a mortgage, for such price and at such time as the Council may determine;
(f) Install, repair, construct, reconstruct or relocate streets, utilities and site improvements
essential to the preparation of the redevelopment area for use in accordance with a redevelopment plan;
(g) Mortgage or convey real or personal property acquired for same in accordance with the
redevelopment plan;
(h) Borrow money, apply for and accept advances, loans, grants, contributions, gifts, services,
or other financial assistance, from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality
thereof, the State, county, municipality or other public body or from any source, public or private, for
or in aid of any of the purposes of the final redevelopment plan, and to secure the payment of any loans
or advances by the issuance of revenue bonds and by the pledge of any loan, grant or contribution, or
parts thereof, or the contracts therefor, to be received from the United States of America or any agency
or instrumentality thereof, and to enter into and carry out contracts in connection therewith;
(i) Exercise any one or more of the foregoing powers in any combination to carry out the final
redevelopment plan.
6. ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY. In exercising the power to acquire real estate as
provided in this Chapter, the City Council may proceed by gift, purchase or condemnation to acquire a
fee simple title to all real property lying within a blight or conservation area, including easements and
reversionary interests in the streets, alleys and other public places lying within such area. If any such
real property is subject to an easement the City Council, in its discretion, may acquire the fee simple
title to such real property subject to such easement if that such easement will not interfere with
carrying out the redevelopment plan. In carrying out the provisions of this Chapter, and pursuant to its
home rule powers under Article VII of the Constitution of the State of Illinois, the City of Decatur may
exercise the right of eminent domain.
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2000-54, June 19, 2000)
7. TRANSFER AND SALE OF REALTY. The City Council may at any time transfer and
sell the fee simple title, or any lesser estate that it acquired to all or any part of the real property within
the redevelopment area. Such sales and transfers may be made to:
(1) Any individual, association or corporation, organized under the laws of this State or
of any other State or country which may legally make such investments in this State, including foreign
and alien insurance companies, as defined in Section 2 of the "Illinois Insurance Code"; or,
(2) Any body politic and corporate, public corporation or private individual,
corporation, association or interest empowered by law to acquire, develop and use such real property
for such uses, public or private, as are in accordance with the final redevelopment plan.
Any redevelopment area may be sold either as an entirety or in such parcels as the City Council
may select. It is not necessary that title be acquired to all real property within the redevelopment area
before the sale of a part thereof may be made as provided in this Section.
8. BORROWING OF MONEY AND ISSUANCE OF BONDS. The City Council may
incur indebtedness and issue revenue bonds in such amounts as it deems necessary for the purpose of
raising funds for carrying out the provisions of a final redevelopment plan provided for the eradication
and elimination of blight and conditions likely to create blight and the acquisition, development or
redevelopment of blight or conservation areas and any other area which may constitute a
redevelopment area within the municipality or for the purpose of financing in whole or in part the cost
of acquisition, construction and financing of any commercial properties.
CHAPTER 50
LICENSES
1. REQUIRED. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on any business,
occupation or trade for which a license is required by this Code without first having obtained
therefore a license so to do.
2. APPLICATIONS. Before any license as required by the preceding section shall be
issued, the person, firm or corporation desiring such license shall make application to the City
Clerk or Finance Department upon forms provided by the City. Such application shall be accompanied
by the license fee as required by this Code. Except as otherwise provided in this
Code, the City Clerk or Finance Department shall immediately refer all such applications to the
City Manager.
(AMENDED BY ORDINANCE NO. 89-42, May 1, 1989)
3. ISSUANCE. Upon written approval by the City Manager, the City Clerk or the Finance
Department shall issue the license applied for. Each license shall state the purpose for
which it was granted, its expiration date and the location of the business authorized. Except
where otherwise provided in this Code, each license shall be signed and attested by the City
Clerk or Finance Department.
4. BONDS. No bond or indemnity policy required by any of the provisions of this Code
Revised 5/89
Chapter 50
of any licensee shall be hereafter approved unless the same shall contain a provision for notice
to the City of the termination of coverage during the period for which the bond or policy was
originally issued. All bonds shall be corporate surety bonds of companies authorized to do business
in the State of Illinois.
5. RENEWAL. No license or permit shall be renewed except upon approval of the City
Manager, if originally required, unless otherwise provided by law. No renewal shall be given
unless bond or indemnity policy, if required originally, be renewed or continued.
6. FEES. When application for an annual license is made after the beginning of the license
period, the fee shall not be prorated, unless otherwise provided in this Code. When an application
is not approved and an applicant has not engaged or shall not have attempted to engage
in the business sought to be licensed, the fee paid shall be refunded.
7. BUILDING AND PREMISES. No license shall be issued for the conduct of any
business, nor any permit given for any act or thing unless the premises or building, as the case
may be, to be used shall comply with the provisions of this Code and any other ordinance of the
City. No license or permit shall be granted for a purpose which would involve a violation of the
Zoning Ordinance.
8. DURATION. All annual licenses shall expire on April 30th in each year unless contrary
provision is made. Unless the contrary is specified in the license, the license shall be taken
as annual.
9. TRANSFER. Unless otherwise provided by this Code, or by special ordinance, no license
shall be assignable without the written permission of the City Manager.
Chapter 50
10. CHANGE OF LOCATION. The location of any licensed business or occupation or
of any permitted act may be changed upon permission of the City Manager provided that building
and zoning ordinances shall not be thereby violated.
11. NUISANCES. No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to
amount to a nuisance in fact, and any business so conducted may be abated and any license
therefor revoked.
12. REVOCATION. Except where otherwise provided, any license or permit may be
revoked by the City Manager at any time during its life upon five (5) days' notice in writing to
the licensee or permittee of an opportunity to be heard, for any violation by the licensee or permittee
of the ordinance provisions relating to the license or permit, to the conduct by the licensee,
or his agents of the occupation licensed, to the subject matter of the license or permit, or to
the premises occupied, and such revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed.
13. POSTING LICENSE. It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed
business in the City to keep his license posted at all times in a prominent place on the premises
or equipment used for such business, but not after the period for which it was issued has expired.
14. INSPECTION. Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection
with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are required or deemed advisable or are
reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance provision, it shall be the duty of
the licensee or person in charge of the premises to admit thereto for the purpose of making such
inspection, any officer or employee of the City who is authorized or directed to make such inspection,
at any reasonable time that admission is requested. Whenever analysis of any commodity
or material is reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any ordinance provision
or to detect violation thereof, it shall be the duty of any licensee whose business is governed by
Chapter 50
such provision to give to the authorized officer or employee of the City, samples of such material
or commodity sufficient for analysis when requested.
15. CONTROLLED BY ORDINANCE. Every license or permit granted shall be subject
to the ordinances of the City existing when the license or permit is granted or which shall
thereafter be passed, so far as the same shall apply.
16. ISSUANCE TO DEBTOR OF CITY. No license or permit shall be issued to any
person indebted to the City until after payment or discharge thereof in accordance with the terms
and conditions fixed by the City Manager.
17. ALTERATION. No person shall alter or add to any license certificate or plate. No
licensee shall lend or give away any license certificate or plate. No person shall use or display
any license certificate or plate or permit not issued to or lawfully assigned to him. Upon proof of
loss satisfactory to the City Manager, the City Clerk or the Finance Department shall issue a new
license or plate or permit upon payment of Five Dollars ($5.00), unless otherwise provided in
this Code or applicable ordinance.
(AMENDED BY ORDINANCE NO. 89-42, May 1, 1989)
18. GAMBLING STAMPS. No license of any kind or character shall be issued to any
person, firm or corporation having a Federal Gambling or Wagering Stamp.
19. CHANGE IN LICENSE FEE. All licenses or permits in effect at the time of the
adoption of this Code shall continue until their expiration or revocation at the license or permit
fee in effect at the time they were issued. All licenses or permits issued after the adoption of this
Code shall bear the license or permit fee provided for in this Code.
CHAPTER 50.1
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
1. WORDS AND PHRASES. Words and phrases in this chapter which are defined in
the Transient Merchant Act of 1987 (the “Act”), as amended, shall have and be given the same
meanings and definitions as therein set out unless expressly otherwise provided herein.
2. ISSUANCE. Transient Merchant and Itinerant Vendor licenses shall be issued by the
Finance Department upon approval by the Chief of Police pursuant to the provisions of the Act
and as provided in this chapter. No Transient or Itinerant Vendor shall operate without a license.
3. APPLICATION. An application for a Transient Merchant or Itinerant Vendor's
license shall be made in writing to the Finance Department which shall set forth the following:
(a) The name of the individual applying for the license.
(b) The residence, telephone number and driver's license number of the
applicant.
(c) The address of the principal place of business of the applicant and its
telephone number.
(d) If the applicant is employed by another person or entity, the name of the
employer, its address and telephone number.
(e) Whether the applicant has been convicted of a criminal offense or
ordinance violation (other than traffic or parking offenses) in any
jurisdiction and, if so, a list of such convictions with date and prosecuting
jurisdiction.
(f) A State of Illinois sales tax number or other evidence that the business is
registered with the state department of revenue.
4. INELIGIBILITY. The Finance Department shall issue the license required unless it
is found:
(a)The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years.
Revised 11/2016
(b)The applicant has been convicted or completed any sentence of imprisonment
within the last five (5) years of any offense relating to theft, burglary or fraud, or
the applicant has ever been convicted of any felony sex offense, felony offense
related to use of a firearm, manslaughter, first or second degree murder, or
home invasion as defined in the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, 720 ILCS 5/1-1
et
seq., or any similar offense under the laws of the United States or another State.
(c)The applicant or his employer has had a license issued pursuant to the Chapter
revoked for cause.
(d)The applicant or his employer has had an application submitted pursuant to this
Chapter denied within the last three (3) years.
(e)The applicant, its partners, officers or listed shareholders has knowingly
furnished false or misleading information on any application for a license
required under this Chapter or any investigation into any such application.
5. FEE. The fee for Transient Merchant or Itinerant Vendor licenses shall be One
Hundred Dollars ($100.00) per year, payment of which shall accompany each application for
said license. Applications for such licenses shall be submitted to the Finance Department. This
fee shall be required for each individual involved in the business.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2016-84, November 21, 2016)
6. WAIVER OF BOND. The posting of a surety bond or cash deposit for Transient
Merchant or Itinerant Vendor licenses is hereby expressly waived pursuant to the provision of
the Act.
7. WAITING PERIOD. No Transient Merchant or Itinerant Vendor license shall be
guaranteed to be issued sooner than fourteen (14) days after the submittal of an application to the
Finance Department for the same.
8. RESTRICTIONS.
(a) No one shall engage in the business of selling or soliciting between the hours of
8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
(b) Whenever a licensee shall make sales from a vehicle, the vehicle shall be
stopped at the right-hand curb of the street or at the extreme right-hand edge of
the pavement. No sales shall be made from any vehicle except from the
curbside thereof.
(c) No person shall engage in the business of selling or soliciting at any residence
or business at which there is displayed upon said premise a notice prominently
displayed, on which is printed the legend, “NO SOLICITORS”, or words to that
effect.
(d) No licensee shall remain at any residence after being asked by an occupant to
leave.
(e) No person shall engage in the business of selling or soliciting using a truck or
other vehicle over four tons. No licensee shall make sales from a vehicle in
excess of four tons. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit use of a vehicle in
excess of four tons for the purpose of delivering merchandise that has been
previously ordered by a customer, consistent with Chapter 34, section 26 of the
Code of the City of Decatur.
9. IDENTIFICATION. Any licensee shall, before entering a dwelling, identify himself
to the occupant by name and state what individual, partnership, corporation, group, or
association he represents. Any licensee shall immediately display the license issued by the City
of Decatur Finance Department and a photo governmental identification card (state driver’s
license or state identification card) upon request of any person or law enforcement officer.
10. ENTERING DWELLINGS. Not more than two persons shall solicit and/or sell at a
single dwelling at one time. It shall constitute a nuisance for any licensee to enter any dwelling
without being admitted thereto by an adult occupant thereof, or to insist on showing his
products/items to any person after being told by the person that he does not wish to see or
purchase any products/items, or to in any manner vex, annoy, or harass any person.
11. SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE. The City Manager shall have
the right to suspend or revoke any license issued under this Chapter for violation of any
provision of this Chapter or other applicable law and may order that the licensee cease all
operations for a part or the entire the duration of term of the license.
12. RULES AND REGULATIONS. The City Manager is hereby empowered to
adopt, promulgate, and to enforce, rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of
the Act or of this chapter relating to any matter pertaining to the administration, enforcement and
application of this chapter.
13. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
Chapter shall be fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each day on which a violation occurs or
continues shall be considered a separate offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-72)
CHAPTER 50.2
HOME KITCHEN OPERATIONS
(Adopted Ordinance 2016-19, April 18, 2016)
1. DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this Chapter, the certain words or
phrases shall be defined as set forth:
A. Home Kitchen Operation shall have the same meaning as ascribed in the State
of Illinois Food Handling Regulation Enforcement Act, 410 ILCS 625/3.6.
B. Baked Goods shall include, but are not limited to, breads, cookies, cakes, pies,
pastries and high-acid fruit pies that use apples, apricot, grape, peach, plum, quince,
orange, nectarine, tangerine, blackberry, raspberry, blueberry, boysenberry, cherry,
cranberry, strawberry, red currant or a combination of these fruits per 410 ILCS
625/4(b)(1)(C).
C. Potentially Hazardous Food means a food that is potentially hazardous
according to the Department of Public Health administrative rules. In general,
potentially hazardous food means a food that requires time and temperature control for
safety to limit pathogenic microorganism growth or toxin formation as defined pursuant
to 410 ILCS 625/4(a). The following are potentially hazardous and prohibited from
production and direct sale by a home kitchen operation: pumpkin pie, sweet potato pie,
cheesecake, custard pies, crème pies, and pastries with potentially hazardous filling or
toppings pursuant to 410 ILCS 625/4(b)(1)(C).
2. HOME KITCHEN OPERATION QUALIFICATIONS. The following
conditions must be met in order to qualify as a home kitchen operation pursuant to 410
ILCS 625/3.6:
A. Monthly gross sales do not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00);
B. The food is a non-potentially hazardous baked good;
C. A notice is provided to the purchaser that the product was produced in a home
kitchen by a person who has a current food handler certificate;
D. The food package is affixed with a label or other written notice is provided to
the purchaser that includes:
1. The common or usual name of the food product;
2. Allergen labeling as specified in federal labeling requirements by the
United States Food and Drug Administration;
E. The food is sold directly to the consumer;
F. The food is stored in the residence where it is produced or packaged;
G. Per the City of Decatur Zoning Ordinance, the home kitchen operation must be
entirely incidental to residential use when (1) carried on in the Main Building and is not
used primarily or exclusively for the home kitchen operation; (2) is carried on by a
member of the immediately family, residing on the premises; (3) there is no commodity
displayed or sold upon the premises; (4) no person is employed other than a member of
the immediate family residing on the premises; and (5) no mechanical equipment is used
except of a type that is similar in character to that normally used for purely domestic or
household purposes.
H. Home kitchen operation does not include a person who produces or packages
non-potentially hazardous baked goods for sale by a religious, charitable, or
nonprofit organization for fundraising purposes; the production or packaging of
non-potentially hazardous baked goods for these purposes is exempt from the
requirements of this Chapter.
3. INSPECTIONS. The Department of Public Health or the Macon County
Health Department may inspect a home kitchen operation in the event of a complaint or
disease outbreak.
4. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars
($150.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each day
on which a violation occurs or continues shall be considered a separate offense.
CHAPTER 51
SALES TAX
(DELETED BY ORDINANCE NO. 90-55, May 14, 1990)
EFFECTIVE 9/1/90
CHAPTER 51.2
FOOD AND BEVERAGE TAX
Section 1. DEFINITIONS. The words and phrases used in this Chapter shall have their
normal and customary meanings except as otherwise defined in this Section.
(I) "Alcoholic Liquor" shall have the meaning ascribed thereto in the Illinois Liquor
Control Act of 1934 (230 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.), and any successor statute, and shall be construed
as synonymous with the term "Alcoholic Beverage".
(2) "Person" means any individual, firm or corporation, representative or entity.
(3) "Purchase at Retail" means to obtain for use or consumption in exchange for a
consideration, whether in the form of money, credits, barter or any other nature, and not for
resale.
(4) "Retailer" means a person who sells or offers for sale for use or consumption and not
for resale.
(5) "Retail food facility" means any inn, restaurant, eating place, drive-in restaurant,
buffet, cafeteria, cafe, lunch counter, fast food outlet, catering service, coffee shop, diner,
sandwich shop, soda fountain, tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, soft drink parlor, ice cream parlor, tea
room, delicatessen operations, movie theater, mobile food or beverage or ice cream vehicle,
hotel, motel, club, or other facility where prepared food or beverage is sold at retail in the City
and whether or not situated in connection with some other endeavor or enterprise but does not
include public or private schools, boarding houses, grocery stores or convenience stores
whereat food is not intended to be consumed on the premises except as to items customarily
Revised 06/2016
furnished by delicatessens or caterers, the service of food to patients or residents of hospitals or
nursing homes or similar residential care facilities, or programs for the central preparation of
meals to be delivered and consumed at private residences of invalids or the elderly, or churches
other than those frequently and regularly selling food at retail.
Section 2. TAX IMPOSED. A tax, in addition to any and all other taxes, is hereby
imposed upon the use and privilege of purchasing alcoholic beverages at retail at any place
within the City, and upon the use and privilege of purchasing beverage or food prepared for
immediate consumption at retail at any retail food facility within the City, at the rate of two
percent (2%) of the purchase price of such food or beverage, the ultimate incidence of and
liability for payment of which shall be borne by the purchaser thereof.
Section 3. CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION. No person shall operate or
maintain a retail food facility within the City without obtaining a certificate of registration for the
same from the Department of Finance, application for which shall be made upon forms provided
by said Department requiring the furnishing of such pertinent information regarding such facility
and the ownership and operation thereof as is reasonably necessary or desirable to facilitate the
enforcement and administration of the provisions hereof.
Section 4. DUTY TO COLLECT TAX. The owner and the operator of each retail
food facility and each premises licensed for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquors within the City
shall, jointly and severally, have the duty to collect and account for said tax from each purchaser
at the time that the consideration for such purchase is paid, and any amount so collected or
required to be collected by the provisions hereof shall constitute a debt owed to the City by such
owner and operator.
Section 5. RECORDS. Said retailer shall cause complete and accurate books, records
and accounts, showing the gross receipts for sales of food and beverage and the taxes collected
each day, which shall be made available in the City for examination by the City upon reasonable
notice and during customary business hours.
Section 6. MONTHLY RETURNS.
(a) A sworn monthly return shall be filed with the Finance Department of the City no
later than the twentieth day of the calendar month next succeeding the month for which the
return is made, a sum of money equal to the amount of food and beverage tax owing for the
preceding month, accompanied by a sworn monthly return in a format prescribed by the Finance
Director containing such information as the Finance Director may reasonably require including,
but not limited to all receipts from taxable purchase of food and beverage and the tax collected
for such.
(b) Any person filing a timely return pursuant to this Section may retian One and
Three quarters (1.75) percent of the tax they collect to be remitted with that return. This retention
is allowed for the purpose of compensating for the costs incurred in complying with the duties
and obligations set forth under this Chapter. If the return is not timely filed, no retention shall be
allowed. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2016-38, June 20, 2016)
Section 7. DELINQUENCY. If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty
at the rate of ten percent (10%) per thirty (30) day period, or portion thereof, from the day of
delinquency shall be added thereto and paid. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-72) (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2016-38, June 20, 2016)
Section 8. OVERPAYMENT. If any retailer collects an amount upon a sale not subject
to the tax imposed hereby but which amount is purported to be the collection of said tax, or if a
retailer collects an amount upon a sale greater than the amount of the tax so imposed thereon and
does not for any reason refund the same to the purchaser who paid the same before filing the
return for the period in which such occurred, said retailer shall account for and pay over those
amounts to the City along with the tax properly collected.
Section 9. ENFORCEMENT. Payment and collection of said tax may be enforced by
action in any court of competent jurisdiction and failure to collect, account for and pay over said
tax shall be cause for revocation of any City license for such facility or applicable to the
premises thereof all in addition to any other penalty provided in this ordinance.
Section 10. RULES AND REGULATIONS. The City Manager shall cause the
provisions hereof to be enforced and administered and in order so to do is authorized to
promulgate and publish such rules and regulations and make such rulings and decisions not in
conflict therewith which he may deem necessary or desirable, all subject however to the further
order of the Council.
Section 11. PENALTY. Any person operating a retail food facility within the City
without a certificate of registration, or failing or omitting to pay said tax when due, or failing or
omitting to collect, or to account for, or to pay over said tax, or failing to comply with said rules,
regulations and rulings shall, in addition to any other payment or penalty provided herein or
elsewhere by law or ordinance be fined not less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor
more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-72)
CHAPTER 51.3
UTILITY TAXES
1. DEFINITIONS. Words and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2).
2. TAX IMPOSED. A tax is hereby imposed on all persons engaged in the following
occupations or privileges:
(a) persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, or
selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the City of
Decatur, and not for resale, at the rate of four and one-fourth percent (4.25 %)
of the gross receipts therefrom, but excluding the distribution, supplying, furnishing,
or sale of gas to school districts or units of local government; and,
(b) persons (but excluding school districts and units of local government)
engaged in the privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at
retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the City of Decatur
at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
(i) For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.2533 cents per kilowatt-hour;
(ii) For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.16592 cents per kilowatt-hour;
(iii) For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.14926 cents per kilowatt-hour;
(iv) For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in
a month: 0.14518 cents per kilowatt-hour;
(v) For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.14110 cents per kilowatt-hour;
(vi) For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed
in a month: 0.13294 cents per kilowatt-hour;
(vii) For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed
in a month: 0.13056 cents per kilowatt-hour;
Revised 10/2019
(viii) For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed
in a month: 0.12852 cents per kilowatt-hour;
(ix) For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed
in a month: 0.12648 cents per kilowatt-hour;
(x) For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000
kilowatt-hours in a month: 0.12444 cents per kilowatt-hour;
The tax rates set forth in the preceding table are proportional and do not exceed the revenue
that could have been collected using the rates enumerated in 65ILCS 5/8-11-2.
Those persons responsible for paying or collecting the taxes imposed by subsections (a) and
(b) hereof shall submit returns to the City Treasurer, including the taxes due, for all such taxes
arising out of gross receipts generated by customer bills and kWh used or consumed issued on or
after January 1, 2020.
(Amended, Ordinance 2019-163, October 7, 2019)
3. EXCEPTIONS. None of the taxes authorized by this Chapter may be imposed with
respect to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which the business
or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the
subject of taxation by this State or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons taxed
hereunder be subject to taxation under the provisions of this Chapter for those transactions that
are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the "Municipal Retailers' Occupation
Tax Act" authorized by Section 8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-
11-1); nor shall any tax authorized by this Chapter be imposed upon any person engaged in a
business or on any privilege unless the tax is imposed in a like manner and at the same rate upon
all persons engaged in business of the same class in the municipality, whether privately or
municipally owned or operated, or exercising the same privilege within the municipality.
4. ADDITIONAL TAXES. Such taxes shall be in addition to other taxes levied upon
the taxpayer or its business.
5. COLLECTION. The tax authorized by Section 2(b) of this Chapter shall be
collected from the purchaser by the person maintaining a place of business in this State who delivers
the electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person
who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and if unpaid, is recoverable in the same manner as the
original charge for delivering the electricity. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to said
Section 2(b) and any such tax collected by a person delivering electricity shall constitute a debt
owed to the municipality by such person delivering the electricity, provided, that the person
delivering electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the
charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that if such charges are
thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax. For purposes of this
Section 5, any partial payment not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be
for the delivery of electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser
by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity, in the manner prescribed by
the municipality. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge
an amount equal to 3% of the tax to reimburse the person delivering electricity for the expenses
incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and
supplying data to the municipality upon request. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect
the tax from the purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay the tax directly to the
municipality in the manner prescribed by the municipality. Persons delivering electricity who file
returns pursuant to this Section 5 shall, at the time of filing such return, pay the municipality
the amount of the tax collected pursuant to Section 2(b).
6. PAYMENT OF TAX. (A) On or before the last day of each month, each taxpayer
(expressly including those persons required to collect taxes pursuant to Section 5 hereof) shall make
a return to the City for the preceding month stating:
(i) His name.
(ii) His principal place of business.
(iii) His gross receipts and/or kilowatt-hour usage during the
month upon the basis of which the tax is imposed.
(iv) Amount of tax.
(v) Such other reasonable and related information as the
Director of Finance may require.
The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making such return, pay
to the City of Decatur the amount of tax herein imposed for the month reported in said return,
provided that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he so elects, report and pay an
amount based upon his total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the
return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later
payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts.
(B) In case any person who is required under this Chapter to file a tax return with the
City fails to file a return when and as required under this Chapter, such person shall pay to the City,
in addition to the amount of tax required to be transmitted, a penalty of five percent of the tax that
such person is required to transmit to the City provided, however, a 20 percent penalty shall be
imposed for any fraudulent failure to transmit such tax.
(C) In case any person who is required under this Chapter to file a tax return with the
City files a return at the time required but fails to transmit the tax proceeds, or any portion
thereof to the City when due, a penalty of five percent of the amount of tax not transmitted to the
City shall be added thereto; provided, however, the fraudulent failure to pay such tax shall result
in a 20 percent penalty.
(D) In addition to any penalty for which provision is made in this Chapter, any amount
of tax not transmitted when due shall bear interest at the rate of two percent per month, or
fraction thereof, until fully transmitted.
7. CREDIT FOR OVERPAYMENT. If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been
paid which was not due under the provisions of this Chapter, whether as a result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due,
under this Chapter from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment, provided that, no
amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be
so credited. No person shall be entitled to a refund of, or credit for, a tax imposed under this
Chapter unless the person files a claim for refund or credit within one (1) year after the date on
which the tax was paid or remitted.
8. BOOKS AND RECORDS. Every tax collector and every taxpayer required to pay
any of the taxes imposed by this Chapter shall keep accurate books and records of its business or
activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that give rise,
or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this Chapter. The books and records shall be
subject to and available for inspection by employees or agents of the City at all times during regular
business hours of the tax collector or taxpayer.
9. REGULATIONS. The City Manager is authorized to promulgate rules and
regulations for the administration of this Chapter consistent with the provisions hereof and
consistent with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
10. PENALTY; CIVIL ACTION. (A) Any taxpayer, including those persons
required to collect taxes pursuant to Section 5 hereof, who fails to make a return within the time
required therefor, or who fails to pay the tax due, or any portion thereof, for any month within
the time required therefor, or who makes a fraudulent return or willfully violates any other
provision of this Chapter shall be fined not less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor
more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-72)
(B) All taxes required to be paid to the City under to the terms of this Chapter shall
constitute a debt owed to the City, and the payment thereof may be enforced by the City in any
court of competent jurisdiction. The payment of such debt, whether pursuant to legal action or
otherwise, is in addition to any penalty imposed under subsection (A) hereof.
11. SEVERABILITY. If any portion of this Chapter is found invalid or unenforceable
by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder thereof shall continue in full force and effect.
CHAPTER 51.4
LOCAL MOTOR FUEL TAX
(ADOPTED, Ordinance 2016-08, February 16, 2016)
1. DEFINITIONS. Whenever used herein, unless context otherwise requires, the following
words, terms or phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:
(a) Bulk user- any person who purchases motor fuel for storage in bulk storage facilities
located within the City, which facilities are owned, leased, or controlled by the person for
subsequent dispensing into the supply tanks of internal combustion engines operated by the
person.
(b) Diesel Fuel-any product intended for use or offered for sale as a fuel for engines in
which the fuel is injected into the combustion chamber and ignited by pressure without electric
spark. Such fuel shall not include dyed diesel fuel as defined in 35 ILCS 505/4d and any
successor statute.
(c) Gallon-in addition to its ordinary meaning, its equivalent in a capacity of
measurement of substance in a gaseous state.
(d) Motor fuel-all volatile and inflammable liquid produced, blended, or compounded for
the purpose of, or which are suitable or practicable for, operating motor vehicles.
(e) Motor fuel retailer- any person as defined herein, engaged in the business of selling
motor fuel at retail, and not for resale within the City of Decatur.
(f) Motor fuel tax- the tax imposed under this Chapter.
(g) Motor vehicles-motor vehicles as defined by the Illinois Vehicle Code and watercraft
propelled by an internal combustion engine.
(h) Person-any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint adventure, corporation, limited liability company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian,
or other representative appointed by order of any court, or any city, town, county or other political
subdivision.
(i) Retail gasoline dealer-any person who engages in the business of selling motor fuel
in the City to a purchaser for use or consumption, and not for resale in any form.
(j) Sale, resale or selling-any transfer of ownership or possession, or both, exchange, or
barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever for valuable
consideration.
2. IMPOSITION OF TAX.
(a) There is levied and imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming motor fuel
that is purchased at retail or bulk within the corporate limits of the City, a motor vehicle fuel tax,
irrespective of the unit of measure in which it is actually sold, at a the rate of five cents ($0.05)
per gallon for non-diesel fuel from and after April 1, 2016.
(b) There is levied and imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming motor fuel that
is purchased at retail or bulk within the corporate limits of the City, a motor vehicle fuel tax,
irrespective of the unit of measure in which it is actually sold, at a rate of one cent ($0.01) per
gallon for diesel fuel from and after April 1, 2016.
(c) The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes and charges.
The tax herein imposed is not based on the selling or purchase price or gross receipts from the
sale or purchase of motor fuel.
(d) The ultimate incident of and liability for payment of the tax is to be borne by the
purchaser of motor fuel. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose a tax upon the
occupation of persons engaged in the sale of motor fuel.
(e) Each motor fuel retailer is required to collect the tax from the purchaser and remit it
as set forth in this Chapter.
3. COLLECTION BY RETAIL GASOLINE DEALERS.
(a) All retail gasoline dealers shall jointly and severally have the duty to collect, and
shall collect and account for the tax imposed in Section 2 of this Chapter from each purchaser at
the time that the consideration for such purchase is paid.
(b) Each retail gasoline dealer collecting and accounting for such tax shall be the trustee
for and on account of the City of Decatur.
4. REQUIRED RETURNS AND REMITTANCE OF TAX.
(a) All retail gasoline dealers shall pay to the City all taxes collected pursuant to this
Chapter.
(b) All retail gasoline dealers shall file a sworn monthly return with the Finance
Department of the City no later than the twentieth day of the calendar month next succeeding the
month for which the return is made, a sum of money equal to the amount of motor fuel tax owing
for the preceding month, accompanied by a sworn monthly return in a format prescribed by the
Finance Director containing such information as the Finance Director may reasonably require
including, but not limited to all receipts from taxable purchases of motor fuel and the tax
collected for such.
(c) Every bulk user shall file a sworn monthly return with the Finance Department no
later than the twentieth day of the calendar month next succeeding the month for which the
return is made, a sum of money equal to the amount of motor fuel tax owing for the preceding
month, accompanied by a sworn monthly return in a format prescribed by the Finance Director
containing such information as the Finance Director may reasonably require.
(d) Any person filing a timely return pursuant to this Section may retain One and Three
quarters (1.75) percent of the tax they collect to be remitted with that return. This retention is
allowed for the purpose of compensating for the costs incurred in complying with the duties and
obligations set forth under this Chapter. If the return is not timely filed, no retention shall be
allowed.
5. IMPROPER COLLECTION. If any retail gasoline dealer collects an amount upon a
sale not subject to the tax imposed in this Chapter but which amount is purported to be the
collection of such tax, or if a retail gasoline dealer collects an amount upon a sale greater than
the amount of the tax so imposed thereon and does not for any reason refund the same to the
purchaser who paid the same before filing the return for the period in which such occurred, such
retail gasoline dealer shall account for and pay over those amounts to the City along with the tax
properly collected.
6. RECORDKEEPING AND INSPECTION OF RECORDS.
(a) Each motor fuel retailer has a duty to maintain complete and accurate books, records,
and accounts showing the gross receipts for the sale of motor fuel and the motor fuel taxes
collected from purchasers and books, records and accounts related to such.
(b) Each bulk user has a duty to maintain complete and accurate books, records and
accounts showing the amount of motor fuel purchased.
(c) The books, records, and accounts under this Section must be available in the City for
examination and for audit by the City. Any examination by the City may be made only after
reasonable notice and may be made only during customary business hours.
7. REGISTRATION. Each motor fuel retailer doing business in the City and each bulk
user purchasing motor fuel for storage in bulk storage facilities in the City is required to register
with the Finance Department on or before the later of (i) March 20, 2016 or (ii) twenty (20) days
after commencing business as a motor fuel retailer or becoming a bulk user. The registration
shall be in the form and manner as prescribed by the Finance Director.
8. USE OF MOTOR FUEL TAX. The revenue produced by the tax imposed in this
Chapter shall be restricted in use to the construction and maintenance of municipal streets and
extensions, sidewalk repairs and maintenance, curbing, grade separations and approaches and
engineering services related to those above listed items.
9. PROMULGATION OF RULES. The Finance Director shall cause the provisions of
this Chapter to be enforced and administered and in order to do so is authorized to promulgate
and publish such rules and regulations and make such ruling and decisions not in conflict with
this Chapter which he deems necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
10. ENFORCEMENT. Payment and collection of the motor fuel tax may be enforced by
action in any court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction and failure to collect, account for and
pay over said tax shall be cause for revocation of any City license for such motor fuel retailer’s
location or such motor fuel retailer thereof in addition to any other penalty provided in this
Chapter.
11. PENALTY.
(a) If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the rate of ten (10) percent
per thirty (30) day period, or portion thereof, from the day of delinquency shall be added thereto
and paid.
(b) In addition to the penalty as set forth in Section 10 (a) or elsewhere by law or
ordinance, any motor fuel retailer operating without a certificate of registration or failing or
omitting to pay said tax when due, or failing or omitting to collect, or to account for, or to pay
over said tax, or failing to comply with said rules, regulations and rulings shall be fined not less
than Two Hundred Fifty ($250) Dollars nor more than Five Hundred ($500) Dollars.
12. TERMINATION. This tax shall be in existence for no more than ten (10) years from
the date of enactment and shall expire at the end of said ten year period without the necessity of
further action by City Council or unless further affirmative action is taken by City Council to
extend.
CHAPTER 51.5
HOTEL USE TAX
(Adopted, Ordinance 2015-65, December 7, 2015)
Effective Date January 1, 2016
Section 1. DEFINITIONS. The words and phrases used in this Chapter shall have
their normal and customary meanings except as otherwise defined in this Section.
(1) “Hotel” means any building or structure in which the public may, for a
consideration, obtain living quarters, or sleeping or housekeeping accommodations in which ten
or more rooms, apartments or suites are available for such use, and includes inns, motels, tourist
homes or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses, and apartment houses.
(2) “Permanent resident” means any person who occupied or has the right to occupy
any room or rooms in a hotel for not fewer than thirty consecutive days.
(3) “Rent” or “rental” means the consideration received for occupancy, valued in
money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and
property or services of any kind or nature.
(4) “Person” means any individual, firm, entity or representative.
Section 2. TAX IMPOSED. A tax, in addition to any and all other taxes, is imposed
upon the use and privilege of renting, leasing or letting of rooms in a hotel in the City at a rate
of eight percent (8%) of the gross rental receipts from such rental, leasing or letting, the
ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of which shall be borne by the user, lessee or
tenant of said rooms.
Section 3. HOTEL USE LICENSE AND TAX. No person shall engage in the
business or renting, leasing or letting rooms in a hotel in the City without an annual license first
obtained from the City Clerk on forms as required by the City Clerk and the paying of the
license fee in the amount of Four Hundred Dollars ($400.00). Any person operating a hotel in
the City without a license, or failing or omitting to pay said tax when due, or failing or omitting
Revised 11/2016
to collect, account for and pay over said tax shall, in addition to any other penalty provided
herein, upon conviction be fined not less than Fifty Dollars ($50.00) nor more than Five
hundred Dollars ($500.00).
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2016-83, November 21, 2016)
Section 4. COLLECTION. The owner and operator of each hotel and the person to
whom the license to operate the same is issued shall, jointly and severally, have the duty to
collect and account for said tax from each user, lessee or tenant of rooms in such hotel at the
time that the rent for the same is collected.
Section 5. PAYMENT OF TAX.
A. A sworn monthly return shall be filed with the Finance Department of the City for
each hotel in the City on forms prescribed by the Finance Director showing all receipts from
each renting, leasing or letting of rooms, which return shall be filed no later than the twentieth
day of the month next succeeding the month for which the return is made, and shall be
accompanied by payment of all taxes due and owing for the month covered by said return.
B. If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the rate of ten percent
(10%) per thirty day period, or portion thereof, from the day of delinquency shall be added
thereto and paid.
C. Any person filing a timely return pursuant to this Section may retain One and Three
quarters (1.75) percent of the tax they collect to be remitted with that return. This retention is
allowed for the purpose of compensating for the costs incurred in complying with the duties and
obligations set forth under this Chapter. If the return is not timely filed, no retention shall be
allowed.
D. Payment and collection of said tax may be enforced by action in any court of
competent jurisdiction and failure to collect, account for and pay over said tax shall be cause for
revocation of any City license for such hotel or applicable to the premises thereof all in addition
to any other penalty provided in this ordinance. (Amended, Ordinance 2016-39, June 20, 2016)
Section 6. EXCEPTIONS. The tax imposed by the provisions hereof shall not apply to
the renting, leasing or letting of rooms by permanent residents.
Section 7. REGULATIONS. The City Manager is hereby authorized to promulgate and
publish rules and regulations and to establish procedures not inconsistent with the provisions
hereof which said Manager may deem necessary or desirable to administer and enforce the
same.
Section 8. BOOKS AND RECORDS. Every tax collector and every taxpayer required
to pay any of the taxes imposed by this Chapter shall keep accurate books and records of its
business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions
that give rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this Chapter. The books and
records shall be subject to and available for inspection by employees or agents of the City at all
times during regular business hours of the tax collector or taxpayer.
Section 9. PENALTY; CIVIL ACTION. (A) Any taxpayer, including those
persons required to collect taxes pursuant to Section 5 hereof, who fails to make a return within
the time required therefor, or who fails to pay the tax due, or any portion thereof, for any
month within the time required therefor, or who makes a fraudulent return or willfully violates
any other provision of this Chapter shall be fined not less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars
($250.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
(B) All taxes required to be paid to the City under to the terms of this Chapter shall
constitute a debt owed to the City, and the payment thereof may be enforced by the City in any
court of competent jurisdiction. The payment of such debt, whether pursuant to legal action
or otherwise, is in addition to any penalty imposed under subsection (A) hereof.
Section 10. SEVERABILITY. If any portion of this Chapter is found invalid or
unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder thereof shall continue in full
force and effect.
CHAPTER 51.1
HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
1. A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling tangible
personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property title or registered with an
agency of this State's government, at retail in the City of Decatur at the rate of 1 1/2% of the
gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this Code chapter is in
effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the City of Decatur in the
business of making sales of service, at the rate of 1 1/2% of the selling price of all tangible
personal property transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of service. Such "Home
Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupational Tax" and the "Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation
Tax" shall not be applicable on the sales of food for human consumption which is to be
consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food
which has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and non-prescription
medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles
used by diabetics. The imposition of these home rule taxes are in accordance with the
provisions of Sections 8-11-1 and 8-11-5, respectively, of the "Illinois Municipal Code" (65
ILCS 5/8-11-1 and 8-11-5, as amended).
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2002-61, July 22, 2002)
(AMENDED, Ordinance No. 96-19, April 29, 1996, to become effective 1/1/97)
2. The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident
thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois.
The Department of Revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions
of this Chapter.
Revised 07/2002
CHAPTER 52
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
1. WORDS AND PHRASES. Words and phrases in this Chapter which are defined in
the Liquor Control Act of 1934, as amended, shall have and be given the same meaning and
definition as therein set out unless expressly otherwise provided herein.
2. LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER. The Mayor, or his designee,
shall be the Local Liquor Control Commissioner with such duties and powers as may be
provided by law or ordinance. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-33, May 4, 2009)
3. LICENSE REQUIRED. No person, firm or corporation shall sell alcoholic liquor at
retail without then having a currently in force local liquor license issued to such person or entity
as provided herein for the premises whereon such sale takes place. Each license and the
privileges there under shall expire and terminate on the 30th day of June next following the issue
date thereof.
4. LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS. Classes of local liquor licenses are hereby
established and are hereby authorized as follows:
Class A, under which alcoholic liquor may be sold for consumption on or off the
licensed premises, which said Class A license shall not be issued for any premises situated in any
Residence, Office, Park Mobile Home or Neighborhood Shopping District established by the
Zoning Ordinance and shall not be issued to any retail establishment, commonly described as a
convenience store, which typically offers such items including but not limited to groceries,
tobacco, soft drinks, beer and wine, or snack foods, or any retail establishment, commonly
described as a gas station, which typically offers automotive fuel or services, or similarly
operated businesses. Those license holders that are not currently in compliance with the
limitations as of December 4, 2017 shall be allowed to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption off
the licensed premises only. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-54, December 4, 2017)
Revised 08/2018
Class B, under which alcoholic liquors may be sold only in packages for consumption off
the licensed premises, which said Class B license shall not be issued for any premises located
within One Thousand (1,000) feet of any church, school, park or subsidized disabled adult and
elderly multi-story housing facility, unless the sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal
business carried on at any such location by such licensee, nor shall such Class B license be
issued for any premises situated in any Residence, Office or Park Mobile Home District
established by the Zoning Ordinance. The prohibition regarding distance from churches,
schools, parks, or subsidized disabled adult and elderly multi-story housing facilities shall not
apply to premises licensed on October 4, 2004, and continuously so licensed since that date. The
restriction of off-premise sales shall not apply to sampling or test marketing. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2004-55, July 6, 2004) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2001-67, September 4, 2001)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 97-47, June 2, 1997)
Class C, under which only a club shall be licensed and alcoholic liquor may be sold for
consumption on or off the licensed premises only to members of such club and invited guests of
said members personally being attended by a member, which said Class C license shall not be
issued for any premises situated in any Residence, Office, Park Mobile Home or Neighborhood
Shopping District established by the Zoning Ordinance unless the licensed premises are a club
house connected with a private golf course.
Class D, under which the licensed premises may only be a hotel having not less than 100
rooms used for the sleeping accommodations of guests, or a motel having not less than 100 such
rooms and having the same accommodations as a hotel, which said Class D license shall not be
issued for any premises situated in any Residence, Office, Park Mobile Home or Neighborhood
Shopping District established by the Zoning Ordinance.
Class E, under which the licensee may only be the State or a department, agency, or
instrumentality thereof, or a unit of local government, and alcoholic liquor may be sold only for
consumption on the licensed premises, or on other premises owned by a licensed unit of local
government if at a specific, non-continuous event such as a wedding reception, private party or
charity benefit, or a sport/athletic tournament not to exceed a three day consecutive period; or to
a licensed food service company contracted for a period of five years or more with an institution
of higher learning accredited through the Higher Learning Commission of NCA (a commission
of the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools) for use at said accredited institution
and only for purposes related to theatre and cultural events of the accredited institution of higher
learning; wherever or however said licensed or other premises are situated or however classified
for zoning purposes within the City. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-100, November 7, 2005)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-40, May 20, 2002) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2001-55, July 16,
2001)
Class F, under which the licensee may only be the State or a department, agency or
instrumentality thereof, a unit of local government or tenant thereof, or a not-for-profit charitable
foundation having as one of its purposes the conduct and promotion of at least one outdoor sport
such as baseball, football, rugby, soccer, golf, or the like, or the conduct and promotion of
outdoor dining or spectator sports or events such as horse racing, fairs, expositions or shows,
and which operates an outdoor facility appropriate to said dining, sport or event whereat
alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises, and which is situated in a zoning
district other than the Residence, Office, Park Mobile Home or Neighborhood Shopping District
unless the licensee is a unit of local government or a tenant thereof, or unless the licensed
premises are a clubhouse or restaurant connected with a golf course. (Amended, Ordinance No.
2002-41, May 20, 2002) (Amended, Ordinance No. 93-18, March 29, 1993) (Amended,
Ordinance No. 92-69, July 20, 1992)
Class G, under which the licensed premises may only be a restaurant in which the
licensee has invested therein after May 10, 1985 not less than $250,000.00 (which may include
the capitalized value of the first ten years only of a leasehold interest) as reasonably determined
by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner using general recognized accounting practices, which
said Class G license shall not be issued for any premises situated in any Residence, Office, Park
Mobile Home or Neighborhood Shopping District established by the Zoning Ordinance unless
the licensed premises are a club house connected with a golf course. Restaurant shall be defined
as any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public primarily as a
place where meals are served and where meals are actually prepared and served without sleeping
accommodations, such space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen which shall
include, but not limited to, sink; refrigerator with the minimum capacity of 20 cubic feet; and
oven with the minimum capacity of 4.3 cubic feet or a range or a grill; and dining equipment and
capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare,
cook and serve suitable food for its guests, where the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquor is
only incidental to the serving of meals and where 50% or more of the gross revenue of the
business must be from the serving of meals. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2015-22, May 18, 2015)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 96-27, May 6, 1996) (Amended, Ordinance No. 89-13, January 30,
1989)
Class H, under which alcoholic liquor may be sold only for consumption on the licensed
premises, and also under which the licensed premises may only be a hotel having not fewer than
four (4) nor more than fifteen (15) rooms used for sleeping accommodation of guests, and
kitchen and dining room facilities for serving meals to guests and the public. A Class H license
shall be personal to the licensee and exclusively limited to the premises, and such license may be
transferred to another applicant for such license only after the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner finds that such new licensee will operate an establishment of like kind and
character as that which was previously licensed, which said Class H license shall not be used for
any premises situated in any Residence, Office, Park Mobile Home or Neighborhood Shopping
District established by the Zoning Ordinance unless the licensed premises are a private club and /
or banquet facility establishment as an approved Historic Neighborhood Use. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2002-74, August 19, 2002) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-95, November 6,
2000)
Class I, under which the licensed premises may only be a restaurant at which alcoholic
liquor may be sold by the drink or pitcher only, for consumption on the premises and only at
tables and incidental to the service of meals. A Class I licensee shall not be permitted to operate
on the licensed premises a bar or lounge area at which alcoholic liquors alone may be purchased,
which said Class I license shall not be issued for any premises situated in any Residence, Office,
Park Mobile Home or Neighborhood Shopping District as established by the Zoning Ordinance
unless the licensed premises are a club house connected with a golf course or a restaurant
establishment as an approved Historic Neighborhood Use. Restaurant shall be defined as any
public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public primarily as a place
where meals are served and where meals are actually prepared and served without sleeping
accommodations, such space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen which shall
include, but not limited to, sink; refrigerator with the minimum capacity of 20 cubic feet; and
oven with the minimum capacity of 4.3 cubic feet or a range or a grill; and dining equipment and
capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare,
cook and serve suitable food for its guests, where the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquor is
only incidental to the serving of meals and where 50% or more of the gross revenue of the
business must be from the serving of meals. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2015-22, May 18, 2015)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-95, November 6, 2000) (Amended, Ordinance No. 89-13,
January 30, 1989)
Class J, under which alcoholic liquor may be sold only in packages for consumption off
the licensed premises, and under which the licensed premises may only be a retail establishment
which derives more than 50% of its gross income from the sale of goods other than alcoholic
liquors and in which the licensee has invested, after January 1, 1991, not less than $1,000,000
(which may include the capitalized value of the first ten years only of a leasehold interest), and,
which establishment employs a minimum of 50 full-time employees, or the equivalent thereof, at
the licensed premises, which said Class J license shall not be issued for any premises situated in
any Residence, Office, Park Mobile Home or Neighborhood Shopping District established by the
Zoning Ordinance unless the licensed premises are a club house connected with a golf course.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-95, November 6, 2000) (Amended, Ordinance No. 92-06,
January 21, 1992)
Class K, under which the licensed premises may only be a movie theater in which the
licensee has invested therein after January 1, 2004 not less than Two Hundred Fifty Thousand
Dollars ($250,000.00) as reasonably determined by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
using general recognized accounting practices and said licensed premises must be located in the
B-4 Central Business District of downtown Decatur. A Class K license shall authorize beer and
wine only to be sold by the drink only for consumption on the premises incidental to the viewing
of motion pictures or live theatrical or stage performances and shall not be permitted to operate
on the licensed premises a bar or lounge area at which alcoholic liquors alone may be purchased.
A Class K license shall be personal to the licensee and exclusively limited to the premises and
shall not be used for any premises situated in any Residence, Office, Park Mobile Home or
Neighborhood Shopping District established by the Zoning Ordinance. (Amended, Ordinance
No. 2007-12, March 19, 2007) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-37, May 2, 2005)
Class L, under which the licensed premises may only be a retail store of not more than
2,500 square feet and in which the licensee has invested therein not less than Fifty Thousand
Dollars ($50,000.00) (which may include the capitalized value of the first five (5) years only of a
leasehold interest) as reasonably determined by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner using
generally recognized accounting practices, which said Class L license shall not be issued for any
premises located within two hundred (200) feet of any church, school, park or subsidized
disabled adult and elderly multi-story housing facility. Said licensed premises must be located in
the B-4 Central Business District of downtown Decatur. A Class L license shall authorize beer
and wine only to be sold in packages for consumption off of the licensed premises between the
hours of 10:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M. No drive through, walk-up or drive-up liquor sales shall be
permitted on the premises. A Class L license shall be personal to the licensee and exclusively
limited to the premises and shall not be used for any premises situated in any Residence, Office,
Park Mobile Home or Neighborhood Shopping District established by the Zoning Ordinance.
Issuance of this Class shall be limited to three (3). (Amended, Ordinance No. 2006-15, March
20, 2006)
Class M, under which the licensed premises may be a retail store of not less than Ten
Thousand (10,000) square feet and in which the licensee has invested therein not less than One
Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00), which investment may include the capitalized value of the first
ten (10) years only of a leasehold interest as reasonably determined by the Finance Director of
the City of Decatur using generally recognized accounting practices. Said licensed premises may
only be located in a B-2 Commercial District, Planned Development or B-3 Planned Shopping
Center District. A Class M license shall authorize liquor to be sold in packages between the
hours of 9:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M. for consumption off of the licensed premises. No drive
through, walk-up or drive-up liquor sales shall be permitted on the premises. A Class M license
shall be personal to the licensee and exclusively limited to the premises. Issuance of Class M
licenses shall be limited to three (3). (Amended, Ordinance 2014-19, May 5, 2014) (Amended,
Ordinance 2012-94, December 17, 2012)
Class N, under which alcoholic liquor may be sold to the general public for consumption
on the licensed premises only during scheduled public performances or events. Class N licenses
shall be valid for up to fifteen (15) events per year, each event lasting no longer than three (3)
consecutive days. A Class N license shall be personal to the licensee and exclusively limited to
the premises and shall not be used for any premises situated in any Residence, Office, Park
Mobile Home or Neighborhood Shopping District established by the Zoning Ordinance.
Issuance of Class N licenses shall be limited to three (3). (Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-90,
November 18, 2013)
Class O, under which the licensed premises may only be a Brewer, Brewpub or similar
business as defined under the Illinois Liquor Control Act and has received a Federal Brewer
permit, and under which at least 50% of its annual gross income from the sale of alcoholic
liquors shall be derived from beer manufactured on the premises, and which said Class O license
shall not be issued for any premises situated in any Residence, Office, Park Mobile Home or
Neighborhood Shopping District established by the Zoning Ordinance. (Amended, Ordinance
No. 2017-12, March 20, 2017) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2015-22, May 18, 2015)
Class P, under which the licensed premises may only be a Video Gaming Parlor, defined
as an establishment or business whose primary purpose is to operate video gaming terminals as
defined under the Illinois Video Gaming Act and in which the sale of foods or snacks and
alcoholic beverages is only incidental to the operation of the video gaming terminals, and which
said Class P license shall not be issued for any premises situated in any Residence, Office, Park
Mobile Home or Neighborhood Shopping District established by the Zoning Ordinance nor shall
said Class P license be issued for any premises located within 1500 feet of another establishment
which offers video gaming terminals. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2016-62, September 6, 2016)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2015-22, May 18, 2015)
Class C, Class D, Class G, Class I, Class J and Class N licenses shall not be issued or
reissued to replace a license of any other class established hereunder or transferred either to
another licensee or for other premises. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-90, November 18, 2013)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 92-06, January 21, 1992) (Amended, Ordinance No. 89-13, January
30, 1989)
If on April 24, 1978, premises were licensed under the then provisions of this Chapter,
even though issuance of a Class A or Class C license would otherwise now be prohibited in the
Zoning district into which said premises are classified, said premises so long as the same use
thereof is continued shall be exempt from said prohibition.
5. APPLICATION. Application shall be made as required by this Code and shall be
delivered by the City Clerk to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner for action. The
application shall show the name, age and address of an individual applicant, and of the persons
entitled to participate in the profits, if a partnership applicant, and the objects, the names and
addresses of the officers and directors, if a corporate applicant, and whether or not one person
owns a controlling interest in such corporation, and if so, the name and address of such person;
the citizenship, place of birth, and place of naturalization, if foreign born, of an individual
applicant; the location and description of the premises where such liquor will be sold and served
or consumed; whether or not any previous similar license has been applied for, the place of
application, and the disposition of such application, and if revoked the reasons therefor, and
whether or not applicant has ever been convicted of a felony. No license will be issued for any
person ineligible under Section 2 of the Article 6 of the Act above referred to. A manager or
agent, including bartenders, must have the same qualifications as the person or firm to whom the
license is issued. All applications shall be verified by the applicant or, if a corporation, by an
authorized corporate officer thereof.
6. CHANGES IN LICENSE. If during a license period there is any change pertaining
to shareholders individually holding in the aggregate more than 5 percent of the corporate shares,
or pertaining to the officers or manager, of a licensee, such change shall be reported to the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner by filing with the City Clerk appropriately completed forms
furnished by the Clerk, accompanied by the proper required shareholders' individual or
manager's statements, within 10 days of such change.
7. LICENSE FEE. Payment of an annual license fee of Two Thousand Two Hundred
Dollars ($2,200.00) shall accompany each application for all classes of license except Class F as
to which the amount of said fee shall be $725.00; and except Class N as to which the amount of
said fee shall be $1,400.00; and except Class P as to which the amount of said fee shall be
$2,000.00 until August 17, 2015, then $6,000 beginning August 18, 2015 and thereafter provided
that, said fee shall be prorated for the issuance of any license during a license period. The
payment of a fee for any license shall be credited toward the payment of a fee for any other
license if the first license is surrendered prior to the issuance of the second license to the same
licensee during the same license year. For all classes of license, a late fee of $100.00 plus $20.00
per day shall be charged for all days after June 1st of any year for which an application for
renewal is incomplete. Each initial application and each application for transfer, whether to
another licensee or to other premises, shall also be accompanied by a processing fee of $100.00
in addition to the annual fee. Payment of an annual fee in amount of $200.00 shall accompany
the request for a caterer’s permit. Payment of a fee shall accompany the request for a temporary
permit or winery special use permit, in accordance with the following schedule:
1st permit / year - $100.00 per day
2nd permit / year - $150.00 per day
3rd permit / year - $200.00 per day
4th permit / year - $250.00 per day
5th permit / year - $250.00 per day
6th permit / year - $250.00 per day
In the event a license does not issue responsive to an application, the payment of the
annual fee accompanying the same shall be refunded, otherwise, there shall be no rebate or
prorate of a fee once paid. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-12, March 20, 2017) (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2016-90, November 21, 2016) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2016-09, February 16,
2016) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2015-43, August 17, 2015) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2015-22,
May 18, 2015) (Amended, Ordinance 2014-08, March 17, 2014) (Amended, Ordinance No.
2013-90, November 18, 2013) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-100, November 7, 2005)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2003-16, April 7, 2003) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-62, July 22,
2002) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-95, November 6, 2000) (Amended, Ordinance No. 97-47,
June 2, 1997)
8. TEMPORARY PERMIT/WINERY SPECIAL USE PERMIT
A. TEMPORARY PERMIT. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may issue a
temporary permit for the sale of alcoholic liquors to be consumed only on the premises at a
banquet, picnic, bazaar, fair or similar private or public assembly where food or drink is sold,
served or dispensed. Such temporary permit shall be issued only to a club, society, fraternity,
benevolent or civic organization not for pecuniary profit, and shall be for a period of not more
than three days. The maximum number of temporary permits issued to the same entity in one
calendar year shall not exceed six (6) and not more than one temporary permit shall be granted to
any one organization in any one period of thirty (30) days.
B. WINERY SPECIAL USE PERMIT. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may
issue a winery special use permit for the sale of wine sold in the original containers which bear
the vintner’s label and which are corked, capped or otherwise securely sealed at the place of
vintning at a market-type, special or festival event. Such license shall be issued to a winery
licensed by the State of Illinois with a winemaking premises license or a special use permit
license, and shall be for a period of not more than three days. The maximum number of winery
special use permits issued to the same winery in one calendar year shall not exceed six (6) and
not more than one winery special use permit shall be granted to any one winery in any one period
of thirty (30) days. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2016-09, February 16, 2016) (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2003-16, April 7, 2003)
C. CATERER’S PERMIT. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may issue an
annual caterer’s permit for the sale of alcoholic liquor to an existing holder of a Class A, C, G or
O liquor license in connection with the sale of prepared food, for service at private parties,
weddings or other similar private events which are not open to the general public, at a location
other than the premises listed on the current license. For the purposes this permit, the location of
the catered event shall be deemed the licensed premises. Holders of caterer’s permits must
comply with all other requirements in this Chapter. No person shall possess alcoholic beverages
other than those provided by the licensee on the premises of the catering location and
consumption of alcoholic liquor shall only be permitted on the premises where the food is
catered. Gross revenues from the sale of alcoholic liquor at any event shall not exceed forty (40)
percent of the total gross revenues generated from the sale of alcohol and food at that event and
the licensee shall submit to the City an affidavit on a quarterly basis certifying compliance with
this requirement. No event shall exceed three (3) days in length nor shall alcoholic liquor be
served at such an event for more than eight (8) consecutive hours. (Amended, Ordinance No.
2017-12, March 20, 2017)
9. TRANSFER OF LICENSE. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may permit a
licensee to transfer their license to other premises if the transfer is solely to change locations and
not to transfer to another holder which comply with the provisions of this Chapter and with
applicable provisions of law, code, ordinance, rule or regulation and with such reasonable
conditions to preserve the general health, safety and welfare as said Commissioner shall attach
thereto. Class P licenses are non-transferrable. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may
permit a licensee to transfer a license to another if the transfer is for the same geographic
location and in conjunction with the sale of the license holder’s business and inventory.
Furthermore, said Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall consider for either transfer: (1) the
zoning classification of the licensed premises, (2) the character of the surrounding area, (3) the
traffic and parking situation, including any off-street parking requirements of the licensed
business, within a 300-foot radius, (4) any statements of interested persons, either oral or written,
(5) the impact of such proposed license on the character of and the traffic and parking situation
in the immediate neighborhood, and (6) the applicants’ history of compliance with all laws,
ordinances and building and property maintenance codes. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2016-62,
September 6, 2016) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2014-28, June 30, 2014) (Amended, Ordinance
No. 2010-01, January 19, 2010)
10. NUMBER OF LICENSES. The issuance of a maximum number of Class A
licenses is limited to 43 and the issuance of a maximum number of Class B licenses is limited to
53. There shall be no maximum number for the issuance of the respective Class C, Class D,
Class E, Class F, Class G, Class I, Class J, Class K, or Class O licenses. Issuance of Class H
licenses is limited to 1. Issuance of Class L, Class M and Class N licenses is limited to three (3).
Issuance of Class P licenses is limited to 20. If on August 29, 2016, premises were licensed as a
Class P or had applied for a Class P license under the then provisions of this Chapter, said
premises so long as the same use thereof is continued shall be exempt from said limitation.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-33, August 6, 2018) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-54,
December 4, 2017) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2016-62, September 6, 2016) (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2015-22, May 18, 2015) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-90, November 18,
2013) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2006-84, September 5, 2006) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2006-
15, March 20, 2006) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-37, May 2, 2005) (Amended, Ordinance
No. 2000-57, July 17, 2000) (Amended, Ordinance No. 95-13, March 20, 1995) (Amended,
Ordinance No. 92-06, January 21, 1992) (Amended, Ordinance No. 90-84, July 30, 1990)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 89-13, January 30, 1989)
11. ISSUANCE OF AVAILABLE LICENSES. As to classes of license for which a
maximum authorized number has been established, if it should occur that less than such number
are issued, applications may be received for the issuance of the available license or licenses. If
after 30 days from the date such a license has become available, no qualified application has
been received such license shall be issued responsive to the first qualified application received
after such 30 day period. If during said 30 day period, more qualified applications are received
than the number of licenses available, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall by lot select
the application for which license shall issue. Applications made pursuant to the provisions of
this section may be supported by agreements, undertakings or other reasonable evidence of an
ability and willingness to satisfy physical and possessory requirements as to the premises
proposed to be licensed, in lieu of evidence of ownership or possessory interest, building and fire
code compliance and the like. Any person, firm, or corporation which has been successful in
acquiring a liquor license by lot shall be prohibited from entering any subsequent lottery for a
period of three years from the issuance of such license. If additional numbers of any class or
classes of license are authorized by the Council for the purpose of issuing such licenses to
owners of newly-annexed properties previously licensed by another jurisdiction, the provisions
hereof shall not apply to such newly-authorized but unissued licenses. (Amended, Ordinance No.
2003-16, April 7, 2003)
12. POSTING OF LICENSE. Every person licensed in accordance with the provisions
of this Chapter shall immediately post and keep posted while in force, in a conspicuous place on
the premises, the license so issued. Whenever such license shall be lost or destroyed, a duplicate
in lieu thereof shall be issued by the City Clerk upon the direction of the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner.
13. USE OF LICENSE. Except as to a Class F license, after a license has issued the
privileges there under shall be actively exercised on the licensed premises. Suspension of the
exercise of said privileges for a period of 90 days may be cause for revocation of such license
absent the showing of substantial reason for the same not within the control of the licensee.
14. SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
A. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may in the manner provided by law suspend
or revoke local liquor license privileges for violation of a provision of this Chapter or of
applicable provisions of law, ordinance, code, rule or regulation.
B. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner, when suspending local liquor license
privileges for violation of a provision of this Chapter or other applicable law, in the manner
provided herein and by statute, may order that the licensee cease and desist all business
operations at the licensed premises for the duration of the suspension of local liquor license
privileges, to the extent permitted by law, if such commissioner determines that such a closure
would assist the enforcement of the suspension in light of the severity of the violation or the
frequency of past violations, whether of the same nature or not. (Amended, Ordinance No. 89-
13, January 30, 1989)
C. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may assess costs including reasonable
attorney's fees against the licensee in any proceeding regarding such license held pursuant to law.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 92-28, May 4, 1992)
15. TOILETS. Class A, C and D licensed premises shall have separate sanitary toilets
maintained in clean and sanitary condition for males and females respectively.
16. COMPLIANCE WITH LAW. Local liquor licensed premises and the operations
therein and thereof shall comply, in addition to the provisions of this Chapter, with the applicable
provisions of law, ordinance, code, rule or regulation.
17. HOURS. No person shall sell, deliver or consume alcoholic liquor, and no licensee
shall permit the same, on or in the premises licensed hereunder with a liquor license except for
Class H between 2:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on Mondays through Saturdays or between 2:00
A.M. and l0:00 A.M. on Sundays except that alcoholic liquor may be sold or consumed until
3:00 A.M. on January 1, each year. No person shall sell, deliver or consume alcoholic liquor,
and no licensee shall permit the same, on or in any premises licensed hereunder with a Class H
license before 10:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m. on any day. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2015-45,
September 8, 2015) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-90, November 18, 2013) (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2006-15, March 20, 2006) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-37, May 2, 2005)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 92-06, January 21, 1992)
18. PUBLIC PLACES. During those hours in which alcoholic liquor shall not be sold,
delivered or consumed in premises licensed hereunder, alcoholic liquor shall not be consumed,
possessed, stored, kept or otherwise permitted or maintained in any building, or portion thereof,
used by members, or guests of members, of any club operating therein, in the meeting or public
rooms of hotels or motels or any other business which leases or otherwise provides such rooms
for banquets, receptions, dances or other similar activities, or in any public place of
accommodation or amusement or place of public resort, including but not limited to, places
selling mix, ice, water and providing drinking utensils for the purpose of mixing drinks
containing alcoholic liquors for consumption thereat, or those places commonly known as
bottle clubs and similar places; provided that, alcoholic liquor may be stored or kept in any such
building, or portion thereof, that is properly licensed for the sale of alcoholic liquor under the
provisions hereof.
19. VIOLATION. No owner, possessor, manager, person in control or in charge of
licensed premises, or of premises referred to in Section 18 of this Chapter, shall permit the
violation on said premises of any provision of this Chapter. It shall not be a defense to a
prosecution brought hereunder that the defendant did not have actual knowledge that alcoholic
liquor was being consumed, possessed, stored, kept or otherwise maintained by patrons, guests,
members or other individuals in violation of said Section 18. (Amended, Ordinance No. 89-03,
January 3, 1990)
20. GAMBLING. No games of chance, or gaming device, shall be kept or used in any
premises licensed hereunder, or shall any licensee permit any illegal, disorderly or immoral
practices upon the premises. No gambling shall be permitted upon the premises at any time.
21. INSPECTIONS. The holder of a liquor license is hereby required to make available
for inspection by police officers of the City any part of the premises where liquor is sold and
served or consumed.
22. OBSCENE CONDUCT. The sale or dispensing of alcoholic liquor is prohibited at
premises whereat, or at premises which have any access which leads from said premises to any
premises whereat, the following acts or conduct is permitted:
a) The employment or use of any person in the sale or service of alcoholic liquors or for
the entertainment or diversion of others while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume
or clothing as to expose to view or to show with less than a fully opaque covering any portion of
the breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic hair, anus, buttocks, vulva or
genitals.
b) The performance of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual intercourse, masturbation,
sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts prohibited by law.
c) The actual or simulated exhibition, displaying, touching or caressing or fondling of or
on the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals.
d) The permitting or encouragement of any person to remain in or upon said premises
who exposes to view any portion of the body described in subparagraphs (a), (b) or (c) hereof.
e) The showing of film, still pictures, electronic reproduction or other visual
reproduction depicting the acts or conduct described in sub-section (b) hereof, or any person
being touched, caressed or fondled on the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals, or scenes wherein
artificial devices or inanimate objects are employed to depict, or drawings are employed to
portray the activities described in this sub-paragraph (e).
23. OBSCENITY PROHIBITED. The engaging in, or performance of, any act or
conduct described in Section 22 herein on premises as to which a license has been issued under
the provisions of this Chapter is prohibited.
24. SALES TO MINORS. No licensee or any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of a licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any
person under the age of 21 years, or to any intoxicated person, or to any person known to be a
habitual drunkard, spendthrift, insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient, or in need of mental
treatment. No person after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor shall sell, give or
deliver such alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21 years, except in the performance
of a religious ceremony or service.
25. REFUSAL OF MINORS. For the purpose of preventing a violation of this section,
any licensee or his agent or employee, may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any
person who is unable to produce adequate written evidence of identity and of the fact that he or
she is of attained age of 21 years or over.
26. ADEQUATE WRITTEN EVIDENCE. Adequate written evidence of age and
identity of the person is no less than two documents one of which is issued by a federal, state,
county or municipal government or subdivision or agency thereof, and which document
incorporates a photograph of such person along with a statement of the month, day and year of
such person's birth.
27. SALE OF FALSE IDENTIFICATION. No person shall sell, give or furnish to
any person under the age of 21 years any false or fraudulent written, printed or photostatic
evidence of the age or identity of such person, or shall sell, give or furnish to any person under
the age of 21 years evidence of age and identification of any other person.
28. USE OF FALSE IDENTIFICATION. No person under the age of 21 years shall
present or offer to any licensee or the agent or employee of any licensee any written, printed or
photostatic evidence of age and identity which is false, fraudulent or not actually said person's
own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase, or otherwise procuring or
attempting to procure the serving of any alcoholic beverage, or to have in possession any false or
fraudulent written, printed or photostatic evidence of age and identity.
29. POSSESSION BY MINORS. No person under the age of 21 years shall consume,
purchase, accept delivery of, or possess alcoholic liquor; provided possession, dispensing or
consumption of alcoholic liquor by such a person in the performance of a religious service or
ceremony, the consumption of alcoholic liquor by such a person in the privacy of a home, under
the direct supervision of, and with the approval of a parent or guardian of such person, or the
possession and delivery of alcoholic liquor in pursuance of the employment of, such person by a
licensee as allowed in this Chapter, are not prohibited.
30. WARNING DISPLAYED. In each premise licensed under the provisions hereof
there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place a printed card supplied by the City
Clerk which shall be substantially as follows:
"WARNING: If you are under twenty-one (21) years of age, you are subject to a fine up
to $500.00 if you PURCHASE alcoholic liquor or MISREPRESENT YOUR AGE for the
purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor. OFFICIAL PHOTO IDENTIFICATION
will be required to prove age before purchase."
31. EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS. No person under the age of 21 years shall tend bar
or tend a package counter or window, or sell, draw, pour, mix or serve alcoholic liquor and no
licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of a licensee shall
engage, employ or permit any person under the age of 21 years so to do; provided that, persons
nineteen (19) years of age and over who have completed the Beverage Alcohol Sellers and
Servers Education and Training (BASSET) program approved by the Educational Foundation of
the National Restaurant Association may serve alcoholic beverages to patrons who are dining at
the licensed premises if the service of such beverages is only incidental to their primary job
function of serving food. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-53, June 19, 2000)
32. PARENTS AND GUARDIANS. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or
person in loco parentis to knowingly suffer or permit any person under the age of 21 years of
which he or she may be such parent, guardian or person in loco parentis to violate any provision
of this Chapter.
33. OWNER OF PREMISES. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any
premises within the City to knowingly allow any person under the age of 21 years to remain on
such premises while in the possession of alcoholic liquor or while consuming alcoholic liquor in
violation of the provisions hereof.
34. CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOL IN AN OPEN
CONTAINER IN PUBLIC PLACES.
A. Alcoholic liquor shall not be consumed or possessed in an open container at anytime
within the City at, in or on the following places:
(1) The right of way of any public highway, street or alley, except as otherwise expressly
provided in this Code;
(2) Central Park, except as otherwise expressly provided in this Code;
(3) The Central Business District, as defined in this Code;
(4) The Street Division and Transit buildings, garages and grounds;
(5) The South Water Treatment Plant and grounds; or any firehouse.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 90-35, March 19, 1990) (Amended, Ordinance No. 92-59, July 13,
1992)
B. The Council may provide by ordinance for the consumption or possession of an open
container of alcoholic liquor, or the consumption or possession of an open container of wine and
beer only, and provide for the regulation of the manner of such consumption or possession of an
open container, for limited periods of time at, in or on any or all of, or any portion of, those
places listed in Section 34A of this Chapter. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2012-63, September 4,
2012)
35. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
Chapter shall be fined not less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor shall more than
Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each day of a continuing violation be
deemed a separate offense. The penalties or remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and
resort to any one or more shall be no defense to prosecution of another. (Amended, Ordinance
No. 2011-72, October 31, 2011)
36. LOCATION LIMITATIONS. Except as otherwise provided in Section 4 (M) of
this Chapter, no license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within five
hundred (500) feet of any church or school, other than an institution of higher learning; provided
that, this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized
clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other places where the retail sale of alcoholic liquors is not
the principal business carried on or licensed businesses located within the B-4 Central Business
District. No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within one
hundred (100) feet of any church or school, other than an institution of higher learning for
licensed businesses located within the B-4 Central Business District. This prohibition shall not
apply to locations licensed on December 18, 1995, or to locations where a church or school has
been established within the prohibited distance since the issuance of the most recent license. The
distance shall be measured from the property boundary of the licensed premises to the property
boundary of the church or school, except for premises located within the main building of a
shopping center of 35,000 square feet or more in gross floor area, the distance shall be measured
from the lease line of the licensed premises to the property boundary of the church or school.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2016-51, July 18, 2016) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2015-54, October
5, 2015) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2012-94, December 17, 2012) (Amended, Ordinance No.
2004-55, July 6, 2004) (Amended, Ordinance No. 95-76, December 18, 1995)
CHAPTER 52.1
PLACES OF AMUSEMENT
1. DEFINITION. For the purposes of this Chapter, and as used herein, a "place of
amusement" is hereby defined as any place or premises, whether entrance thereto is restricted to
club members or open to the public generally, which is designed, used or intended to be used
primarily, by the public or by club members, for participation in entertainment or amusement,
such entertainment or amusement to include, but not to be limited to, the following: music
(either recorded or live), music videos, dancing, billiards and pool, roller or ice skating, and
video and other mechanical games. A "place of amusement" shall also include any place or
premises that is primarily rented or intended to be rented to others for any of the purposes listed
herein.
2. LICENSE REQUIRED. No person, firm, partnership, association or corporation
shall own, conduct, manage or operate a place of amusement on or at any place or premises
located within the City of Decatur without a license for such place or premises, as provided
herein.
3. SPECIFIC USE. A place of amusement license may only be used for the specific
stated purpose and use that is listed and set forth in the license application and for which the
license is specifically issued. Any change in the specific licensed use shall require a new license.
Any unauthorized or unlicensed change in the specific use shall be grounds for suspension or
revocation of the place of amusement license.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-83, November 16, 2009)
Revised 10/11
Chapter 52.1
4. EXEMPTIONS. No place or premises owned or operated by any unit of government
or college or university, or licensed for the sale of alcoholic liquor under the provisions of the
City Code, shall be required to be licensed as a place of amusement.
5. LIQUOR LICENSES. No place or premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic liquor
may be licensed as a place of amusement.
6. APPLICATION. Application for a place of amusement license shall be made to the
Finance Department and shall be accompanied by the license fee required herein. The
application shall show the name, age and address of an individual applicant; the persons entitled
to participate in the profits, if a partnership applicant; the objects, the names and addresses of the
officers and directors, if a corporate applicant, and whether or not one person owns a controlling
interest in such corporation, and if so, the name and address of such person; and the names and
addresses of the members thereof, if the applicant is a club or unincorporated association; the
location and description of the place or premises where such place of amusement will be
operated and conducted; whether or not any previous similar license has been applied for, the
place of application, and the disposition of such application, and if revoked the reasons therefore;
and whether or not the applicant, or any partner or shareholder owning more the 5% of the
corporation, has ever been convicted of a felony. A manager or agent must have the same
qualifications as the person or firm to whom the license is issued. All applications shall be
verified by the applicant or, if a corporation, by an authorized corporate officer thereof.
7. QUALIFICATIONS. No license for a place of amusement will be issued to any
applicant who is ineligible for a local liquor license, as provided by law.
8. FEE. The fee for a place of amusement license shall be One Hundred Dollars
($100.00). In the event a license does not issue responsive to an application, the payment of the
Chapter 52.1
annual fee accompanying the same shall be refunded; otherwise, there shall be no rebate or
prorate of a fee once paid.
9. TERM. Each place of amusement license issued under the provisions hereof, and the
privileges thereunder, shall expire and terminate on the 30th day of June next following the issue
date thereof.
10. GAMBLING. No gambling shall be permitted at any place of amusement at any
time.
11. BUILDING CODES. A place or premises licensed as a place of amusement under
the provisions hereof shall be in compliance at all times with all applicable City of Decatur
building and safety codes, ordinances and regulations.
12. LIABILITY OF CERTAIN PERSONS. No licensee, owner, possessor, manager
or other person in control or in charge of any place or premises licensed under the provisions
hereof, or any place or premises used as a place of amusement as defined herein, whether
licensed or not, shall permit the violation at said place or premises of any provisions of statute or
the City Code. It shall not be a defense to a prosecution brought hereunder that the defendant did
not have actual knowledge of the violation, provided that the evidence demonstrates that such
defendant would or should have been aware of said violation through the exercise of reasonable
care or attention.
13. REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION. Place of amusement licenses may be
suspended or revoked by the City Manager for any violation of law by the licensee or its agents,
but only after such licensee is provided a hearing before said officer, or his designee. A licensee
shall be given not less than five days' notice prior to such hearing.
Chapter 52.1
14. INSPECTIONS. Every licensed place of amusement shall be open for inspection
during all business hours by police officers and building and fire inspectors of the City of
Decatur, upon the showing of proper credentials by such persons. Failure to admit an officer or
employee of the City for inspection, as provided herein, shall be cause for suspension or
revocation of the license.
15. PENALTY. Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation who shall
violate any provision of this Chapter, except section 13, shall be fined not less than Two
Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense,
and each day of a continuing violation shall be deemed a separate offense. The penalties or
remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and resort to any one or more shall be no defense
to prosecution of another. Nothing provided for herein shall preclude the City of Decatur from
seeking such equitable relief, in addition to fines and penalties, as it deems appropriate.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-72, October 31, 2011)
16. SEVERABILITY. If any provision of this chapter or application thereof to any
person or circumstances is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity does not
affect other provisions or applications of this Chapter which can be given effect without the
invalid application or provision, and to this end each such invalid provision or invalid application
of this Chapter is severable, unless otherwise provided by this Chapter. In particular, but without
limitation, each provision creating an exemption from the licensing requirement hereof is
severable. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the City Council that this Chapter
would have been adopted had any such unconstitutional or otherwise invalid provision or
application not been included.
Chapter 52.1
17. HOURS. No place of amusement shall be open for business nor in operation, nor
shall patrons or members thereof be, or be permitted to be or remain, thereat, between the hours
of 2:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M. on any day.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 92-05, January 21, 1992)
18. POSTING OF LICENSE AND HOURS OF OPERATION. Every person, firm
or corporation licensed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter shall immediately post
and keep posted while in force, in a conspicuous place on the premises, the license so issued.
Whenever such license shall be lost or destroyed, a duplicate in lieu thereof shall be issued by the
Licensing Supervisor upon the direction of the City Manager. Such licensee shall also post the
hours of operation of such place of amusement in a prominent place on the exterior of the
business, as approved by the Chief of Police.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 92-05, January 21, 1992)
CHAPTER 52.2
CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED
(Ordinance No. 2019-160, September 30, 2019)
1. WORDS AND PHRASES. Words and phrases in this Chapter which are defined in
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, P.A. 101-0027 (“Act”) and as may be amended from time to
time, shall have and be given the same meaning and definitions as therein set out unless expressly
otherwise provided herein.
2. DEFINITIONS. The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of
this Chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section, as follows:
CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT: A cultivation center, craft grower,
processing organization, infuser organization, dispensing organization or transporting
organization.
CRAFT GROWER: A facility operated by an organization or business that is licensed
by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to cultivate, dry, cure and package cannabis and perform
other necessary activities to make cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or use
at a processing organization, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (P.A.101-0027), as it may
be amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
CULTIVATION CENTER: A facility operated by an organization or business that is
licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to cultivate, process, transport and perform
necessary activities to provide cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis
business establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be
amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
INFUSER ORGANIZATION OR INFUSER: A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis
or cannabis concentrate into a product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (P.A.101-0027), as it may be amended from time to time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
PERSON: Any person or individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, club,
society or other organization, including any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer or
agent.
PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to either extract
constituent chemicals or compounds to produce cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or
cannabis concentrate into a product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act (P.A.101-0027), as it may be amended from time to time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER: An organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to transport cannabis on behalf
of a cannabis business establishment or a community college licensed under the Community
College Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act
(P.A.101-0027), as it may be amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
3. CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED. Pursuant to the
Authority reserved to the City of Decatur under Section 55-25 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
Act, the following Cannabis Business Establishments are prohibited in the City of Decatur. No
person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to be operated or aide, abet or assist in the operation
within the City of Decatur of any of the following:
a. Craft Grower
b. Cultivation Center
c. Infuser Organization or Infuser
d. Processing Organization or Processor
e. Transporting Organization or Transporter
4. PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED. Operation of any prohibited Cannabis Business
Establishment within the City of Decatur in violation of the provisions of this Article is hereby
declared a public nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all available remedies.
5. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of
this Chapter shall be fined not less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor more than Seven
Hundred Fifty Dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and each day of a continuing violation be
deemed a separate offense. The penalties or remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and
resort to any one or more shall be no defense to prosecution of another.
6. SEVERABILITY. If any provision of this Ordinance, or the application of any
provision of this Ordinance is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall not
affect other provisions of this Ordinance, or their application, that can be given effect without the
unconstitutional or invalid provision or its application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision,
or application of such provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this Ordinance.
7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after
its passage and approval and publication as required by law.
CHAPTER 52.3
CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATIONS PROHIBITED
(Ordinance No. 2019-159, September 30, 2019)
1. WORDS AND PHRASES. Words and phrases in this Chapter which are defined in
the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, P.A. 101-0027 (“Act”) and as may be amended from time
to time, shall have and be given the same meaning and definitions as therein set out unless
expressly otherwise provided herein.
2. DEFINITIONS. The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of
this Chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section, as follows:
CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT: A cultivation center, craft grower,
processing organization, infuser organization, dispensing organization or transporting
organization.
DISPENSING ORGANIZATION: A facility operated by an organization or business
that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire
cannabis from licensed cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related supplies to
purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and caregivers per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act (P.A.101-0027), as it may be amended from time to time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
PERSON: Any person or individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, club,
society or other organization, including any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer or
agent.
3. CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATIONS PROHIBITED. Pursuant to
the Authority reserved to the City of Decatur under Section 55-25 of the Cannabis Regulation and
Tax Act, Cannabis Dispensing Organizations are prohibited in the City of Decatur. No person
shall locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to be operated or aide, abet or assist in the operation within
the City of Decatur any Cannabis Dispensing Organizations.
4. PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED. Operation of any prohibited Cannabis
Dispensing Organizations within the City of Decatur in violation of the provisions of this Article
is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all available remedies.
5. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of
this Chapter shall be fined not less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor more than Seven
Hundred Fifty Dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and each day of a continuing violation be
deemed a separate offense. The penalties or remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and
resort to any one or more shall be no defense to prosecution of another.
6. SEVERABILITY. If any provision of this Ordinance, or the application of any
provision of this Ordinance is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall not
affect other provisions of this Ordinance, or their application, that can be given effect without the
unconstitutional or invalid provision or its application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision,
or application of such provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this Ordinance.
7. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after
its passage and approval and publication as required by law.
CHAPTER 53
AMBULANCE SERVICE
1. WORDS AND PHRASES. Unless otherwise defined herein, the words and phrases
used in this Chapter shall have the meanings ascribed thereto in The Illinois Vehicle Code or in
the Illinois Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Systems Act (the Act) and the administrative
rules and regulations of the Division of Highway Safety and Emergency Medical Services of the
Illinois Department of Public Health promulgated thereunder.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 98-06, February 16, 1998)
2. LICENSE REQUIRED. No person, firm or corporation shall furnish, operate,
conduct, maintain, or engage in the operation of an ambulance service within the City without
having a valid current City license for such service, except in the case of catastrophe wherein the
number of ambulances needed exceeds the number available from licensed services.
3. AMBULANCE SERVICE DEFINED. "Ambulance service within the City" means
the transportation by medical transport vehicle from a place within the City to some other place
of persons who are sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless whether in
emergency or otherwise in vehicles based within the City. Ambulance means any publicly or
privately owned vehicle that is specifically designed, constructed or modified and equipped, and
is intended to be used for, and maintained and operated for the emergency transportation of
persons who are sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless (Emergency
Medical Services (EMS) Systems Act, 210 ILCS 50). It does not include transportation of such
persons from outside the City to hospitals or other places within the City by ambulance services
Revised 08/2018
Chapter 53
based outside the City, or the transportation of such persons from hospitals or other places within
the City to places in locales where such ambulance services are based outside the City, or does it
include transportation of handicapped persons under programs operated by or on behalf of the
City. (Amended, Ordinance No. 98-06, February 16, 1998)
4. APPLICATION. Applications for a license to operate an ambulance, and renewal
thereof, shall be made upon forms prescribed by the City Manager. Completed applications shall
be forwarded to Licensing in the Finance Department. The application shall contain:
(a) The name and address of the applicant;
(b) The trade or all other fictitious names, if any, under which the applicant does
business or proposes to do business;
(c) The location and description of the place or places from which the ambulance service
operates or is intended to be operated;
(d) A description of each ambulance which the applicant operates or intends to operate
within the license year, including the make, model, year of manufacture, serial number, and the
classification thereof under the Act;
(e) Proof of liability insurance to sufficiently protect the public during their utilization of
this service;
(f) A letter of affirmation from the local or other EMS Resource Hospital stating that the
ambulance service and EMT personnel functioning with that service meet or exceed all current
Illinois EMS Act and the Division of Highway Safety and EMS of the Illinois Department of
Public Health rules and regulations and will be functioning as a prehospital patient care
ambulance provided under the supervision of the EMS Resource Hospital's Project Medical
Director;
Chapter 53
(g) Such other information as the City Manager may reasonably require in the
administration of the provisions of this Chapter.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 98-06, February 16, 1998) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-
36, August 20, 2018)
5. LICENSE FEE. All applications for licenses or renewal thereof shall be
accompanied by an application fee of Four Hundred Dollars ($400.00) for the license year which
shall commence on October 1 and end the following September 30.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2016-89, November 21, 2016)
6. NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING. Within a reasonable time after an application
for original license is filed with the Finance Department, a public hearing shall be, and in the
case of application for renewal of license a hearing may be, held by the City Manager, or his
designee, notice of the time and place whereof shall be published once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City not less than ten days prior to said hearing, and a copy of which said
notice shall be served, either personally or by mail, upon the applicant and upon each ambulance
service then currently licensed by the City.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 89-42, May 1, 1989)
7. CONDUCT OF PUBLIC HEARING. Such hearing officer may consider that which
is submitted concerning any item contained within such application; the experience and
responsibility of the applicant; the effect the proposed service may have on the general health,
safety and welfare of the community; and such other matters as may to such officer appear to be
germane, and such officer shall file with the Clerk a report in writing of findings and conclusions
with regard thereto, which said report shall specifically, in addition to whatever else may be
reported, state findings as to;
(a) Whether or not the public is, at the time, reasonably adequately served.
Chapter 53
(b) Whether or not convenience and necessity require the proposed service.
(c) Whether or not the proposed service location, personnel, equipment, vehicles and
operation comply with the provisions of this Chapter.
(d) Whether or not the license applied for should be granted.
8. COUNCIL REVIEW. Any party aggrieved by the conclusions of such hearing
officer as to whether or not a license should be granted may, within ten days from the date such
report is filed with the Clerk, file a request with the Clerk for Council review of said report,
whereafter the Council shall consider the report and may make or cause to be made such
additional investigation or inquiry as it deems advisable, whereafter the Council may make such
determination in the matter as appears to it to be in the best interest of the general health, safety
and welfare of the community.
9. LICENSED VEHICLES. At all times when an ambulance is in use in the City as an
ambulance, the same shall:
(a) Be currently licensed by the Division of Highway Safety and EMS of the Illinois
Department of Public Health and be equipped and staffed as provided by the Act and the rules
and regulations promulgated thereunder.
(b) Be equipped with a mobile data computer (MDC) and an automatic vehicle locator
(AVL) that is interoperable with the Decatur Fire Department’s CAD system.
(c) Be adequately insured with liability insurance in the amounts listed below, to
sufficiently protect the public and naming the City of Decatur as an additional insured.
Each Occurrence Aggregate
General liability $1,000,000 $3,000,000
(including bodily injury and property damage)
Automobile liability $1,000,000 $1,000,000
Worker’s compensation
Each occurrence $1,000,000
Disease – policy limit $1,000,000
Chapter 53
Disease – each employee $1,000,000
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-36, August 20, 2018) (Amended, Ordinance No. 98-06,
February 16, 1998)
10. DRIVER AND ATTENDANT. Each ambulance, while in use in the City as an
ambulance, shall be operated by a driver and attendant each of whom shall be currently Illinois
licensed as an Emergency Medical Technician commensurate with the Act licensed level of the
ambulance to which the driver and attendant are assigned. (Amended, Ordinance No. 98-06,
February 16, 1998)
11. EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIANS. Each licensed ambulance service
operating within the City of Decatur shall provide a minimum of four Illinois licensed
Emergency Medical Technicians on duty at all times with an additional two such Illinois licensed
Emergency Medical Technicians on immediate reserve. The Illinois licensed Emergency
Medical Technicians who are functioning at any EMT level with the ambulance service must be
affiliated with the local or other EMS Resource Hospital and be approved to function within the
EMS System which serves the City and be approved to function under the supervision of the
EMS Resource Hospital's EMS Project Medical Director. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-36,
August 20, 2018) (Amended, Ordinance No. 98-06, February 16, 1998)
12. EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN’S REQUIREMENTS. Each Illinois
licensed Emergency Medical Technician who is functioning at any EMT level with the ambulance
must:
(a) Be affiliated with the local or other EMS Resource Hospital and be approved to function
within the EMS System which serves the City and be approved to function under the supervision
of the EMS Resource Hospital’s EMS Project Medical Director. (Amended, Ordinance
No. 98-06, February 16, 1998).
Chapter 53
(b) Be trained annually on the Decatur Fire Department’s Incident Command System
with proof of such initial training provided to the Decatur Fire Chief by August 7, 2019 and annually
thereafter.
(c) Be trained in Hazardous Material Awareness by August 7, 2019.
(d) Be trained in Technical Rescue Awareness by August 7, 2019.
(e) Be trained to the National Incident Management System (NIMS) 100 and 700 level
within 90 days of their date of hire.
(f) Be trained and certified under the NIMS compliant with or equivalent to NIMS 100,
200, 300, 400, 700, and 800 if acting in a management or supervisory role as defined in NIMS
laws, rules and regulations.
(g) Be trained in International Trauma Life Support.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-36, August 20, 2018)
13. CONTINUOUS OPERATION. Each licensed ambulance service shall be operated
continuously at all hours of every day and shall be so constituted as to provide on continuous
duty two Mobile Intensive Care Units equipped and staffed so as to be capable of performing
Advanced Life Support.
14. INCIDENT COMMAND. The Fire Chief, or his or her designee, shall be in
command of all incidents within the City of Decatur. The ambulance service shall assimilate
into the incident command system and operate with the Medical Division under the medical
group. The ambulance service shall maintain authority and responsibility on all patient care
matters and decisions. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-36, August 20, 2018)
15. RECORDS. Each ambulance service licensed by the City shall keep such adequate
records of its equipment and the maintenance thereof, a log of calls and responses, and records
regarding its personnel, as the City Manager may direct.
Chapter 53
16. RESPONSE TIME PERFORMANCE. Each ambulance service licensed to
operate within the City of Decatur shall meet specific response criteria. Response times shall be
calculated from the hour, minute, and second the call is given by the dispatching agency to the
ambulance service, to the hour, minute, and second the ambulance service’s ALS transport unit
arrives on scene. Each incident will be counted as a single response regardless of the number of
units that respond.
(a) The ALS ambulance must arrive at the scene of all calls categorized as class B, C, D,
or E as defined by the emergency medical dispatch system within eight (8) minutes of the time
the call was received by the ambulance service from the dispatch agency, no less than ninety (90)
percent of the time for all calls received during the calendar month.
(b) All non-code responses to calls categorized as class A or O as defined by the
emergency medical dispatch system shall arrive on scene within twelve (12) minutes of the time
the call was received by the ambulance service from the dispatching agency, no less than ninety
(90) percent of the time all calls received during each calendar month.
(c) Any ambulance service licensed to operate within the City of Decatur shall provide to
the Decatur Fire Chief or designee, a written monthly report of response time performance.
(d) At the reasonable request of the Fire Chief, an audit of response times provided by an
ambulance service may be conducted. The cost of the audit will be charged to the ambulance
service.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-36, August 20, 2018)
17. CHANGE IN OPERATIONS. Any change of vehicles, location or substantial
change in operating procedures, from that contained in the application for the license currently in
effect and supporting data, shall be promptly reported in writing to Licensing in the City of
Chapter 53
Decatur Finance Department and the Decatur Fire Chief. Personnel and changes in personnel
shall be provided annually in the license application or renewal process. (Amended, Ordinance
No. 2018-36, August 20, 2018)
18. COOPERATION. All ambulance services licensed by the City and the personnel
thereof shall cooperate with one another and with the other public safety and emergency services
of and operating within the City, both generally and specifically at the scene of an emergency.
19. MANNER OF DISPATCH AND CALLS FOR SERVICE. In the event there is
more than one licensed ambulance service in the City of Decatur, the City's Fire Department
shall determine the manner of dispatch utilizing a method to dispatch the closest ambulance to
the call for service location. No ambulance service licensed by the City, or the personnel thereof,
shall respond to a call for service directed to another such ambulance service unless requested so
to do by the ambulance service originally called.
(a) Each licensed ambulance service shall comply with all emergency dispatch
procedures established by the City’s Fire Department and any dispatching agency for the Fire
Department.
(b) If for any reason a licensed ambulance service is not able to comply with the
operational requirements set forth in this article it shall immediately report that status to the Fire
Department in accordance with the Decatur Fire Chief’s emergency dispatch procedures.
(c) An ambulance service shall not respond to any requests for emergency assistance
unless it is in compliance with the operational requirements set forth in this article and it’s
specifically authorized to respond by the Decatur Fire Chief or the designee as provided for in
the Decatur Fire Chief’s emergency dispatch procedures.
(d) Personnel affiliated with a licensed ambulance service or hospital who wish to
respond to an emergency scene in an emergency vehicle other than an ambulance must:
Chapter 53
(1) Identify their response to the Central Illinois Regional Dispatch Center;
(2) Be in compliance with all City, State, or Federal laws and regulations in
regard to emergency response;
(3) Be in compliance with the current Emergency Medical Dispatch System; and
shall not respond to Alpha, Bravo, or Omega calls with the use of lights and sirens;
(4) Have insurance naming the City as an additional insured.
(e) An ambulance service licensed to operate within the Decatur City limits shall have in
place and utilize the current system used for Emergency Medical Dispatch (EMD).
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-36, August 20, 2018)
20. MONITORING POLICE OR FIRE CALLS. Responses originated by monitoring
Emergency Communications Center radio communications in the absence of specific radio or
telephone request from the concerned Department directed specifically to the responding
ambulance service is prohibited. (Amended, Ordinance No. 98-06; Ordinance No. 90-35)
21. REVOCATION. In addition to any penalty that may be provided in this Chapter,
violation of any of the provisions hereof, or a failure to comply with any of the standards or
qualifications provided herein after reasonable notice and an opportunity to so comply, may be
grounds for suspension or revocation by the City Manager of license and the privileges
thereunder, which once revoked shall not again be granted the same person, firm or entity, or any
such firm or entity made up in part of the person or persons formerly of interest in the revoked
license or privileges.
22. REVOCATION HEARING. Any licensee whose license is revoked, or is
suspended for a period of more than thirty days, may request a statement in writing of the reason
or reasons for such action, and may by filing a request with the City Clerk within ten days after
being notified of such action, be heard by the City Manager, or his designee, with regard thereto,
Chapter 53
at which hearing anything touching upon any aspect of the license, the license privileges, the
vehicles, equipment, operation, personnel, qualifications, character or any other consideration
involving the licensee or the ambulance service of such licensee may be considered. A report of
findings and conclusions shall be made and filed and the same may be further considered all in
the same manner and time and upon the same notice as is provided with regard to hearings on
applications.
23. RULES AND REGULATIONS. The City Manager is authorized to make such
reasonable rules and regulations not contrary to or in conflict with the provisions of this Chapter,
as he may deem necessary or desirable to implement, clarify, refine or enforce the provisions
hereof.
24. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
Chapter shall be fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense and each day a violation occurs or continues shall be
considered a separate offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-72, October 31, 2011)
CHAPTER 54
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
1. LICENSE. No person, firm or corporation shall operate, maintain or conduct a
shuffle board, shuffle alley, bank board, coin operated pool table, coin operated bowling
machine, coin operated baseball machine, gun or target type mechanical amusement device,
video game or any other mechanical or electronic amusement device open to the public for hire
or gain without having first obtained a license therefor. Amusement devices shall not include
video gaming devices as defined by the Illinois Video Gaming Act 230 ILCS 40/1 et. seq. and
any successor statute.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2016-85, November 21, 2016)
2. APPLICATION. Application shall be made as required to the Finance Department
and shall state the location and place of business and the number and kind of such devices to be
used therein.
3. EXPIRATION. Licenses for amusement devices shall expire on the first day of
February next after issuance.
4. FEE. The fee for such license shall be Forty Dollars ($40.00) for each machine
located in such establishment, for each calendar year or fraction thereof.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2016-85, November 21, 2016)
5. HOURS. If such amusement devices are operated in a place of business where the
hours of such business are restricted by law or ordinance, the operation of such devices therein is
hereby restricted to the same hours.
Revised 11/2016
Chapter 54
6. GAMBLING FORBIDDEN. No gambling shall be permitted in any place of
business where such amusement devices are operated and maintained.
7. PINBALL AND GAMBLING DEVICES. The licensing of slot machines, or any device
or mechanism that has been or may be judicially determined to be a gambling device, is
specifically prohibited. If a gambling device is inadvertently licensed hereunder, such license
shall not be construed as legalizing such gambling device.
8. REVOCATION. Any license granted under the provisions hereof may be revoked
for violating the terms of this Chapter. Any person, firm or corporation applying for and
receiving a license hereunder shall be deemed to have consented to the conditions herein named,
and the same shall be a part of any license issued to him.
9. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
Chapter shall be fined not less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor more than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense and each day upon which a violation occurs or
continues shall be considered as a separate offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-72)
CHAPTER 54.1
- VIDEO GAMING LICENSE–
(Adopted, Ordinance No. 2016-80, November 21, 2016)
1. DEFINITIONS. Whenever used herein, unless context otherwise requires, the
following words, terms or phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:
(a). Video Gaming Terminal shall have the same meaning as ascribed in the State of
Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/5 et.seq. and any successor statute.
(b). Establishment shall mean any business licensed by the State of Illinois to have or
operate a video gaming device in the City of Decatur and shall include any “licensed
establishment,” “licensed fraternal establishment,” “licensed veterans establishment,” and
“licensed truck stop establishment” as those terms are defined in the State of Illinois Video
Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/5 et.seq. and any successor statute.
(c). Distributor shall have the same meaning as ascribed in the State of Illinois Video
Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/5 et.seq. and any successor statute.
(d). Terminal Operator shall have the same meaning as ascribed in the State of Illinois
Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/5 et.seq. and any successor statute.
2. LICENSE REQUIRED. No establishment shall have on its premises any video
gaming terminal without first obtaining a video gaming license and paying the appropriate fee.
3. LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS. Application shall be made as
required to the Finance Department and shall state the following:
(a). The legal name of the establishment;
(b). The business name of the establishment;
Revised 8/2018
(c). The address of the establishment where the video gaming terminals are to be located;
(d). The business office address of the establishment if different from the address of the
establishment;
(e). A phone number for the establishment;
(f). An e-mail address for the establishment, if any;
(g). The name and address of every person owning more than a five percent (5%) share
of the establishment;
(h). The name, address, phone number and e-mail address (if any) of any terminal
operator or distributor owning, servicing or maintaining a video gaming terminal;
(i). A copy of the establishment’s State of Illinois Video Gaming License;
(j). A statement as to the number of video gaming terminals which the establishment will
have on its premises;
(k). A statement that the establishment is not in arrears in any tax, fee or bill due to the
City of Decatur or State of Illinois;
(l). A statement that the establishment agrees to abide by all State and Federal laws and
any local ordinance;
(m). A statement that no owner with more than a five percent (5%) interest or manager
of the establishment has ever been convicted of a felony, a gambling offense, or a crime of moral
turpitude. In the event that an establishment cannot provide such statement, the establishment
may apply for a Certificate of Rehabilitation from the City Manager indicating that the individual
who would disqualify the establishment from obtaining the Video Gaming License has been
rehabilitated and is no longer a threat to violate the law. The City Manager may consider the
nature of the offense, the length of time since the offense, the length of time since release from
custody, and other factors to determine if the individual has rehabilitated himself such that he is
no longer likely to commit another offense.
4. VIDEO GAMING LICENSE FEES. The fee for a Video Gaming License shall be
Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) per video gaming terminal per year. Video Gaming Licenses
shall be issued by the Finance Department and shall be for a twelve-month period commencing
on the first day of January of each year. There shall be no pro-ration of any fee except for new
licensees. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-37, August 20, 2018)
5. NUMBER OF VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS. No establishment shall have on
its premises more video gaming terminals than are permitted by the Video Gaming License.
6. UNLAWFUL ACTIVITY. No establishment shall permit the use of a video gaming
terminal in any manner not authorized by State law including, but not limited to, improper
location of terminals, lack of required oversight, payouts in excess of those provided by law, side
bets, underage use, and other illegal gambling activities.
7. EMPLOYER RESPONSIBILITY. Any action by an employee of an establishment
in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be considered a violation committed by the
establishment.
8. LICENSE REVOCATION. Any Video Gaming License may be revoked, after
notice and hearing by the City Manager, or his designee, for any of the following reasons;
(a). Failure to pay the Video Gaming License fee;
(b). Violation of any law occurring on the establishment’s premises committed by the
establishment or an employee of the establishment;
(c). Violation of any law or State regulation regarding video gaming or video gaming
terminals;
(d). Violation of any law occurring on the establishment’s premises which the
establishment did not take adequate means to prevent, or did not respond in an appropriate
manner after it became aware of such violation;
(e). Failure to pay any tax, fee, or bill due to the City of Decatur; or
(f). Failure to provide current information regarding the ownership or location of the
business.
The rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing and hearsay will be permitted. At the
hearing, the City Manager, or his designee, shall determine by a preponderance of the evidence
whether a lawful reason exists to revoke the license. The City Manager, or his designee, after
determining that a lawful reason exists to revoke the license, shall also determine whether that
lawful reason merits the sanction of a revocation of the license.
9. INSPECTIONS. The holder of a video gaming license is hereby required to make
available for inspection by police officers of the City any part of the premises.
10. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
Chapter shall be fined not less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor shall more than
Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each day of a continuing violation be
deemed a separate offense. The penalties or remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and
resort to any one or more shall be no defense to prosecution of another.
CHAPTER 55
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS
1. DEFINITION. A place, including the entire premises occupied thereby and
including ingress and egress thereto, where meals, or sandwiches, or beverages, or ice cream, or
frozen desserts or other food, singly or in combination are served directly to, or are permitted to
be consumed by, patrons in or on motor vehicles parked upon the premises, within the meaning
of this Chapter, is deemed to be a drive-in restaurant.
2. NOISE. No person, while on or adjacent to the premises of a drive-in restaurant, shall
race the motor of any car, suddenly start or stop any car, make or cause to be made any other
loud or unseemly noise, or blow or cause to be blown any automobile horn or motorcycle horn at
any time.
3. NO INTOXICATING LIQUOR BY PATRONS. No patrons or other person on the
premises of a drive-in restaurant, whether in or out of an automobile, shall drink any intoxicating
liquor, or have in his possession any open bottle, can or other receptacle containing alcoholic
beverages of any type, nature or description.
4. NO CONGREGATING IN VICINITY. No group of three or more persons shall
congregate and linger at any location on the premises of a drive-in restaurant other than in the
restaurant building, or in a legally parked motor vehicle, or at tables or other facilities provided
by such drive-in restaurant for the use of patrons thereof.
5. NO DRIVE IN OTHER THAN FOR SERVICE. No person shall drive a motor
vehicle across any sidewalk, driveway, or pedestrian right-of-way for the purpose of gaining
Revised 10/11
Chapter 55
access to any drive-in restaurant unless such person, or one of the occupants of such vehicle,
does so for the purpose of transacting business on the premises of said drive-in restaurant. For
the purpose of this section, "transacting business" shall mean that one of the purposes of any
such person, or occupant of the motor vehicle, for entering shall be with the intent of engaging in
a transaction with the proprietor, his agents or employees of such restaurant which transaction is
normally incidental to the business for which the public is invited. The driving of a motor
vehicle onto and out of such premises without stopping, in a manner constituting that which is
commonly called "cruising", is prohibited.
6. NO UNOCCUPIED AUTOMOBILE EXCEPT FOR SERVICE. No person shall
leave any motor vehicle unoccupied on any drive-in restaurant parking lot, except during the
time such person is in the restaurant building, or except with the knowledge and consent of the
operator of such restaurant.
7. NO PARKING NEAR ENTRANCE ON STREET. No driver of a motor vehicle
shall stop, stand or park such vehicle in a street at or near the entrance to or exit from a drive-in
restaurant while waiting to enter the premises thereof, or otherwise, except in an authorized and
clearly marked or designated parking space adjacent to the curb of such street, and in such
manner as not to interfere with other vehicles upon such street.
8. TRASH RECEPTACLES. The owner or operator of a drive-in restaurant shall
provide not less than two (2) receptacles for the receipt of trash, litter, paper, napkins, cups and
remnants of food at each exit, available to patrons as they leave the premises.
9. NO LITTER EXCEPT IN RECEPTACLES. No patron of a drive-in restaurant or
other person shall throw or deposit any of the litter mentioned in the preceding section anywhere
on the ground or on the streets or public ways, except in the receptacles provided therefor.
Chapter 55
10. NO LOUD, OBSCENE LANGUAGE. No person, while on the premises of any
drive-in restaurant, or adjacent thereto, shall use loud, or obscene, or vulgar, or indecent
language, or swear, or curse, or yell, or shriek in a manner calculated to disturb persons at or
near such drive-in restaurant.
11. MUST KEEP CLEAN. The operator of a drive-in restaurant, or any person in
charge thereof, shall keep and maintain the premises thereof, in a clean and sanitary condition
and the parking lot thereof reasonably free at all times from all rubbish, waste products and
debris including napkins, straws, cups, plates, boxes, containers and other waste material.
12. MUST KEEP STREET CLEAN. The operator of a drive-in restaurant shall cause
any portion of any street or streets adjoining the premises to be kept free from all rubbish, waste
products and debris either originating from such premises, or of the type and kind of material
used upon said premises in the conduct of the licensed business, including napkins, straws, cups,
plates, boxes, containers, unconsumed food products, and other similar waste material.
13. NO LOUD SPEAKERS OTHER THAN PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEM. NO
owner or operator of a drive-in restaurant shall operate, or permit to be operated, any loud
speakers, or make or permit to be made, any other loud noise, or permit any show or exhibit on
the premises occupied by said drive-in restaurant; provided however, the owner or operator of
such restaurant may use a public address system solely for the purpose of giving instructions to
employees on the premises or receiving orders or request for service from customers, but the
instructions, orders, or requests so given shall not be loud enough to cause any noise or
disturbance to persons not on the premises of such drive-in restaurant.
14. CHARGED WITH COST. In addition to the other penalties provided in this
Chapter, the proprietor of any drive-in restaurant may be charged with the cost of cleaning up or
Chapter 55
removing debris found on the premises or on the public highway or highways adjacent to said
premises. Any officer shall have the right if he sees debris on the premises occupied by the
drive-in restaurant or on the highways adjacent thereto, to cause the same to be cleaned up and
removed from the premises and shall certify the cost of said cleaning up and removal to the City
Manager.
15. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
Chapter shall be fined not less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor more than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense and each day on which a violation occurs or
continues shall be considered a separate offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-72)
CHAPTER 56
REFUSE AND RECYCLABLES REMOVAL
1. POLICY. It is the policy and purpose of the provisions of this Chapter, and it is
hereby determined to be necessary thereto, in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the people of the City, to provide a coordinated City-wide program for the safe, economical and
efficient storage, collection and removal of refuse and recyclables, and to insure adequate
standards of basic service for the same, and this Chapter shall be liberally construed for
accomplishing these purposes. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
2. DEFINITIONS. As used in this Chapter, unless context otherwise requires, the
following words or phrases shall mean:
Basic removal service (Single Family, Duplex and Triplex): Once weekly removal of
refuse and once weekly removal of recyclables, with one annual large item pick-up. Weekly
removal of landscape waste shall be provided for six weeks in the spring beginning April 1 and
for six weeks in the fall beginning November 1 of each year. A premium landscape waste option
is available to all single family customers with one weekly removal of landscape waste,
yearlong. Under the premium option weekly removal of landscape waste shall be provided upon
customer request during the period of January 1 through March 31.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-92, October 17, 2005)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2001-89, December 17, 2001)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 90-69, June 18, 1990)
Revised June 2018
Chapter 56
Basic removal service (Fourplex, Fiveplex and Sixplex): Twice weekly removal of
refuse and once weekly removal of recyclables with one annual large item pick up. Weekly
removal of landscape waste shall be provided for six weeks in the spring beginning April 1 and
for six weeks in the fall beginning November 1 of each year. A premium landscape waste option
is available to all duplex, triplex, fourplex, fiveplex and sixplex customers with one weekly
removal of landscape waste, yearlong. Under the premium option weekly removal of landscape
waste shall be provided upon customer request during the period of January 1 through March 31.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
Commercial: All that which is not residential as well as properties owned by the Decatur
Housing Authority. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-11, March 1, 2010)
Garbage: Refuse resulting from the handling, processing, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food or food products.
Hardship Customer: A customer who is physically unable to place refuse containers at
the curb and has no family member or other person living in the residence able to place the
refuse containers at the curb. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
Landscape waste: All accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs
and other materials accumulated on the customer’s residence as the result of the care of lawns,
shrubbery, vines and trees.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 90-69, June 18, 1990)
Large item pick-up: Removal of one household appliance such as a refrigerator, oven or
dishwasher and not more than five (5) other items none of which are able to be placed in an
approved container, and all of which items must be placed at the curb by the customer. A twenty
dollar ($20.00) surcharge will be assessed for any pickup of an appliance with refrigerant.
Chapter 56
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2001-89, December 17, 2001)
Minimum removal service: Service whereby the customer is charged only by the bag of
refuse actually removed by the licensed hauler and not a regular monthly rate.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 88-87, September 19, 1988)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 88-72, August 29, 1988)
Recyclables: Material that has been recovered or diverted from the nonhazardous solid
waste stream for purpose of reuse, recycling or reclamation and a substantial portion of which is
consistently used in the manufacture of products, which may otherwise be produced using raw or
virgin materials. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
Refuse: Any discarded matter, including but not limited to garbage, sweepings,
landscape waste, paper, cardboard, tin cans, ashes, bottles and similar other accumulations, but
excluding special waste as defined by the Illinois Pollution Control Board.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
Residential: Premises occupied by six or fewer living units. Routes predominantly
serving residential premises. Areas predominantly consisting of residential premises. Refuse
and recyclables produced on residential premises.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
3. RULES AND REGULATIONS.
A. The provisions hereof shall be administered under the supervision of the City Manager
which officer is authorized to promulgate reasonable rules and regulations not contrary thereto in
order to facilitate such administration and to carry out the intent and purpose thereof.
B. Other provisions of this Chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, the City Manager is
further authorized to modify the terms and conditions of removal service for licensees in
Chapter 56
residential areas specified by such officer, but only as expressly permitted herein. Such
modifications of the removal service otherwise required by the provisions of this Chapter shall
be limited in duration not to exceed three months, and no such modification may be applied to
any residential area more than once in any two year period. Modifications as described herein
may not be made applicable to more than five residential areas at any time, without the express
consent of the Council, and may be made only for the purpose of conducting empirical studies
regarding modes of delivery service and the efficacy and economy thereof. Such modifications
may require the separation of refuse and recyclables by the producer thereof, and may vary the
placement of and container for said refuse and recyclables and the frequency of collection
thereof, but no such modification may reduce the number of refuse and recyclables collections to
fewer than one per week.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 90-13, January 29, 1990)
4. ACCUMULATION OF REFUSE AND RECYCLABLES. Refuse and recyclables
shall not be allowed to accumulate on any premises in the City.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
5. TEMPORARY STORAGE OF REFUSE AND RECYCLABLES. Refuse and
recyclables may be temporarily stored at the premises where produced only while awaiting
periodic removal. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
6. MANNER OF STORAGE. Storage and removal of refuse and recyclables shall be
in such manner as to not create vector production or sustenance, or conditions for transmission of
disease to man or animals, fire hazards, litter or hazards to service or disposal workers or the
public. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
Chapter 56
7. CLEAN CONTAINERS. Garbage temporarily stored shall be kept only in approved
containers kept clean and closed; excluding recyclables contained in eighteen (18) gallon
recycling bins. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
8. APPROVED CONTAINERS.
A. Approved containers for refuse other than landscape waste are the following:
(a) Metal or impact resistant plastic water-tight cans of not less than 15 or more than 32
gallon capacity with tight fitting lids and at least two opposing exterior handles; or,
(b) Water-tight bulk containers with tight fitting covers for commercial pickup.
(c) Water-tight bulk containers with tight fitting covers for residential pickup not less
than 32 gallons or more than 96 gallons and meeting approved standards for automated or semiautomated
collection. Bulk containers may be leased from licensed refuse haulers, purchased
from licensed refuse haulers or purchased from an independent source.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
B. Approved containers for landscape waste, other than limbs, branches and wood, are
the following:
(a) 33 gallon paper bags designed for composting purposes; or,
(b) Metal or impact resistant plastic water-tight cans of not less than 15 or more than 32
gallon capacity with tight fitting lids and at least two opposing exterior handles, marked with an
approved yard waste only sticker.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 93-17, March 29, 1993)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 90-69, June 18, 1990)
C. Approved containers for recyclables are the following:
(a) Water-tight bulk containers with tight fitting covers for residential pickup not less
than 32 gallons or more than 96 gallons and meeting approved standards for automated or semiChapter
56
automated collection. The bulk containers for recyclables will be provided to customers from a
source authorized through a contract with the City and a third-party contractor.
(b) Eighteen (18) gallon plastic bins provided to customers from Suburban Disposal
authorized by a contract between the City and Suburban Disposal.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
9. CONTAINER WEIGHT. Approved containers, except bulk containers, shall be so
filled as not to exceed 35 pounds total weight.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 93-17, March 29, 1993)
10. BULK CONTAINERS. All bulk containers and detachable units shall be at all
times kept in a place easily accessible to private contractors and shall at all times be kept clean,
neat, painted and in a good state of repair. However, no bulk container or detachable unit shall
be stored in front of a business, residence, in front of the building line closest to the street or on a
public right-of-way. Commercial establishments leasing said containers or units shall be
responsible for notifying the company from whom they are leasing said containers or units that
they are in need of repair. Owners or lessees of bulk containers or portable packing units shall
be responsible for notifying their service contractor of any damaged conditions. Said containers
and units shall at all times be kept in a place safely accessible to collection personnel and shall at
all times be kept clean, neat, painted and in a good state of repair. All doors and lid springs must
be in working condition. Container lids must be kept closed at all times. Cleaning up spilled
materials shall be the responsibility of the property owner or occupant. All bulk containers must
meet approved standards for automated or semi-automated collection.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
11. LOCATION OF CONTAINER. Refuse and recyclables containers on private
property, for other than landscape waste, shall be placed and kept at all times either within or
Chapter 56
adjacent to a building at a location which does not front or face any public street, but which
location may front or face an alley.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 90-69, June 18, 1990)
12. SPILLAGE. To avoid spillage, all garbage shall be thoroughly drained of surplus
liquid before being placed in containers.
13. ASHES. All ashes, chips and briquettes shall be thoroughly extinguished before
being placed in containers.
14. LIMBS AND BRANCHES. Limbs, branches and wood which are set out for
removal shall be tied securely in bundles not to exceed 48 inches in length or 35 pounds in
weight. Such approved bundles shall be placed within three feet of the curb or alley line,
dependent on the nearest location to the established removal route, no earlier than 24 hours
before the established removal time. (Amended, Ordinance No. 90-69, June 18, 1990)
15. GRASS CLIPPINGS. Landscape waste, other than limbs, branches and wood, shall
be placed in approved containers within three feet of the curb or alley line, dependent on the
nearest location to the established removal route. Such approved containers may be so placed no
earlier than 24 hours before the established removal time.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 90-69, June 18, 1990)
16. TAMPERING WITH CONTAINER. No person, firm or corporation, except the
owner or occupant of the premises whereon the same is produced, or a licensee hereunder
authorized so to do, shall take, tamper with or remove the contents of any refuse and recyclables
container awaiting removal or any receptacle provided for the disposal of refuse and recyclables
by the public generally. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
Chapter 56
17. USE OF OTHER CONTAINER. No person, firm or corporation shall use
receptacles of another producer or those provided for the disposal of refuse and recyclables by
the public generally as a primary means of refuse and recyclables removal.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
18. PAYMENT REQUIRED. All owners of residential premises in the City shall
subscribe to, and be a customer of, the licensee for refuse and recyclables removal for the
residential area containing said premises, as described herein, and it shall be unlawful, and a
violation of this section, for any such owner to fail at any time to be fully and lawfully entitled to
receive refuse and recyclables removal service from such licensee. It shall be a defense to any
prosecution for a violation hereof that the licensee from whom the property owner is required to
receive service has failed to provide such service in material breach of the provisions of this
Chapter or any other applicable law or ordinance, or in material breach of any lawful agreement
between said owner and licensee.
The rates for refuse and recyclables removal for residential premises is as follows:
Type of Residence 2018 rate per
month as of July 1,
2018
2019 rate per
month as of July 1,
2019
2020 rate per
month as of July 1,
2020
2021 rate per
month as of July 1,
2021
Basic Residential
Service - Single
Family
$17.50 per month $18.00 per month $18.50 per month $19.00 per month
Expanded Basic
Residential
Service - Single
Family
$20.50 per month $21.00 per month $21.50 per month $22.00 per month
Basic Residential
Service - Duplex
$25.25 per month $25.75 per month $26.25 per month $26.75 per month
Expanded Basic
Residential
Service – Duplex
$29.85 per month $30.35 per month $30.85 per month $31.35 per month
Basic Residential
Service – Triplex
$31.15 per month $31.65 per month $32.15 per month $32.65 per month
Expanded Basic
Residential
Service – Triplex
$36.95 per month $37.45 per month $38.95 per month $39.45 per month
Chapter 56
Basic Residential
Service – Fourplex
$47.40 per month $47.90 per month $48.40 per month $48.90 per month
Basic Residential
Service – Fiveplex
$56.30 per month $56.80 per month $57.30 per month $57.80 per month
Basic Residential
Service - Sixplex
$65.30 per month $65.80 per month $66.30 per month $66.80 per month
Minimum
Removal
Residential
Service
$2.42 per bag with
initial purchase of
twelve (12) bags
and a minimum of
twelve (12) bags
each calendar year.
Does not include
yard waste
collection. Refuse
bags must be
placed in approved
containers.
$2.42 per bag with
initial purchase of
twelve (12) bags
and a minimum of
twelve (12) bags
each calendar year.
Does not include
yard waste
collection. Refuse
bags must be
placed in approved
containers.
$2.42 per bag with
initial purchase of
twelve (12) bags
and a minimum of
twelve (12) bags
each calendar year.
Does not include
yard waste
collection. Refuse
bags must be
placed in approved
containers.
$2.42 per bag with
initial purchase of
twelve (12) bags
and a minimum of
twelve (12) bags
each calendar year.
Does not include
yard waste
collection. Refuse
bags must be
placed in approved
containers.
Premium Yard
Waste Option
$1.00 extra per
month for yearround
unlimited
residential yard
waste collection.
If between January
1 – March 31,
must request yard
waste pickup 24
hours in advance.
$1.00 extra per
month for yearround
unlimited
residential yard
waste collection.
If between January
1 – March 31,
must request yard
waste pickup 24
hours in advance.
$1.00 extra per
month for yearround
unlimited
residential yard
waste collection.
If between January
1 – March 31,
must request yard
waste pickup 24
hours in advance.
$1.00 extra per
month for yearround
unlimited
residential yard
waste collection.
If between January
1 – March 31,
must request yard
waste pickup 24
hours in advance.
Single Stream
Recycling
$2.15 per unit (on
City water bill)
$2.15 per unit (on
City water bill)
$2.15 per unit (on
City water bill)
$2.15 per unit (on
City water bill)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-26, June 18, 2018)
19. SERVICE REQUIRED. Each licensee shall provide service to all residential
producers in each residential area served under such license unless said producers are delinquent
in the payment of any fees for such service, as authorized hereby, or are otherwise in material
breach of the provisions of this Chapter or any other applicable law or ordinance or are in
material breach of any lawful agreement between said owner and licensee.
Chapter 56
20. COMMERCIAL PREMISES. Basic removal service shall be provided, either by
the owner or occupant thereof, or by a licensee hereunder, at all commercial premises in the City
where refuse is produced, except where minimum service is permitted.
21. MINIMUM REMOVAL SERVICE. Minimum removal service shall be permitted
where the occupancy of the premises is such that the weekly production of refuse is less than the
capacity of one approved container.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 88-87, September 19, 1988)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 88-72, June 29, 1988)
22. VEHICLES. No vehicles used in and on the streets of the City of Decatur for the
removal of refuse and recyclables shall be overloaded nor shall such vehicles be parked in any
one place while fully or partially loaded for any longer than is necessary to collect the refuse and
recyclables of the person being served. All such vehicles shall be so covered as not to permit the
sifting out or spilling or scattering by the wind or leakage of any refuse and recyclables hauled or
transported, and such vehicles shall be kept thoroughly cleaned so that when empty they will
give off no offensive or obnoxious odors. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20)
23. REMOVAL. A. Except as provided in subparagraph B hereof, no person, firm or
corporation shall remove refuse and recyclables from any premises within the City without a
current license issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, provided that the owner or
occupant of commercial premises whereon such refuse and recyclables was produced may
remove the same. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
B. It shall not be a violation of any provision of this Chapter for any person, firm or
corporation to remove recyclable materials from any premises within the corporate limits of the
City of Decatur if such person, firm or corporation is the owner of said recyclable materials or
does so pursuant to a contract with said City, as provided in Chapter 56.1 of the City Code; for
Chapter 56
the purposes hereof, "recyclable materials" shall be those materials defined as such in said
Chapter 56.1. (Amended, Ordinance No. 91-66, September 30, 1991)
24. APPLICATION. Application for a license and renewals thereof shall be made upon
forms prescribed by the City Manager and submitted to the Finance Department. The
applications shall contain:
(a) The name and address of the applicant;
(b) The trade or other fictitious name, if any, under which the applicant does business or
proposes to do business;
(c) The location of the place or places from which the removal service operates or is
intended to operate, and a description, in such form and with such reasonable detail as may be
prescribed by the City Manager, of the boundaries of any residential area in the City to be served
under such license, or, if only commercial producers will be served, a statement to that effect.
(d) A description of each vehicle which the applicant operates or intends to operate
within the license year, including the make, model, year of manufacture, serial number, and the
length of time the vehicle has been in use.
(e) Such other information as the City Manager may reasonably require in the
administration of the provisions of this Chapter.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 89-42, May 1, 1989)
25. LICENSE FEE.
All applications for licenses or renewals thereof shall be accompanied by an
annual fee of Six Hundred Dollars ($600.00) plus Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) for each
vehicle to be operated during the license year, which license year shall commence January 1, and
end the following December 3l. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-111, December 16, 2002)
Chapter 56
26. RESIDENTIAL AREAS. The residential areas described in applications for
licenses hereunder shall be those respective areas established and existing on January 1, 1983, as
shown by the descriptions attached to the license applications on file with the Finance
Department on that date. No residential area, or part of an area, shall be changed, or changed
from one license to another except upon notice to each licensee and the occupant of each
residence that would be affected by any proposed change and after a hearing before the City
Manager in the time and manner provided for hearings other than to establish rates.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 89-42, May 1, 1989)
27. LICENSED AREAS. No residential area shall be included in the boundaries of
more than one license.
28. PUBLIC HEARING. Within a reasonable time after an application for original
license is filed with the Finance Department, a public hearing shall be, and in the case of
application for renewal of license a hearing may be, held by the City Manager, or his designee,
notice of the time and place whereof shall be published once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City not less than ten days prior to said hearing, and a copy of which said
notice shall be served, either personally or by mail, upon the applicant.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 89-42, May 1, 1989)
29. REPORT OF HEARING. Such hearing officer may consider that which is
submitted concerning any item contained within such application; the experience and
responsibility of the applicant; the effect the proposed service may have on the general health,
safety and welfare of the community; and such other matters as may to such officer appear to be
germane, and such officer shall file with the Finance Department a report in writing of findings
Chapter 56
and conclusions with regard thereto, which said report shall specifically, in addition to whatever
else may be reported, state findings as to:
(a) Whether or not the public is at the time reasonably adequately served.
(b) Whether or not convenience and necessity requires the proposed service.
(c) Whether or not the proposed service, location, personnel, equipment, vehicles and
operation comply with the provisions of this Chapter.
(d) Whether or not the license applied for should be granted.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 89-42, dated May 1, 1989)
30. REVIEW BY COUNCIL. Any party aggrieved by the conclusions of such hearing
officer as to whether or not a license should be granted may within ten days from the date such
report is filed with the Finance Department, file a request with the Finance Department for
Council review of said report, whereafter the Council shall consider the report and may make or
cause to be made such additional investigation or inquiry as it deems advisable, whereafter the
Council may make such determination in the matter as appears to it to be in the best interest of
the general health, safety and welfare of the community.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 89-42, May 1, 1989)
31. REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSE. A license for the removal of refuse and
recyclables shall not be issued unless the applicant for the same shall have and own proper and
necessary vehicles, machinery and appliances for transporting and disposing of refuse and
recyclables in conformity with the provisions hereof and with all applicable traffic, health and
sanitary ordinances, statutes, regulations or rules of the State of Illinois, the County of Macon
and the City of Decatur. Such a license shall not be issued to any applicant who has been
Chapter 56
convicted of the violation of any health or sanitary rule, regulation, ordinance or statute of said
State, County or City. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
32. VEHICLE DECAL. The Finance Department, shall issue to each licensee an
appropriate sticker, decal or other device for each vehicle operated under such license, and which
shall be displayed on said vehicle at all times of such operation.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 89-42, May 1, 1989)
33. VEHICLE NUMBER. The City license number shall be displayed on the front and
rear of each truck in legible characters at least six (6) inches in height.
34. CLOSED VEHICLES. All vehicles used by licensees hereunder to collect and haul
refuse and recyclables shall be closed, non-leakable packer-type motor trucks, equipped with a
mechanism that is designed in such a way that the entry for refuse and recyclables into the
vehicle's body will be exposed only for the time actually required to deposit the refuse and
recyclables. The exterior of such vehicles shall at all times be kept neatly painted and the
exterior and interior of such vehicles shall be kept thoroughly washed and cleansed with a
suitable deodorant at all times. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
35. INSPECTION OF VEHICLES. All vehicles used by licensee hereunder to remove
refuse and recyclables are subject to inspection at the discretion of the City Manager and at
reasonable hours to assure conformance to the requirements hereof.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
36. COLLECTION OF REFUSE AND RECYCLABLES. Licensees hereunder shall
make collections with a minimum of noise and disturbance to the customer. Refuse and
recyclables containers shall be handled carefully and shall be thoroughly emptied and then left
where they were placed for collection. Any refuse and recyclables spilled by the licensee shall
Chapter 56
be picked up immediately and the area left clean. In those areas of the City in residential zoning
districts as established and provided by the Zoning Ordinance, or upon streets and alleys lying
within said districts or next and adjacent thereto no refuse and recyclables shall be collected by
any licensee hereunder between the hours of 6:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M. of the following day, and
in all other areas of the City no refuse and recyclables shall be collected between the hours of
6:00 P.M. and 5:00 A.M of the following day. In the case of special events, the City Manager
may allow special hours of refuse and recyclables pickup for no more than seven (7) consecutive
days.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
37. USE OF STREETS. When serving commercial producers, and when going to and
from served residential areas, licensee shall use major or collector streets and avoid using
residential streets unless not practically possible so to do.
38. LIST OF CUSTOMERS. The licensee hereunder shall at all times keep a list of the
names of his customers and their addresses and shall, upon request, deliver a copy of the same to
the Finance Department. (Amended, Ordinance No. 89-42, May 1, 1989)
39. LICENSEE TELEPHONE. Each licensee hereunder shall maintain an office and
telephone service, which telephone number shall be plainly denoted on all vehicles required to be
tagged under the provisions hereof and in the local yellow pages. Such licensee shall maintain
reasonable office hours.
40. BILLING. Licensees hereunder shall bill their customers on a regular and
consistent basis, but not more frequently than once every month.
41. RATE SCHEDULES. Each licensee shall file a rate schedule with the Finance
Department setting forth a rate for each type of regular service furnished under such license,
Chapter 56
which in no case exceed the maximum that may be set by City Council. City Council may also
set a service charge for the expense of providing a recycling program as provided in Chapter
56.1 of the City Code that may include the City reimbursing licensed haulers for the collection of
recyclables.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 89-42, May 1, 1989)
42. MODIFICATION OF RATES. In order to establish rates for services for which no
rate has heretofore been established, or to modify established rates, a schedule of proposed rates
shall be filed with the City Clerk who shall inform the City Manager thereof and the City
Manager or his designee shall fix a date, time and place for a public hearing thereon and shall
advise the person who filed such schedule thereof and such person shall cause such schedule and
notice of hearing to be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City
not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the hearing date and cause
evidence of such publication to be filed with the City Clerk. The City Manager, or his designee,
shall hold such hearing and receive evidence regarding the proposed rate or rates and thereafter
make by filing the same with the City Clerk recommendations to the Council with regard thereto.
The Council may approve or disapprove or modify such recommendations in whole or in part by
action within forty-five (45) days after the filing thereof with the City Clerk. Should the Council
not so act within such forty-five (45) days, the recommendation shall be deemed to have been
approved and the recommended rates shall become the authorized maximum rates. Nothing
herein shall prevent the Council from initiating establishment or modification of rates in such
other manner as it may select. Except upon initiation by the Council, application for
modification of established rates shall not be made more than once during a license term.
Chapter 56
43. UNIQUE SERVICES. Nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit a licensee from, by
agreement with a party served, establishing a price for unique or unusual, other than regular
haulage of things other than refuse and recyclables including but not limited to back door service
or for customized removal of refuse and recyclables in amounts greater than, or at frequencies
more often than, that included in regular service for which rates are established hereunder. Back
door service shall be provided to Hardship Customers at no charge.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
44. ANNEXATION. Territory annexed to the City shall be added to the area of the then
current licensee that can more conveniently and efficiently serve such territory, the determination
of which, if not reached by agreement, shall be made by the City Manager.
45. REVOCATION OF LICENSE. The City Manager may suspend, revoke, fine, or
deny renewal of a license to remove refuse and recyclables issued under the provisions hereof or
of any other applicable code, ordinance, rule, regulation, or statute of the City of Decatur,
County of Macon or State of Illinois. The fine shall not exceed Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00)
for each offense, and each day of a continuing violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
Such suspension, revocation, fine, or denial of renewal may take place only after the licensee has
been given written notice warning of possible suspension, revocation, fine, or denial and a
hearing, if requested by the licensee, before the City Manager. Such request for a hearing must
be made within five (5) days of receipt of such written notice.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-36, May 17, 2010)
46. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
Chapter shall be fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense and each day on which a violation occurs or
Chapter 56
continues shall be considered a separate offense. The penalties or remedies provided herein shall
be cumulative and resort to any one or more shall be no defense to prosecution of another.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-72, October 31, 2011)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-89, December 20, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-111, December 16, 2002)
CHAPTER 56.1
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
1. DEFINITIONS. As used in this Chapter, unless the context requires otherwise, the
singular shall include the plural and the plural shall include the singular, and the following
phrases shall mean:
Dwelling: Any occupied single family residence and any occupied multifamily
residence containing not more than six units, provided that each occupied unit in a multifamily
residence shall be considered one dwelling.
Processing Facility
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-90, December 20, 2010)
: A facility where recyclable materials are sorted and
processed or prepared for bulk shipment to a manufacturer for use as a raw material.
Recyclable Materials: Material that has been recovered or diverted from the nonhazardous
solid waste stream for purpose of reuse, recycling or reclamation and a substantial
portion of which is consistently used in the manufacture of products, which may otherwise be
produced using raw or virgin materials. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-90, December 20)
Recycle: To process used and discarded objects and materials into objects or
materials that may be reused for ultimate consumption and manufacturing and/or remarketed for
value.
Recycling Program
Revised 10/11
: A comprehensive program in which citizens are provided
with the opportunity to have recyclable materials collected from their dwellings and recycled.
Chapter 56.1
2. RECYCLING PROGRAM. The City Manager may, by appropriate action, institute
a recycling program for the City of Decatur, subject to Council authorization as required herein.
3. RECYCLING CONTRACT. The City may, by action of the Council, contract with,
or authorize a contract with, any person, firm or corporation for the collection and / or processing
of recyclable materials from all dwellings within the City pursuant to a recycling program. The
City may, by action of the Council, authorize licensed refuse removal haulers for the collection
of recyclable materials from all dwellings within the City pursuant to a recycling program and
may reimburse licensed haulers for the collection of those recyclable materials through a service
charge as described in Paragraph 4 below. The Council hereby ratifies any such contract
authorized prior to the effective date of this Chapter and which has an effective date on or about
October 1, 1991. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-90, December 20, 2010)
4. SERVICE CHARGE. To provide for the expense of providing a recycling program
for the citizens of the City of Decatur, the City may, by action of the Council, levy a charge on
the owners of all dwellings within the City from which recyclable materials must be collected
under the provisions of any contract as provided herein. Such charge may only be in such
amount as represents the actual costs and contractual obligations of the City and provide for
other administrative expenses of the City related to the collection of recyclable materials. The
owners of such dwellings shall be responsible for the payment of all charges levied under the
provisions hereof. The City Manager may, upon public notice in a newspaper of general
circulation not less than 30 days in advance, adjust the service charge in accordance with the
contractual obligations and actual costs approved by the City Council.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-90, December 20, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-104, November 12, 2005)
Chapter 56.1
5. CHARGE MANDATORY. Any charge levied by the Council on any owner of a
dwelling pursuant to this Chapter shall be fully due and owing to the City regardless of whether
such owner, or any occupant, of such dwelling provides recyclable materials to such contractor
for collection.
6. BILLING. The Department of Financial Management shall be responsible for the
billing and collection of any charges levied by the Council pursuant to this Chapter, shall bill
therefore not less frequently than quarterly.
7. RULES AND REGULATIONS. The provisions hereof shall be administered under
the supervision of the City Manager which officer is authorized to promulgate reasonable rules
and regulations not contrary thereto in order to facilitate such administration and to carry out the
intent and purpose thereof.
8. NO SCAVENGING. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
collect, obtain, possess or pick up any recyclable material placed for collection in front of a
residence as a part of, and in accordance with, the City of Decatur's recycling program, unless
such person, firm or corporation has a valid and current contract with the City to collect
recyclable material as authorized by this Chapter. Any person, firm or corporation who shall
violate the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars
($150.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-72, October 31, 2011)
CHAPTER 56.2
CURBSIDE LEAF VACUUMING
(REPEALED, Ordinance No. 2001-65, August 20, 2001)
CHAPTER 57
HOUSE MOVING
1. PERMIT REQUIRED. No person, firm or corporation shall move any building or
structure along or across any street or alley or other public place without a permit therefor.
2. APPLICATION. Application for permit hereunder shall be made to the Finance
Department and shall state the location of the building to be moved, its length, width and height
in feet, and the principal material of its walls and of its roof, the route proposed to be followed
and the mode of transportation to be used, together with applicant's experience in such work.
The permit may direct what streets shall be used.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 89-42, May 1, 1989)
3. BOND AND INSURANCE. No permit shall be granted until applicant shall file his
bond, payable to the City, in the penal sum of Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000), with a corporate
surety to be approved by the City Manager, and conditioned, among other things, that said
applicant will pay any and all damage caused by him; that he will move the same without delay;
that he will cut no trees except as herein provided; that he will follow the route designated by
the permit; that he will save, indemnify, and hold the City harmless against any and all liabilities,
judgments, costs and expenses which may accrue against the City in consequence of the granting
of such permit; and that he will in all things strictly comply with the conditions of the permit and
with all ordinances of the City. Said permittee shall also provide the City with evidence of
Revised 10/11
Chapter 57
insurance showing the City as a named co-insured on a policy of general liability with limits not
less than $1,000,000 per occurrence, and $1,500,000 aggregate, for bodily injury and property
damage combined.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 89-35, April 7, 1989)
4. FEE. The fee for issuing each permit shall be as follows: For a one-story structure
not larger than twelve feet by twenty feet, Ten Dollars ($10.00); for a one-story structure not
larger than twenty-four feet by twenty feet, Fifteen Dollars ($15.00); and for any larger structure,
Fifty Dollars ($50.00).
5. SHADE TREES. No shade tree shall be removed, or the branches thereof cut or
trimmed, in order to facilitate the moving of a building, except with the written consent of the
Public Works Director. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03; Ordinance No. 2000-63)
6. WIRES AND CABLES. Whenever in the moving of any building along the route
specified, it shall become necessary to cut, disconnect, remove or disturb any wires, guys, or
cables over or across any of the streets or alleys along the line of such route, seventy-two hours
notice in writing shall be given by the permittee to all persons, companies, or corporations,
including the City, owning, using or controlling any such wires, guys or cables, of the time when
such building or structure will arrive at any given point on any such street or alley overhung by
wires, guys or cables, and that such wires, guys or cables must be cut, removed or disconnected
by the time designated in such notice for the building or structure to arrive at that point, and in
case of failure of the owner, user or controller of such wires, guys or cables thus notified to cut,
remove, disconnect any such wires, guys or cables at the time appointed, then the City may
remove or disconnect any or all such wires, guys or cables, or cause the same to be done, and
shall mend, re-connect and replace the same after the building has passed. The permittee shall
Chapter 57
pay all costs and expense incident to and occasioned by the cutting, disconnecting, removing or
disturbing of any such wires, guys, and cables, and the reconnecting or replacing of same, and in
default of payment within a reasonable time after demand, then recourse may be had for the
collection of same to the sureties on the permittee's bond.
7. COST OF BUILDING. No structure in the City shall be moved along or across any
street or alley or any public place within the City unless the Public Works Director shall have
determined, in writing, that said building is worth at least 50% of the cost of a new building of
like size and character. No building not worth 50% of the cost of a similar new building shall be
removed. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39; Ordinance No. 2000-63)
8. SIZE OF BUILDING. Where the house or building sought to be removed is found
to be of such size and character that the removal of the same over the proposed route would
blockade traffic or materially injure such street or streets, then a permit to remove such house or
building shall be refused.
9. FIRE LIMITS. No house or building shall be moved from outside of the fire limits
of the City to a location within said fire limits in the City, nor shall the route prescribed in any
permit or license extend into or through said fire limits; provided, however, nothing in this
section contained shall be taken to prohibit issuance of a permit for the moving of any house or
building from inside of said fire limits to a location outside.
10. POLICE ESCORT. No building shall be removed as provided herein without a
police escort if such is determined to be necessary by the Chief of Police. In making such
determination, said officer shall consider the size of the building, the route to be traveled, and
any factors affecting the safety of persons and property. The permittee shall reimburse the City
for all reasonable costs, including wages, incurred in the provision of such escort.´
Chapter 57
11. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this Chapter shall be fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than
Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense and each day on which a violation occurs or
continues shall be considered a separate offense. In addition thereto, for every day any structure
is permitted to be moved shall remain upon any street, alley or public place after the expiration
of the time specified in the permit, the permittee therein named shall be subject to a further
penalty of not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than Five Hundred
Dollars ($500.00) for each such day. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-72, October 31, 2011)
CHAPTER 58
SECONDHAND STORES, AUCTION HOUSES AND RUMMAGE ROOMS
1. DEFINITIONS. "Auction house", as used herein, shall mean any building, place or
premises used for the purpose of conducting a public sale at which goods, commodities or
appliances are sold to the highest bidder, excluding such sales where the goods, commodities or
appliances offered for sale are the property of and were originally acquired for the use thereof by
the owner of such building, place or premises, and also excluding such sales conducted by said
owner's estate or other legal representative.
"Secondhand store", as used herein, shall mean any building, place or premises used for the
purpose of selling, bartering or exchanging any goods, commodities or appliances which have
previously been sold, exchanged, given away or had title transferred from the person, firm or
corporation which first acquired the same for the use thereof.
"Rummage room", as used herein, shall mean any building, place or premises used for the
purpose of leasing space or spaces to the owners of any goods, commodities or appliances who
originally acquired the same for the use thereof so that such owners may sell, barter or exchange
such goods, commodities or appliances.
2. EXCLUSIONS. The provisions of this ordinance do not apply to the sale of, nor
shall the terms "goods, commodities or appliances" be interpreted or construed to include,
motor vehicles or parts thereof, mobile homes, boats, books, clothes, coins or stamps, records,
refrigerators, ranges and ovens, clothes washers and dryers, or furniture and equipment of a
Revised 10/11
Chapter 58
type commonly and exclusively used in commercial restaurant operations.
3. LICENSE REQUIRED. No person, firm or corporation shall operate an auction
house, secondhand store or rummage room in the City of Decatur without first having obtained a
license for each such auction house, secondhand store or rummage room issued by the City
Manager.
4. APPLICATION. Application for a license to operate an auction house, secondhand
store or rummage room shall be made to the Finance Department and shall include such
information as may be required to effect the provisions hereof. Such application shall be
accompanied by the appropriate license fee required herein.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 89-42, May 1, 1989)
5. FEE. The annual fee for an auction house, secondhand store or rummage room
license shall be Fifty Dollars ($50.00).
6. TERM OF LICENSE. Auction house, secondhand store and rummage room licenses
shall expire on the 31st day of December of the year for which the same are issued.
7. REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION. An auction house, secondhand store or
rummage room license may be suspended or revoked by the City Manager as elsewhere provided
in this Code for any violation by the licensee or its agents of any provisions of this Chapter or
any rule or regulation duly established hereunder or any other applicable ordinance or statute.
All auction house, secondhand store and rummage room licenses held by a licensee may be
revoked or suspended by the City Manager upon a finding of such a violation at any one of a
licensee's licensed premises.
8. PREMISES. When a license for any auction house, secondhand store or rummage
room is revoked by the City Manager, no auction house, secondhand store or rummage room
Chapter 58
license for the formerly licensed premises shall be granted to any person, firm or corporation for
a period of one (1) year thereafter.
9. INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE. No auction house, secondhand store or rummage
room license shall be issued to:
(a) Any person who is not twenty-one (21) years of age or over;
(b) Any person who has been convicted of a felony or any other theft-related offense under
any Federal or State law if the City Manager determines, after investigation, and after a hearing,
if requested by the applicant, that such person has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant
the public trust;
(c) Any person who at the time of application for renewal of a license would not be eligible
for such license upon a first application;
(d) Any person whose license has been revoked for cause;
(e) Any partnership unless all of the partners are qualified to obtain a license; and
(f) Any corporation if any officer or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders
owning in the aggregate more than 10% of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to
receive a license.
10. EMPLOYEES. No licensee shall employ any person in any secondhand store,
auction house or rummage room unless such person meets all requirements and qualifications to
be a licensee except those pertaining to age.
11. MINORS. No auction house, secondhand store or rummage room licensee shall
accept or purchase any goods, commodities or appliances for auction or resale at its licensed
premises from, or permit the sale thereat by, any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
Chapter 58
12. IDENTIFICATION. Before accepting or purchasing any goods, commodities or
appliances for auction or resale at its licensed premises, or permitting the sale of same thereat, a
secondhand store, auction house or rummage room licensee shall demand from the owner thereof
or his agent presentation of some form of positive identification of such owner or agent,
including proof of age, issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties.
13. LIST OF GOODS. All rummage room licensees shall deliver to the Police
Department on a complete list of all goods, commodities or appliances to be sold, bartered or
exchanged on the licensed premises, and the names and addresses of both the owner and seller or
sellers thereof, not less than 24 hours prior to such sale, barter or exchange.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 90-35, March 19, 1990)
14. RECORDS. All auction house, secondhand store and rummage room licensees shall
maintain a written record giving a detailed description of each individual good, commodity or
appliance accepted or purchased for auction or resale at its licensed premises or permitted to be
sold thereat, and the person or persons from whom the same were accepted or purchased or to
whom permission to sell the same was given, including the form of identification used by the
owner or his agent as required herein. Such records shall be maintained by the licensee for three
(3) years.
15. INSPECTIONS. Records required to be kept by a licensee under the provisions
hereof, and the articles required to be listed therein, shall be made available for inspection by the
licensee to officers of the Police Department. Such inspections shall be made during the regular
business hours of the licensee and shall be limited to such records and articles. All licensed
premises shall be so inspected at least four times during the year for which said premises are
licensed. (Amended, Ordinance No. 90-35, March 19, 1990)
Chapter 58
16. HOLD FOR 72 HOURS. No goods, commodities or appliances acquired in the
regular course of business may be transferred from the possession of any secondhand store
licensee unless the same have been listed or entered in the written records of purchase by said
licensee as required herein for not less than 72 hours prior to such transfer of possession.
17. PRICE LIMITATION. No licensee may re-sell any goods, commodities, or
appliances to the previous owner thereof for a price greater than the maximum allowable loan
repayment on a pawn of the same goods, commodities or appliances under the Illinois
Pawnbroker Regulation Act, and no service fee of any kind may be added thereto. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 95-51)
18. RULES AND REGULATIONS. The City Manager is hereby authorized to cause
to be established, promulgated, published, and enforced such reasonable rules, regulations and
procedures, not in conflict with the provisions hereof, as may to said officer appear to be
necessary or convenient to administer the provisions of this Chapter and to carry out the purpose
and intent thereof.
19. NOT FOR PROFIT. The provisions hereof shall not apply to, nor shall any license
be required of, any auction house, secondhand store or rummage room that is operated not for
profit under the auspices of a religious, fraternal or charitable non-profit organization, nor shall
the provisions hereof apply to any person, firm or corporation operating a rummage room when
such rummage room is leased to a religious, fraternal or charitable non-profit organization.
20. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
Chapter, or any regulation duly promulgated hereunder, shall be fined not less than Two
Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense
and each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall be considered as a separate offense.
Chapter 58
The penalties or remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and resort to any one or more
shall be no defense to prosecution of another. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-72)
CHAPTER 59
SIGN HANGERS
1. DEFINITIONS. "Sign Hanger", as used herein, means any person who, for hire,
builds, erects, hangs, suspends, maintains or removes any kind of display sign.
"Display Sign", as used herein, means a structure that is arranged, intended, designed or
used as an advertisement, announcement or direction and including a sign, sign screen, billboard
and advertising device of every kind.
2. LICENSE REQUIRED. No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business
of sign hanger without a license therefor. Journeyman employees of a licensee need not be
licensed.
3. APPLICATION. Application for license shall be made to the Finance Department.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 89-42, May 1, 1989)
4. INSURANCE. No such license shall be valid unless there is, and all privileges under
any issued license shall terminate automatically at anytime there ceases to be, on file with the
Finance Department, a certificate evidencing valid contracts of insurance between the licensee
and a company authorized to do business in this State and approved by the City Risk Manager.
The licensee may purchase insurance for the full limits required, or a combination of primary
policies for lesser limits and the remaining limits provided by an Umbrella or Excess policy.
Any policy providing excess limits shall name the City as additional insured and be primary.
The Certificate shall provide for not less than thirty (30) days notice to the City before
cancellation or modification of coverage can be effective.
Revised 11/2016
Chapter 59
The insurance contracts shall provide: (A) Comprehensive General Liability on an
occurrence basis for premises, operations, completed operations and product liability with limits
not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 in the aggregate and for completed
operations and products. The City will be named as an additional insured and the licensee’s
insurance must be primary.
(B) Commercial Auto Liability with limits of not less than $1,000,000 Combined Single
Limit for bodily injury and property damage each occurrence. The policy shall also cover hired
and nonowned vehicles. The City will be named as an additional insured and the licensee’s
insurance must be primary.
(C) Workers Compensation insurance according to the provisions of the Illinois Worker’s
Compensation Act, as amended, with Employer’s Liability of not less than $500,000 each
accident, $500,000 for Disease - policy limit and $500,000 for Disease - each employee.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-08, February 21, 2005)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 89-42, May 1, 2989)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 89-35, April 7, 1989)
5. FEE. The license fee hereunder shall be Seventy-Five Dollars ($75.00) per annum,
payable in advance at the time of making application.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2016-86, November 21, 2016)
6. RENEWAL. Renewal may be had upon the same terms as original issuance.
7. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of
this Chapter shall be fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense and each day a violation occurs or continues shall be
considered a separate offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-72, October 31, 2011)
CHAPTER 60
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
(Ordinance 2012-70)
1. DEFINITIONS. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
Chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Chapter, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
A. “City” shall mean the City of Decatur, Illinois.
B. “Driver” shall mean the person in actual physical control of a vehicle for hire.
C. “Licensee” shall mean the owner of a vehicle for hire or the driver of said vehicle.
D. “Limousine” shall mean a vehicle used to carry passengers for hire based primarily on
a trip or zone rate rather than mileage or time rate.
E. “Occasional Use” shall mean not more than ten (10) special events, (including but not
limited to weddings, anniversary parties, celebrations, school dances or similar events) per
calendar year. (Amended Ordinance 2012-73)
F. “Operating” shall mean operating a vehicle for hire and shall include owning a vehicle
for hire.
G. “Operator” shall mean the operator of a vehicle for hire and shall include the owner of
a vehicle for hire.
H. “Public Transportation Vehicle” shall mean a privately-owned vehicle which is
required to have registration plates with a “PT” suffix and designed to lawfully carry ten (10) or
more passengers, including, but not limited to, passenger vans.
I. “Taxi” also referred to as a “taxicab” and “cab”, shall mean any vehicle in the city to
carry passengers for hire based on mileage.
Revised 11/2016
J. “Taximeter” shall mean any mechanical or electronic device that records and indicates
a charge or fare measured by distance traveled, waiting time and extra passengers.
K. “Vehicle for hire” shall mean any motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying
persons for a fee on the streets of the City of Decatur, including taxicabs, limousines and public
transportation vehicles.
2. APPLICABILITY.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all vehicles for hire, whether
transporting persons within or outside the corporate limits of the City of Decatur, and to the
drivers of such vehicles.
B. This chapter shall not apply to:
(1) vehicles operated as school buses as defined by the Illinois Vehicle Code;
(2) vehicles provided by employers for the exclusive use of their employees;
(3) vehicles devoted exclusively for funeral use;
(4) vehicles used exclusively by religious organizations;
(5) vehicles when used for ride-sharing or carpooling purposes;
(6) vehicles used in operation of a metropolitan transit authority;
(7) vehicles as shuttles or courtesy vehicles by a business for the convenience of
its customers and at no charge to said customers; or,
(8) vehicles specifically designed, constructed or modified and equipped, and
which are intended to be used for, and are maintained or operated exclusively for the
emergency or non-emergency transportation of person for compensation for the purpose
of obtaining medical services.
3. LICENSE REQUIRED. No vehicle for hire shall be operated or driven on the
streets and public ways of the City of Decatur without a license therefore, nor unless it conforms
to the requirements of this Chapter. No person shall operate a vehicle for hire upon the streets of
the City of Decatur unless the driver of said vehicle shall have first obtained and shall have then
in force a current vehicle for hire driver’s license issued under the provisions of this Chapter.
4. FEE FOR VEHICLE FOR HIRE LICENSE. The annual license fee shall be One
Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for each vehicle for hire licensed.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2016-87, November 21, 2016)
5. APPLICATION FOR VEHICLE FOR HIRE LICENSE.
A. No person shall operate a vehicle for hire without first having obtained a Vehicle for
Hire License. Application for Vehicle for Hire license shall be made in writing by the owner of
each vehicle for which licensing is sought, on forms approved by the City. A completed
application shall include all documentation required in this Chapter, including but not limited to
the full name, address, and phone number of every owner; a description of each vehicle to be
licensed, including the year of manufacture, make, model, color, vehicle identification number
(V.I.N.), and state registration (license plate) number; the licensee’s principal place of business
including address and phone number, and the name address and phone number of the licensee’s
manager if different than the owner; the name, address, State driver’s license number, and City
vehicle for hire driver’s license number of each person who will operate the licensee’s licensed
vehicles.
If the owner is a corporation, a completed application shall include the name of the
corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and stockholders holding more than five (5)
percent ownership in the corporation, the current registered agent of the corporation including
address, a certificate of good standing issued by the State of Illinois, and the name address and
phone number of the manager or person to be in charge of and responsible for the vehicles for
hire licensed to the corporation.
If the owner is a partnership, a competed application shall include the names and
addresses of each partner; and the name, address, and phone number of the manager or person to
be in charge of and responsible for the vehicles for hire licensed to the partnership.
It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any licensee to fail to provide the City, within five (5)
days of any material change(s) in the information submitted on the most recent application,
written notice of such material change(s).
B. No vehicle for hire shall pick up passengers or originate a trip within the City without
a Vehicle for Hire License duly issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. No vehicle for
hire shall pick up passengers or originate a fare within the City without a Vehicle for Hire
License duly issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. A vehicle for hire currently
licensed by another jurisdiction and operated by a driver currently licensed in another
jurisdiction may discharge passengers within the City but only if the trip originated outside the
City, provided however that it shall be a violation of this Chapter for any such vehicle for hire or
driver to fail to produce proof of current licenses upon request together with proof of the location
of origin of the fare.
C. Any person, firm or corporation who solicits or transports passengers for hire, and the
registered owner of any motor vehicle who permits such solicitation and transportation, in
violation of this chapter, shall be subject to fines, vehicle impoundment and other applicable
penalties.
D. Every act or omission constituting a violation of any provision of city ordinances or
state law by any officer, director, manager, agent, driver or employee of any vehicle for hire
licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such vehicle for hire licensee, and the licensee
shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission had been done or omitted by
the licensee personally.
E. No applicant shall be granted a license to engage in the business of vehicles for hire
who has been convicted of a felony under any Federal or State law, unless such person has been
sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust as determined by the City’s Chief of Police,
or designee, in accordance with the provisions of 235 ILCS 5/6-2, as amended. The burden of
proof of sufficient rehabilitation shall be on the applicant.
F. No license to engage in the business of vehicles for hire shall be issued to or held by
any person whose license to operate a vehicle for hire business in any jurisdiction has been
suspended or revoked during the preceding twelve (12) months.
G. All vehicle for hire licenses shall expire on the 30th day of April each year.
Completed license renewal applications shall be submitted no later than sixty (60) days prior to
current license expiration date. Renewal applications submitted less than sixty (60) days prior to
expiration and incomplete applications shall not be processed without payment of an additional
processing fee of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00), plus Ten Dollars ($10.00) per day for each day
after the 60th day prior to expiration, that no application or an incomplete application is
submitted.
H. No vehicle for hire license issued pursuant to this chapter may be sold, assigned or
transferred.
I. No vehicle for hire license shall be issued for a vehicle not owned by the applicant
unless the applicant demonstrates to the City’s satisfaction that the applicant possesses a defined
beneficial interest in the vehicle.
6. ADDITIONAL VEHICLES. A licensee shall submit, on forms provided by the
City, an application to add or remove vehicle(s) from the original application, as the case may
be. Every vehicle added shall comply fully with the requirements of this Chapter. Application
to add vehicle(s) shall be denied for any vehicle failing to meet the requirements of this Chapter.
7. ISSUANCE OF LICENSES. The City Manager or designee shall approve the
issuance of all licenses hereunder upon evidence that the applicant has satisfactorily submitted
completed application forms as required, and provided all required documentation, including but
not limited to:
a) A certificate or certificates of insurance showing insurance coverage as required herein
for the entire term of the license, for each licensed vehicle, showing the City as named
additional named insured, requiring the insurer to provide the City prompt notice of
cancellation or lapse in coverage; and
b) A certified report by a currently certified ASE mechanic for each licensed vehicle that it
complies with requirements set forth herein out; and,
c) For vehicle for hire licensees operating taxi cabs, a report by a currently certified ASE
mechanic that the taximeter of each licensed taxi is accurate to within five (5) per cent of
the measured test distance travelled by said taxi; and
d) For corporate licensees, a certificate of good standing for the corporation; and
e) Payment of all required fees.
8. USE OF LICENSE. After a vehicle for hire license has issued, the privileges there
under shall be actively exercised. Suspension or the exercise of said privileges for a period of 90
days may be cause for revocation of such license absent the showing of substantial reasons for
the same not within the control of the licensee.
9. IDENTIFICATION CARD REQUIRED; FORM; POSTING. When any vehicle
for hire is licensed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, a license card of such size
and form as may be prescribed by the City shall be provided to the owner of each licensed
vehicle - in addition to the license. The license card shall include the license year, license
number, vehicle number, vehicle make, model, color, and registration number, and the name,
address, and phone number of the licensee. The license card shall at all times be conspicuously
displayed within the interior of the vehicle, such that it is visible to the passenger(s). No person
shall operate a licensed vehicle for hire carrying any person or persons, in which a currently
valid license card for that vehicle is not conspicuously displayed. No licensee shall operate, own
or possess a licensed vehicle for hire carrying any person or persons, in which a currently valid
license card is not conspicuously displayed. It shall be a violation of this Chapter to alter,
mutilate the card or to alter any entry or information placed thereon pursuant to the terms of this
section. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-73)
When any vehicle for which a license card has been issued shall no longer be used to
transport passengers for hire, the vehicle for hire licensee shall promptly notify the City.
10. NUMBERING OF VEHICLES. Every vehicle for hire shall have conspicuously
painted on both sides thereof and on the rear of said vehicle in distinct and legible numbers at
least four (4) inches in height, the city-issued vehicle number. The number must at all times be
visible and not obscured. Licensed vehicle numbers shall be issued by the City and shall not be
transferred to another vehicle without prior City authorization.
11. DRIVERS’ LICENSES REQUIRED.
A. No vehicle for hire as defined herein may be operated on the highways, streets, or
public ways of the City without a currently valid vehicle for hire driver’s license.
B. No vehicle for hire licensee shall employ any person to operate any vehicle for hire on
the highways, streets, or public ways of the City who does not have a currently valid vehicle for
hire driver’s license issued to such person by the City.
12. APPLICATION FOR VEHICLE FOR HIRE DRIVER’S LICENSE.
A. Every applicant for a vehicle for hire driver’s license must certify that he/she meets
the following requirements:
(1) Must be at least twenty-one (21) years of age;
(2) Must be of sound physique, with good eyesight, and not subject to epilepsy,
vertigo, heart trouble, or any other infirmity of body or mind which might render him
unfit for the safe operation of the vehicle;
(3) Must be able to speak, read and write the English language plainly;
(4) Must be clean in dress and person, and not addicted to the use of alcohol or
drugs;
(5) Must complete a verified application for a vehicle for hire driver’s license
upon a form provided by the City. The application shall state the full name of the
applicant, his/her date of birth, social security number, State of Illinois driver’s license
number, residence address, whether a citizen of the United States, whether or not he/she
has ever been convicted of a felony, whether or not he/she has previously been licensed
as a vehicle for hire driver, and if so, when and by whose authority, whether or not
his/her driving privileges have ever been revoked or suspended, and if so, for what cause,
and the name of the vehicle for hire licensee for whom he/she will be driving. Such
verified application shall be reviewed by the Chief of Police, and shall not be effective
until it shall have endorsed on it the approval of the Chief of Police. Any false statements
made by the applicant for a vehicle for hire driver’s license may be promptly reported by
the Police Chief to the Macon County State’s Attorney. Every vehicle for hire driver’s
license application shall include three (3) copies of a recent photograph of the driver not
less than 4 inches by 4 inches in size, at least 75 per cent of which shall show the
applicant’s face, including head and shoulders. Every application for a vehicle for hire
driver’s license shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee of Eighty Dollars ($80.00).
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2016-87, November 21, 2016)
B. No applicant shall be granted a vehicle for hire driver’s license as required by this
Chapter, if he or she has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, had a prior application for a
vehicle for hire license denied.
C. No applicant shall be granted a vehicle for hire driver’s license who has been
convicted of a felony under any Federal or State law, unless such person has been sufficiently
rehabilitated to warrant the public trust as determined by the City’s Chief of Police, or designee,
in accordance with the provisions of 235 ILCS 5/6-2, as amended. The burden of proof of
sufficient rehabilitation shall be on the applicant.
13. DRIVER’S IDENTIFICATION CARD.
A. The City shall issue to all qualified applicants a vehicle for hire driver’s license card
in such form as may be prescribed by the City. The driver’s license card shall prominently
display at a minimum the driver’s full name, his photograph, his vehicle for hire driver’s license
number, and the name, address and phone number of the vehicle for hire licensee who owns the
vehicle operated by the driver. Multiple vehicles for hire driver’s license cards may be issued to
a single driver, upon the written approval of the licensee whose vehicle the driver seeks licensure
to operate. No vehicle for hire driver’s licensee shall operate any vehicle for hire except one
owned by the licensee described on the driver’s license card displayed in the vehicle for hire. It
shall be a violation of this Chapter to alter, mutilate, or in any way obscure the information
displayed on the driver’s license card. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-73)
B. The driver of a vehicle for hire shall conspicuously display his/her vehicle for hire
driver’s license card whenever there is any passenger in the vehicle. The driver’s license card
shall be displayed in such a fashion as to be readily visible to any passenger. If a driver has lost
or destroyed his/her city-issued vehicle for hire driver’s license card, he/she may submit a
written sworn statement to the City stating that the driver’s license card has been lost or
destroyed, with three (3) additional photographs meeting the requirements of this Chapter. The
City shall issue a replacement driver’s license card upon payment of Ten Dollars ($10.00) for
each license so replaced.
14. INSURANCE. Each operator must carry automobile liability insurance on each
licensed vehicle for hire in the amount of at least Two Hundred Fifty Thousand Dollars
($250,000.00) minimum bodily injury per person, and Two Hundred Fifty Thousand Dollars
($250,000.00) minimum bodily injury per accident, and Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00)
minimum property damage per accident which shall name the City of Decatur as an additional
named insured, and shall required the insurer to notify the City, within five (5) days of
cancellation or lapse of coverage. Such insurance must be kept in force at all times and if any
such insurance expires, such operator must at once cease operation of any vehicles for hire on the
streets of the City. Every vehicle for hire licensee shall provide the City with a certificate or
certificates of insurance showing insurance coverage as required herein for the entire term of the
license, for each licensed vehicle. The certificate shall show the City as additional named
insured, and shall require the insurer to provide the City prompt notice of cancellation or lapse in
coverage. The insurance company issuing any such certificate shall be licensed to do business in
the State of Illinois.
15. STANDARDS FOR VEHICLES FOR HIRE. No vehicle shall be licensed until it
has been examined and certified by a currently certified ASE mechanic that it complies with the
requirements of this Chapter, including the requirements that it is clean, of good appearance and
well painted. Each such vehicle shall be examined and certified by a currently certified ASE
mechanic semi-annually and a report of such test shall be filed with the City not later than
November 15 of each year. After any accident involving a vehicle for hire, the Chief of Police,
or his designee may require that said vehicle for hire again be tested by a currently certified ASE
mechanic. The City Manager or designee may revoke or suspend a vehicle for hire license if any
vehicle licensed therein shall fail inspection as required herein, or be found unclean, not of good
appearance or not well painted. No such suspension or revocation shall issue for any vehicle for
which the licensee submits an affidavit in a form provided by the City, stating under penalty of
perjury that the vehicle has been removed from service, that the vehicle identification numbers
and names required to be painted on the vehicle have been permanently rendered no longer
visible, and the licensee will not use the vehicle for hire until such time as the vehicle is again
certified as meeting the requirements of this Chapter. Similarly, vehicle for hire licenses
suspended or revoked for failing inspection, or being found unclean, not of good appearance or
not well painted may be reinstated by the City Manager or designee upon submission of an
affidavit in a form provided by the City, stating under penalty of perjury that the vehicle has been
removed from service, that the vehicle identification numbers and names required to be painted
on the vehicle have been permanently rendered no longer visible, and the licensee will not use
the vehicle for hire until such time as the vehicle is again certified as meeting the requirements of
this Chapter. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-73)
16. OCCASIONAL USE LICENSE. Vehicles used for hire only occasionally for
special events such as weddings, anniversaries, parties, celebrations, school dances, or similar
events may be issued an occasional use license. No occasional use license shall be issued unless
an appointment has been made by a patron in advance for the special event for which the license
is sought. Each special use shall require a separate license. Application shall be made on forms
provided by the City. Approval by the City shall be expedited. Occasional use shall mean not
more than ten (10) special events per calendar year. An occasional use license shall authorize
use of the licensed vehicle only during the special event, including a reasonable time before the
event begins and after the event ends, and shall specify the special event for which the license is
issued. The carrying of passengers for any use other than described in the occasional use license
is prohibited. The fee for an occasional use vehicle for hire license shall be Twenty-Five Dollars
($25.00). The annual fee for an occasional use vehicle for hire driver’s license shall be Ten
Dollars ($10.00). Application for each shall be made on forms approved by the City. All
requirements of this Chapter shall be applicable to occasional use licenses, except the provisions
requiring vehicle marking and posting the schedule of rates within the vehicle shall not apply to
vehicles licensed under this section. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-73)
17. NAME OF OWNER. Every vehicle for hire licensed under the provisions of this
Chapter except those licensed as occasional use vehicles for hire shall have the name of the
owner thereof plainly painted in letters at least four (4) inches in height on the center of the main
panel of each front or rear door of said vehicle.
18. REGISTER OF NAMES. The City shall keep a register of the name of each person
owning or operating any vehicle or vehicles for hire licensed hereunder, together with the vehicle
for hire license number, vehicle registration number, vehicle make, model, year and color, the
name and address of the insurer or bonding company, the date of expiration of such insurance or
bond, and of all renewals, suspensions and revocations of the license. This record shall be open
to the inspection of the public at all reasonable times.
19. TAXIMETERS.
A. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle for hire that is not used as a taxicab to have a
taximeter installed in said vehicle.
B.. Every vehicle for hire operated as a taxicab on the streets of the City shall be licensed
per the requirements of this Chapter, and shall have installed therein an operating taximeter
which has been inspected and found to be accurate and in compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter. A taximeter shall be deemed to be accurate if the distance registered thereby is within
5% of the measured test distance traveled by said taxicab.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to owner, operate or drive a taxicab in the City
unless the fare to be charged is determined by an approved taximeter, and no other or different
fare shall be charged to passengers than is recorded on the reading face of said taximeter for the
trip except as herein otherwise provided.
D. No taximeter shall be used between sunset and sunrise unless the face thereof shall be
illuminated by a suitable light so arranged as to throw a continuous, steady light thereon, and no
person shall use or permit to be used or drive for hire a taxicab equipped with a taximeter the
case of which shall be unsealed, and which does not have its cover and gear intact.
E. No driver of a taxicab equipped with a taximeter while carrying passengers or under
employment shall display the signal affixed to such taximeter in such position as to denote that
such vehicle is not employed, or in such position as to denote that such vehicle is employed at a
rate of fare greater than that to which it is entitled.
F. The Chief of Police or his authorized agent may check each taximeter for accuracy.
20. TAXICABS – TELEPHONE AND 24-HOUR SERVICE. Every vehicle for hire
licensee operating a taxicab must maintain a working telephone by which to receive calls for taxi
service. The number shall be listed in the telephone directory under the operator’s business
name. The vehicle for hire licensee shall provide twenty-four (24) hour taxicab service and at no
time shall there be less than one (1) taxicab in operation.
21. REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF VEHICLE FOR HIRE DRIVER’S
LICENSE.
A. Vehicle for Hire driver’s licenses may be revoked or suspended by the City Manager
or his designee following reasonable notice and hearing, for making charges in excess of those
provided by this Chapter, for violating any ordinances of the City of Decatur, or of any of the
traffic or criminal laws of the State of Illinois, or for operating a vehicle for hire while there is, in
the driver’s blood, breath or urine, any amount of a drug, substance or compound resulting from
the consumption of cannabis or a controlled substance (as defined in the Illinois Controlled
Substance Act, as amended); any amount of alcohol; or any amount of any drug, substance or
compound, whether taken pursuant to direction of a licensed physician, or not, provided, that in
the case of any drug, substance or compound other than controlled substances, cannabis or
alcohol, there is evidence the driver is impaired in his or her ability to safely operate a motor
vehicle. Such driver’s licenses may also be suspended or revoked following reasonable notice
and hearing, for any conduct involving moral turpitude or for violations of any of the provisions
of this Chapter.
B. Each licensed vehicle for hire driver shall, within thirty (30) days of the entry of any
judgment of conviction, report the fact of said conviction to the City of Decatur. The City
Manager, or his designee, is authorized to suspend or revoke the vehicle for hire driver’s license
of any driver who fails to so report.
C. Each licensed vehicle for hire driver shall be deemed to have given his or her consent
to chemical testing of his or her breath, blood or urine, upon the request of a police officer, made
upon reasonable, articulable suspicion that said driver may be impaired as a result of having,
within his or her system, any amount of alcohol or drugs. The City Manager, or his designee, is
authorized to suspend or revoke the vehicle for hire driver’s license of any person who fails to
submit to the request of a Police Officer, made upon reasonable, articulable suspicion that said
driver may be impaired due to the effects of any amount of alcohol or drugs.
D. For every suspension or revocation of a vehicle for hire driver’s license, the City
Manager, or his designee, shall issue a written notice, which shall be mailed via first class mail to
the last known address of both the driver and the owner, stating briefly the basis for the
suspension or revocation, the effective date of the suspension or revocation, and affording the
driver’s licensee an opportunity to appear and be heard. An order of suspension or revocation
entered pursuant to this Chapter shall be a final administrative decision for purposes of appeal
under the Administrative Review Act. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-73)
22. REVOCATON OR SUSPENSION OF VEHICLE FOR HIRE LICENSES.
The City Manager or his/her designee may suspend or revoke vehicle for hire license privileges
for violation or any provision of this Chapter or any State or Federal regulation or law by either
an owner or operator of a vehicle for hire. For every suspension or revocation of a vehicle for
hire license, the City Manager or his/her designee shall issue a written notice, which shall be
mailed via first class mail to the last known address of the owner, stating briefly the basis for the
suspension or revocation, the effective date of the suspension or revocation, the duration of the
suspension or revocation, and affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and be heard. An
order of suspension or revocation entered pursuant to this Chapter shall be a final administrative
decision for purposes of appeal under the Administrative Review Act. (Amended, Ordinance
2012-73)
23. SCHEDULE OF RATES. Each person, firm or corporation owning, operating or
controlling a vehicle for hire service in the City shall before making any charge for service file a
schedule of rates with the City to be kept on file and available for public inspection. Said
schedule or rates shall also be conspicuously posted in the passenger area of the vehicle so as to
be readily visible to any passenger. Said rates shall be uniform as to class of service. No charge
for service shall be made by any said person, firm or corporation, or any agent or employee
thereof in excess of the rate shown for that service on the schedule so filed with the City. No
such person, firm or corporation, agent or employee shall discriminate between persons or
entities in making charges for service. No new, modified or amended rate shall become
effective, or any charge be made based thereon, unless or until a schedule setting forth the same
has been on file with the City for ten (10) days.
24. TRIP LOGS.
A. Each operator shall maintain a record of the daily activity of the vehicle for hire and
driver, on forms provided by the City. The daily activity record shall include the following
information:
(1) Day, month, year and time of day;
(2) Driver’s name and badge number;
(3) Number of vehicle for hire and name of company;
(4) Beginning mileage of each fare;
(5) Mileage at conclusion of each fare;
(6) Address or location of commencement and conclusion of each fare;
(7) Amount charged to each passenger;
(8) Other information as may be required by the City.
B. Daily activity records shall be kept maintained intact at the vehicle for hire licensee’s
principal place of business where they shall be provided upon request to police officers or
representatives of the City. Every vehicle for hire licensee shall maintain original daily activity
records for each licensed vehicle for the entire period of the license and for not less than 90 days
following the end of each license year.
25. USE OF VEHICLE FOR HIRE FOR UNLAWFUL ACT. It shall be unlawful
for any licensed operator or driver of any vehicle to misrepresent the name of his employer, or to
knowingly receive or transport any person, or persons, who intend to commit any unlawful act in
said vehicle during the trip or at the termination thereof, whether within said vehicle or not, and
it shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or procure or to aid, or to assist in soliciting, or
procuring, any person to ride in any vehicle hereunder, with intent to commit any unlawful act
therein during the trip or at the termination thereof, and upon conviction thereof, such driver
shall have his vehicle for hire license revoked in addition to any fine imposed. The vehicle for
hire shall not be used for the personal use of the operator or driver.
26. DRIVER LEAVING VEHICLE. The driver of any vehicle for hire shall remain
upon the driver’s seat, or inside his vehicle, or stand beside the vehicle at all times, while such
vehicle is standing, but nothing in this section shall prohibit the driver from leaving his position
in the car for such time as may be necessary to assist passengers into or out of his vehicle.
Loitering or stand in the lobbies or entrances of buildings or businesses is prohibited.
27. SEEKING PATRONS. No owner of a vehicle for hire, operator or other employee
or agent, shall solicit patronage of persons assembled at the termini of any common carrier, nor
at intermediate points along any established route of such carrier, when such persons have so
assembled for the purpose of using the service of such common carrier, nor shall they make a
practice of following the established routes of such common carriers. This rule is not intended to
prohibit or interfere with response to any call for service made by telephone or by signal from a
pedestrian, or from accepting patronage of debarking passengers of any such common carrier.
28. HORNS. Unnecessary, loud, or continuous blowing of the horn is prohibited.
29. CITY DEBT. No vehicle for hire license or vehicle for hire driver’s license shall be
issued to any person, firm, partnership, or corporation which owes any delinquent debt to the
City of Decatur.
30. PENALTY.
A. Any owner or driver of a motor vehicle not licensed as a vehicle for hire in
accordance with the provisions hereof, or where the license has been suspended or revoked, who
operates said vehicle on the streets or public ways of the City for the purpose of carrying persons
for hire or reward, or who solicits for hire passengers on the streets or public ways, shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) and not more than One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense, and each day on which a violation occurs or
continues shall be considered as a separate offense.
B. Any persons not having been duly licensed as a vehicle for hire driver, or any person
whose license as such driver has been suspended or revoked, and who, during the time of such
suspension or revocation, drives a vehicle for hire on the streets of the City shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) and not more than One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense, and each day on which a violation occurs or
continues shall be considered a separate offense.
C. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this
Chapter for which no fine is provided in the foregoing subsections A and B, shall, be fined not
less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00)
for each offense, and each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall be considered as a
separate offense.
31. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage
and approval. Currently valid licenses issued under former Chapters 60 or 61 of the City Code
of the City of Decatur shall remain valid as issued for the remaining term of the license term,
subject to the procedural revisions enacted herein.
CHAPTER 61
LIVERY VEHICLES
REPEALED 9/17/2012
Ordinance 2012-69
CHAPTER 62
RAFFLES
1. DEFINITIONS. Whenever used in this Chapter, the word "Act" shall mean "An Act
to provide for licensing and regulating certain games of chance and amending certain Acts herein
named", Public Act 81-1365, as amended by Public Act 101-109. Words and phrases used
herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Act, unless the context clearly indicates
some other meaning is intended. The word "organization" shall be construed to include an
auxiliary or affiliate of a licensee. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2019-115, August 19, 2019)
2. ISSUANCE OF LICENSES. The Finance Department shall have the authority to
issue licenses for raffles, as defined in the Act, subject to the limitations stated in Section 3
hereof. (AMENDED, Ordinance No. 89-42, May 1, 1989)
3. APPLICATION FOR LICENSE. Licenses for raffles shall be issued only to bona
fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational, veteran's or other bona fide notfor-
profit organizations which are located within the corporate limits of the City of Decatur and
which operate without profit to their members and which have been in existence continuously for
a period of five years immediately before applying for such license and have during said period
been engaged in carrying out their objects, or to a non-profit fundraising organization that the
City Manager determines is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an
identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of
an illness, disability, accident or disaster or to any law enforcement agencies and Statewide
associations that represent law enforcement officials. Application shall be made in writing, no
Revised 08/2019
Chapter 62
fewer than ten days before the intended sale of raffle chances, on forms provided by the Finance
Department. Each application shall contain the name and address of the applicant, the area in
which winning chances in the raffle will be determined, the time period during which raffle
chances will be sold or issued, the time and manner and location of determining the winning
chances, and such other information as the Department may require. Each application must
contain a sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit character of the applicant, signed by its
presiding officer and secretary. (AMENDED, Ordinance No. 89-42, May 1, 1989) (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2019-115, August 19, 2019)
4. FEE. Each raffle, other than those authorized by an annual license, shall be
authorized by a separate license. Annual licenses may be issued for a specified number of raffles
to be conducted during a specified period not to exceed one year. The license fee, for other
than annual licenses, payment of which shall accompany the application, shall be $25.00 for the
first $1,000 of prize value or part thereof and $10.00 for each additional $1,000 of prize value up
to $10,000 with a maximum fee of $115.00. The fee for an annual license shall be $115.00.
Licenses shall be valid for the duration of the licensed contest or contests. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2019-115, August 19, 2019)
5. RAFFLE TICKETS. Each raffle ticket, chance or other raffle token, for other than
annual licenses, shall state on its face, the name and address of the licensee, the date or dates of
the drawing, and the prize or prizes to be awarded; provided, however, that this requirement shall
not apply to any raffle in which prizes in aggregate value under $50.00 are awarded. Such
tickets, chances or other tokens sold under the authority of an annual license shall state the name
and address of the licensee on the faces thereof. No such ticket, chance or token, other than for
Chapter 62
an annual license, shall be sold or issued more than 364 days before the determination of the
winning chance or chances.
6. INELIGIBILITY. The following are ineligible for any license under this Chapter:
(a) any person whose felony conviction will impair the person’s ability to engage
in the licensed position;
(b) any person who is or has been a professional gambler or professional
gambling promoter;
(c) any person who is not of good moral character;
(d) any organization in which a person defined in (a), (b) or (c) above has a
proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which such a person is active or
employed;
(e) any organization in which a person defined in (a), (b) or (c) above is an
officer, director, or employee, whether compensated or not; and
(f) any organization in which a person defined in (a), (b) or (c) above is to
participate in the management or operation of a raffle as defined in this Chapter.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2019-115, August 19, 2019)
7. CONDUCT OF RAFFLES. The conducting of raffles is subject to the following
restrictions:
(a) The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the
lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct the raffle.
(b) No person except a bona fide director, officer, employee, or member of the
sponsoring organization may manage or participate in the management of the
raffle.
Chapter 62
(c) No person may receive any remuneration or profit for managing or
participating in the management of the raffle. Sponsoring organizations may
contract with third parties who, acting at the direction of and under the
supervision of the sponsoring organization, provide bona fide services to the
sponsoring organization in connection with the operation of a raffle and may pay
reasonable compensation for such services. Services may include:
(1) Advertising, marketing and promotion
(2) Legal
(3) Procurement of goods, prizes, wares and merchandise for the purpose
of operating the raffle
(4) Rent, if the premises upon which the raffle will be held is rented. A
licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning chance or
chances provided that the rent is not determined as a percentage of receipts
or profits from the raffle.
(5) Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping
(6) Website hosting
(7) Mailing and delivery
(8) Banking and payment processing
(9) Other services related to the operation of the raffle
(d) Raffle chances may be sold throughout the State of Illinois; however, winning
chances may be determined only at those locations specified on the license for a
raffle.
Chapter 62
(e) A person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances only with the permission of a parent or legal
guardian and may be within the area where winning chances in a raffle are being
determined only when accompanied by his parent or legal guardian.
(f) All management, operation, and conduct of raffles shall be under the
supervision of a single manager designated by the organization. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2019-115, August 19, 2019)
8. RECORDS. Each licensee shall keep the following records and preserve such for
three (3) years and shall make such records available for public inspection at reasonable times
and places:
(a) Records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances in a raffle are determined. All
deductions from gross receipts for such shall be documented with receipts or other
records indicating the amount, a description of the purchased items or service or
other reason for the deduction, and the recipient. The distribution of net proceeds
shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and date of payment.
(b) Gross receipts shall be segregated from other revenues of the organization,
including bingo gross receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same
organization and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have
separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same
person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
Chapter 62
(c) Each licensee shall report promptly after the conclusion of each raffle to its
membership or, if the organization does not have members, to its governing board
and to the City Finance Department its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds
from the raffle, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this
Section. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2019-115, August 19, 2019)
9. PRIZES. The maximum cash prize awarded in any raffle shall be $100,000; the
maximum retail value of a non-cash prize awarded in any raffle shall be $200,000. The
aggregate value of all prizes awarded in any raffle shall not exceed $300,000. The maximum fee
for any chance shall be $1,000.00; all such fees shall be paid in currency or by check.
10. RULES AND REGULATIONS. The City Manager is authorized and directed to
cause to be promulgated rules and regulations not inconsistent with this Chapter or the Act
governing the conduct of raffles hereunder.
11. BOND. The amount of the surety bond in favor of the organization required by the
Act shall be an amount equal to double the total value of the prize or prizes to be awarded. The
bond shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to the City not less than thirty (30) days
prior to its cancellation. (AMENDED, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009) (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2019-115, August 19, 2019)
CHAPTER 63
MOBILE HOME PARKS
1. DEFINITIONS. As used herein, unless a different meaning appears clearly from the
context, the following words or phrases shall have the meanings provided in this section:
(a) ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE - A subordinate building located on the same lot
or tract of ground as the main structure, the use of which is naturally and normally incidental to
that of the dominant use of the main structure or land. An accessory use is a use which is
naturally and normally incidental to the main use of the premises;
(b) CONSTRUCTION FIELD OFFICE - A mobile home used as an on-site, temporary
office for the supervisors of a construction project;
(c) HABITATION, PERMANENT - Residence for a period of sixty consecutive days or
more;
(d) HABITATION, TEMPORARY - Residence for a period of less than sixty
consecutive days;
(e) MOBILE HOME - A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight
feet or more in width and thirty-two feet or more in length, and which is built on a permanent
chassis and is designed to be used as a dwelling unit, and including the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning and electrical systems contained therein;
(f) MOBILE HOME LOT - A parcel of land within a mobile home park designed for the
exclusive use of the occupants of the mobile home placed on the lot;
Revised 02/2017
Chapter 63
(g) MOBILE HOME PARK - A parcel or tract of land which has been approved and
developed for the placement of one or more mobile homes, either free of charge or for revenue
purposes, including all accessory buildings, structures, utilities, facilities, or uses;
(h) MOBILE HOME SALES LOT - A tract of land used for the storage, display and
sale of mobile homes;
(i) MOBILE HOME SALES OFFICE - A mobile home used as a sales office by a
mobile home dealer;
(j) MOBILE HOME STAND - The portion of a mobile home lot which is designed and
reserved for the placement of a mobile home;
(k) OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE - An area of not less than 180 square feet
permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one motor vehicle;
(l) YARD, FRONT - The minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and
the main structure, or attachment thereto, other than an uncovered porch or steps;
(m) YARD, REAR - The minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the
main structure or attachment thereto, other than an uncovered porch or steps;
(n) YARD, SIDE - The minimum horizontal distance between the side lot line and the
main structure or attachment thereto, other than an uncovered porch or steps.
2. MOBILE HOME PLACEMENT. No mobile home shall be located, placed,
maintained, inhabited or occupied within the City other than in a mobile home park licensed
under the provisions hereof or except as otherwise provided herein.
3. SALES OFFICE. A mobile home sales office may be placed on a mobile home sales
lot so long as it is not used, temporarily or otherwise, as a residence or habitation.
4. SALES LOTS. Uninhabited, unoccupied mobile homes may be parked or stored in
mobile home sales lots.
5. CONSTRUCTION FIELD OFFICE. A construction field office may be
temporarily placed at a construction site while such project is in progress and may include
facilities for night watchmen, but the same shall not be used, temporarily or otherwise, as a
residence or habitation and shall be removed upon completion of construction.
6. LICENSE REQUIRED. No person, firm or corporation shall establish, maintain,
conduct or operate a mobile home park within the corporate limits of the City of Decatur without
first obtaining a license therefor issued by the City Manager.
7. TERM OF LICENSE. Mobile home park licenses issued under the provisions
hereof shall expire on the 31st day of December of the year for which the same are issued.
8. APPLICATION FOR LICENSE. Application for an original license shall be made
to the Finance Department and shall consist of the following:
(a) The name and address of the applicant or applicants, and the names and addresses of
all partners, if the applicant is a partnership, and the names and addresses of all officers and
directors, if the applicant is a corporation;
(b) The legal description and common address, if any, of the tract of land upon which it
is proposed to operate and maintain a mobile home park;
(c) As-built plans of the proposed mobile home park in conformance with the
requirements of Section 17 hereof as certified by a Registered Professional Engineer and the
Building Inspections Manager, together with copies of the site plan and the site improvement
bond submitted in conformance with the provisions of Section 13 hereof for those portions of
said park, if any, remaining unimproved or uncompleted at the time of application.
Chapter 63
(d) The annual license fee required by the provisions hereof;
(e) An affidavit of the applicant or applicants, as the case may be, as to the truth of the
matters contained in the application. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39; Ordinance No. 89-42)
9. RENEWAL OR TRANSFER. Application for a renewal or a transfer of a license
shall be made to the Finance Department and shall consist of that which is required under
Sections 8 (a), (b), (d) and (e) hereof, together with a certification by the Building Inspections
Manager that said mobile home park is in conformance with the provisions of Section 17 hereof,
provided that an application for a transfer of license shall be accompanied by the license transfer
fee required by the provisions hereof and not the annual license fee.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 89-42, May 1, 1989)
10. LICENSE FEE. The annual fee for a mobile home park license shall be Four
Hundred Fifty Dollars ($450.00). The license transfer fee for a mobile home park license shall
be Fifty Dollars ($50.00).
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2016-88, November 21, 2016)
11. REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE. The City Manager may
suspend or revoke a mobile home park license for failure to comply with the rules and
regulations established herein or published or promulgated pursuant to the authority granted
herein or any other applicable codes or ordinances of the City of Decatur. Such suspension or
revocation may take place only after the licensee has been given written notice warning of
possible suspension or revocation and a hearing, if requested by the licensee, before the City
Manager, or his designee. Such request for a hearing must be made within five days of receipt of
such written notice. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-56, June 20, 2005)
12. COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER. It shall be unlawful for a licensee to own,
operate or maintain a mobile home park in violation of the rules, regulations and requirements
established by this Chapter.
13. SITE PLAN REQUIRED. No person, firm or corporation shall lay out, establish,
develop, improve, construct, substantially alter, extend or enlarge a mobile home park in the City
of Decatur, or within one and one-half miles of the corporate limits thereof, unless and until a
site plan of said mobile home park has been approved by the Public Works Director and the
Director of the Economic and Community Development Department and a site development
bond in conformance with the provisions of the Building Ordinance has been furnished to the
City.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-63, July 17, 2000)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-11, March 13, 2000)
14. REVIEWING FEE. Three copies of all mobile home park site plans required by
the provisions hereof shall be submitted to the Economic and Community Development
Department together with a reviewing fee of $150.00.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-11, March 13, 2000)
15. SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS. Mobile home park site plans shall be in such
scale, detail and format as may reasonably be required by the Public Works Director and the
Director of the Economic and Community Development Department to enable such departments
to administer the provisions hereof, and at a minimum shall show the layout, location,
relationship, grades, contours and dimensions of all property lines, lots, buildings, streets,
Chapter 63
sidewalks, utilities, drains, surface water drainage, parking facilities, drives, easements, fire
hydrants, area lighting, and other improvements and structures all in conformance as near as may
be with those provisions of similar nature of the Subdivision Ordinance.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-63, July 17, 2000)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-11, March 13, 2000)
16. APPROVAL OF SITE PLAN. The approval of the mobile home park site plan and
the acceptance by the City of the site development bond as required herein shall constitute
authority to layout, establish, develop, improve, construct, substantially alter, extend or enlarge
such mobile home park in accordance with the site plan thereof approved; however, no mobile
home may be placed on any lot within said park, or if developed in phases on any lot within any
phases thereof, until as-built plans certified by a Registered Professional Engineer have been
filed with the Economic and Community Development Department and a Certificate of
Occupancy obtained therefrom. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03; Ordinance No. 2000-11)
17. MINIMUM STANDARDS. All mobile home parks located within the City of
Decatur, and all site plans of mobile home parks required by the provisions hereof, shall meet the
minimum standards of design and construction imposed by the provisions of Sections 18 through
36 hereof.
18. ACREAGE. A mobile home park site shall contain ten or more acres.
19. DISTANCE FROM PERIMETER LINE. No mobile home shall be placed within
twenty-five feet of any perimeter line of a mobile home park site.
20. RECREATIONAL AREA. Not less than 5 percent of the total site area of a mobile
home park shall be developed for outdoor recreational purposes either as a single unit or by
division into separate units of not less than 2,500 square feet.
21. SIZE OF LOTS. Mobile home lots shall contain not less than 3,600 square feet and
be not less than forty feet in width and ninety feet in depth.
22. MINIMUM YARDS. Mobile homes shall be placed on mobile home lots so as to
provide a minimum front yard of fifteen feet and minimum rear and side yards of eight feet.
23. PARKING SPACES. Not less than two paved off-street parking spaces shall be
provided and maintained on each mobile home lot.
24. CENTRAL SEWER AND WATER SYSTEMS. Central sewer and water systems
constructed and maintained to City standards and specifications for City water mains and sewer
mains shall be provided by mobile home parks, and said system shall be connected to the City
system if such mobile home park is within the corporate limits of the City.
25. INDIVIDUAL SEWER AND WATER SERVICES. Each mobile home located in
a mobile home park shall be connected to the central sewer and water system of said park
through individual services for each mobile home lot.
26. SEWER SERVICE CONSTRUCTION. Sewer service in mobile home parks shall
be so constructed so as to be free from freezing and so as to be conveniently closed or plugged
when not connected to a mobile home and shall be so closed or plugged when not so connected.
27. WATER SERVICE CONSTRUCTION. Water services in mobile home parks
shall be so constructed as to be free from freezing and shall have an individual shut-off valve so
located and constructed as to be conveniently operable and so as not to permit siphoning of
surface water or other drainage or contaminant into the water service or system.
Chapter 63
28. ELECTRICITY. Each mobile home lot shall be provided with electricity.
29. DRAINAGE. All mobile home park sites shall be drained of surface water by
installation of systems of drains and drainways that accord with customarily accepted good
engineering drainage practices.
30. ACCESS. Each mobile home lot shall abut and have direct access to an internal
mobile home park street and no such lot shall abut or have direct access to a public or other street
or way external or peripheral to said park.
31. INTERNAL STREETS. Internal mobile home park streets shall be paved and
maintained to a width of twenty-eight feet with such geometrics as to permit convenient travel
thereon of fire suppression equipment.
32. SIDEWALKS. A sidewalk shall be constructed and maintained on at least one side
of every street in a mobile home park.
33. CUL-DE-SACS. Cul-de-sac streets in mobile home parks shall not exceed 250 feet
in length and shall have a minimum turn around radius of forty feet.
34. FIRE HYDRANTS. Mobile home parks shall provide fire hydrants in compliance
with City standards and specifications and maintained in good working order at locations
directed by the Fire Chief.
35. MOBILE HOME STANDS.
A. Mobile home stands shall be located, constructed and maintained in such manner that
placement and removal of a mobile home is conveniently practical and shall be so graded and
drained that surface water does not collect or stand under any mobile home thereon.
B. Mobile home stands shall be constructed of portland cement concrete not less than
five inches thick and so that when properly located and blocked each longitudinal frame member
for the entire length thereto is supported by a slab or runway not less than two feet wide.
36. TIEDOWN ANCHORS. Each mobile home stand shall be provided with tiedown
anchors which at a minimum comply with the promulgated rules and regulations of the Illinois
Department of Public Health under The Illinois Mobile Home Tiedown Act.
37. REGISTER OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS. Mobile home park licensees
under the provisions hereof shall maintain a register listing both current owners and occupants of
all mobile homes within such park and all owners and occupants for any mobile home lot within
such park for the three years last past. Such register shall be made available to officers or agents
of the City upon request.
38. EXEMPTION. Mobile home parks lawfully in existence and operation on July 1,
1981 are hereby exempted from the provisions of Section 17 hereof, provided that such mobile
home parks shall provide as-built plans certified by a Registered Professional Engineer to the
City Clerk as part of the application for original license in lieu of Section 8 (c) hereof, and
further provided that any extensions, expansions, improvements or substantial alterations of such
existing mobile home parks shall comply fully with all of the provisions of this Chapter.
39. RULES AND REGULATIONS. The City Manager is hereby authorized to cause
to be established, promulgated, published and enforced such reasonable rules, regulations, and
procedures, not in conflict with the provisions hereof, as may to said officer appear to be
necessary or convenient to administer the provisions of this Chapter and to carry out the purpose
and intent hereof.
Chapter 63
40. SEVERABILITY. The provisions hereof are and shall be construed to be severable
and invalidity of any section or provisions of this Chapter shall not invalidate other sections or
provisions hereof.
41. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of
this Chapter shall be fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense and each day a violation occurs or continues shall be
considered a separate offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-72, October 31, 2011)
42. OTHER REMEDIES. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not
preclude the institution of appropriate actions to prevent or abate any unlawful establishment,
operation or enlargement of any mobile home park.
CHAPTER 64
WATER SERVICE
1. WATER FURNISHED. Water service shall be furnished by the City only in
compliance with, and subject to, the provisions of this Chapter and other applicable provisions
and ordinances of the City and rules, regulations, and directives authorized thereby, and then
only upon application for the same made to the Public Works Department by the owner, or the
duly authorized agent of the owner, of the premises to be served, upon forms furnished by the
City. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-112)
2. OWNER RESPONSIBLE. The owner of the premises to be served shall be
responsible for the payment of all charges for water service thereto and said owners, and the
person or entity in possession of the premises if other than the owner, severally and jointly, shall
accept and abide by all of the provisions of this Code, or of other ordinances, rules, regulations,
and directives of the City applicable to water service. The owner shall also meet all applicable
requirements of the State of Illinois including but not limited to those contained in the EPA
Rules for Public Water Supplies (Title 35 of the Illinois Administrative Code Part 651 through
654) and the Illinois Plumbing Code (Title 77 of the Illinois Administrative Code Part 890).
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-112, December 19, 2005)
3. LIABILITY OF CITY. The City shall not be liable for or on account of the
interruption, for any reason whatsoever, of water service to any water user or other person or
entity, and the officers or employees of the City shall not be liable for or on account of the
interruption, for any reason whatsoever, of water service to any such user or other person or
entity, except for the intentional or willful misconduct of such officer or such employee.
Revised 02/2017
Chapter 64
4. WATER METERS. Water furnished from the water system of the City shall be
measured by meters tested and approved by the Public Works Department and furnished by the
water user, which Department shall repair or replace all meters in services of one inch or smaller.
Meters in services larger than one inch shall be tested, repaired or replaced in accordance with
rules and regulations promulgated by the City Manager. Said rules may provide for the
frequency of testing or inspection and the manner thereof; the cost or expense of or charges for
testing, inspection, repair or replacement and the allocation thereof, the place of such operations
and the responsibility for production of meters thereat, or of testing or repair equipment at meter
sites; the limitation of the makes of meters to specific manufacturers which may be placed in
service; the establishment of reasonable time limits for, and procedures to, carry out the
mechanics of such testing, inspection, repair and replacement and the administration thereof.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-08, February 6, 2017) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-20, April
1, 2013) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-63, July 17, 2000) (Amended, Ordinance No. 90-35,
March 19, 1990)
5. WATER SERVICE LINE. A water service line shall consist of the necessary tap,
pipe, stop boxes, test plugs, stop cocks, hydrants, bypasses, meters, fixtures and appurtenances
between the City water main and the discharge side of the water meter. Unmetered service lines
for fire protection purposes shall be considered water service lines for the entire length thereof.
The water service line shall be originally supplied by the owner of the property served thereby.
The City shall maintain and keep in repair residential water service lines from the City main to
the discharge side of the curb stop. The owner of the property served thereby shall maintain and
keep in repair residential service lines from the discharge side of the curb stop to the intake side
of the water meter, and keep in repair unmetered services lines, commercial service lines and
Chapter 64
industrial service lines from the tap at the City mains to the discharge side of the water meter,
subject to the other provisions of this Chapter. If repairs to a water service line become
necessary in the judgment of City personnel, the City may cause such repairs to be made, and if
the same would otherwise be the responsibility of said owner of the property, the cost thereof
may be added to the water bill for that service. Not more than one lot or parcel of ground shall
be served by each service line, except as provided elsewhere herein, and whenever a lot or parcel
of ground being served by a service line is divided into separate ownership, water service after
such division shall be provided by a separate service line for each of the respective parts thereof.
Where two or more single-family residence buildings or two-family residence buildings having
water service of the residential classification are located on one lot or parcel of ground, a
separate water service line shall be provided for each such building whether the same are owned
by one person or entity or otherwise. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-20, April 1, 2013)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-112, December 19, 2005) (Amended, Ordinance No. 90-12,
January 29, 1990)
6. COMMERCIAL SERVICE LINE. Water service classified as commercial service
will be supplied through a single service line to each building situated on one lot or parcel of
ground or on contiguous lots or parcels of ground under single ownership and the water
furnished thereto will be measured by a single meter for each service line. The property owner
may request in writing to the Public Works Director that more than one service line or more than
one meter be utilized to furnish the water service in this section. The Director shall approve or
deny such requests in writing to the property owner prior to service line installation. The
intervening of a street, alley, or public easement or way between such lots or parcels of ground
under single ownership shall be ignored in determining the contiguity thereof. In the event any
Chapter 64
part of such lot or parcel, or such contiguous lots or parcels, is separated into more than one
ownership, the respective separate parcels shall thereafter be served by separate service lines and
meters. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-08, February 6, 2017) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-
112, December 19, 2005) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-63, July 17, 2000) (Amended,
Ordinance No. 90-35, March 19, 1990)
7. WATER METER INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE. All existing and
newly installed water meters shall be located or relocated, at the expense of the owner of the
premises served, so as, in the determination of the Public Works Director, to control the entire
supply of water to the premises and in a clean, dry safe place so that the meter or meters not be
subject to great temperature variance and be properly protected from freezing and other hazards,
and be easily accessible for installation, maintenance, reading, and replacement. All meters shall
at the time of installation be equipped with a device, approved by said Director, which will
permit said meter to be read without entry into the building or other enclosure wherein the meter
is located, said device being known as a communication module. After original installation, said
Department shall test, inspect, repair, or replace water meters and communication modules as
needed. Said Department may charge the owner of the premises served for service and/or
replacement costs for water meters and accessories that are damaged due to improper protection
from freezing and other hazards by said owner. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-08, February 6,
2017) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-20, April 1, 2013) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-112,
December 19, 2005) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-63, July 17, 2000) (Amended, Ordinance
No. 90-35, March 19, 1990)
8. ESTIMATED BILLING. If at any time a meter shall fail to accurately measure and
register the amount of water passing through the same, or the meter is not read by the City due to
Chapter 64
labor shortage, equipment failure, inclement weather, or other unforeseen circumstances, the
quantity of water used may be estimated as an amount equal to the amount properly and correctly
registered during a previous reading period determined by the Water Customer Service Office to
be a period of substantially similar water usage. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-112)
9. CLASSIFICATION OF WATER SERVICES. Water services from the water
system of the City are hereby classified as residential monthly services, commercial monthly
services, and industrial monthly services. The term "monthly" as used in this Chapter, unless
some other meaning is clearly intended from the context in which the same is used, means a
period of twenty-eight, twenty-nine, thirty, or thirty-one days, as the case may be, whether the
same commences or ends on the first day of a calendar month or otherwise.
Water services from said system to a single family residence or a two-family residence
are residential services. Water services to which more than one million (1,000,000) gallons or
133,680.55 cubic feet per day are furnished, averaged over the one year period immediately
preceding the effective billing date, are industrial services. Except as otherwise provided herein,
all other services are commercial services. Classifications shall be assigned at the determination
of the Public Works Director. If there is insufficient actual measurement of water furnished to
determine the average use as aforesaid, classification pending determination based on actual use,
may be made on the basis of reasonable estimate. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-08, February
6, 2017) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-20, April 1, 2013) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-
112, December 19, 2005) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-63, July 17, 2000) (Amended,
Ordinance No. 98-55, August 31, 1998) (Amended, Ordinance No. 90-35, March 19, 1990)
10. WATER CHARGES. The water charges shall be based upon the classification of
service, the meter size and the quantity of water furnished monthly as follows:
Chapter 64
METER CHARGE 5/1/13 5/1/14 5/1/15
RESIDENTIAL SERVICE:
Meter Size Monthly – Per Meter
All $2.27 $2.95 $3.69
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL SERVICE:
Meter Size Monthly – Per Meter
5/8” - 3/4" $ 6.14 $ 7.98 $ 9.98
1" - 1 ¼” - 1 ½” 22.69 29.50 36.88
2" - 3" - 4" 80.07 104.09 130.11
6" - 7" - 8" - 10" - 12" 373.68 485.78 607.23
14" - 16" - 18" 1,534.75 1,995.18 2,493.98
QUANTITY CHARGE 5/1/13 5/1/14 5/1/15
RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICE:
Cubic Feet Monthly Charge Per 100 Cubic Feet
First 700 $ 2.81 $ 3.65 $ 4.56
Next 1,500 2.55 3.32 4.15
Next 12,900 2.28 2.96 3.70
Next 18,300 1.82 2.37 2.96
Next 133,300 1.43 1.86 2.33
Next 833,300 1.35 1.76 2.20
Next 1,000,000 1.13 1.47 1.84
All Over 2,000,000 .80 1.04 1.30
INDUSTRIAL SERVICE:
Cubic Feet Monthly Charge Per 100 Cubic Feet
First 700 $ 4.31 $ 5.60 $ 7.00
Next 1,500 3.90 5.07 6.34
Next 12,900 3.47 4.51 5.64
Next 18,300 2.79 3.63 4.54
Next 133,300 2.21 2.87 3.59
Next 833,300 2.05 2.67 3.34
Next 1,000,000 1.73 2.25 2.81
All Over 2,000,000 1.23 1.60 2.00
The monthly charge shall consist of the meter charge plus the quantity charge.
Chapter 64
The meter charge shall accrue for each monthly period during which water service is
available and has not been shut off without regard to whether water service is furnished through
the same.
Effective May 1, 2016, and continuing annually on May 1 thereafter, all water meter,
water quantity, fire hydrant and water station charges contained in this Chapter will increase by
2.5 percent or by the annual percentage change of the U.S. Department of Labor Midwest Urban
Consumer Price Index for each corresponding May 1 to April 30 time period, whichever is
greater. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-33, April 15, 2013) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-
20, April 1, 2013) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-42, June 16, 2008) (Amended, Ordinance No.
2005-112, December 19, 2005) (Amended, Ordinance No. 98-55, August 31, 1998) (Amended,
Ordinance No. 93-28, May 17, 1993) (Amended, Ordinance No. 89-05, January 17, 1989)
11. NOT FOR PROFIT INSTITUTIONS. Water service to public and semi-public
entities, organizations and institutions not operated for profit including but not limited to
religious, educational, eleemosynary, philanthropic and other similar entities or organizations
with U.S. Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3) recognition of exemption from federal
income taxation may be, by the Public Works Director, classified as residential for meter charges
only in accordance with such classification. Water quantity charge classifications for not for
profit institutions are not affected by this section. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-08, February
6, 2017) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-20, April 1, 2013) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-
112, December 19, 2005) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-63, July 17, 2000) (Amended,
Ordinance No. 90-35, March 19, 1990)
12. SERVICE OUTSIDE OF CORPORATE LIMITS. Water may be furnished
through services situated outside the corporate limits of the City only upon express agreement
Chapter 64
approved by the Council, and then only upon charges two times the charges for water furnished
water services of the same classification situated within the corporate limits.
13. REGULAR BILLING. The Public Works Department, upon such schedule as shall
be determined by the Director thereof, shall cause each water meter to be read regularly each
classification period applicable to each meter and shall promptly return such readings to the
Department of Finance. The Department of Finance shall compute the appropriate charges for
water furnished in accordance with this ordinance and shall bill for the same. The water bill
shall set forth the period during which the charges shown thereon accrued, the amount of the
service charge, the amount of the water-furnished charge, the amount of water furnished, the due
date of payment and any other charges connected with such service including the amount and the
reason for same. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-08, February 6, 2017) (Amended, Ordinance
No. 2000-63, July 17, 2000) (Amended, Ordinance No. 90-35, March 19, 1990)
14. SPECIAL METER READING. In the event a meter is not accessible to be read at
the time usually scheduled for such reading so that the same is not then read, charges may be
based on an amount of water estimated to have been furnished through said meter determined in
the same manner as provided in Section 8 hereof. Not more than one bill based on an estimate
shall be permitted. It shall be the duty of the owner of the premises or the person in possession
thereof to arrange with the Public Works Department for a special time at which the meter will
be accessible for such purpose at the usually scheduled time for such reading for the billing
period succeeding the estimated bill. A fee of Thirty Five Dollars ($35.00) shall be charged for
each special reading requested to be made during regular departmental working hours and a fee
of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for each special reading requested to be made during a time other than
regular departmental working hours. Failure to cause the required reading to be timely made
Chapter 64
shall be a delinquency and shall result in the same penalty and admit of the same notice and
consequences as late payment as elsewhere provided herein. (Amended, Ordinance 2017-08,
February 6, 2017) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-20, April 1, 2013) (Amended, Ordinance No.
2005-112, December 19, 2005) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-63, July 17, 2000) (Amended,
Ordinance No. 90-35, March 19, 1990)
15. ANNUAL READING REQUIRED. Each meter in each service shall be read at
least once annually by Public Works Department employees. After one bill reflecting charges
based upon the reading of a meter by other than Public Works Department employees it shall be
the duty of the owner or person in possession of the premises wherein such meter is located to
arrange for a special reading of said meter by a departmental employee for the next billing
period, unless said meter will be accessible to be read by said departmental employee at the time
usually scheduled for the reading thereof. The special reading fee provided elsewhere in this
ordinance shall be charged. Failure to cause the required reading to be timely made shall be a
delinquency and shall result in the same penalty and admit of the same notice and consequences
as late payment as elsewhere provided herein. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-08, February 6,
2017) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-112, December 19, 2005) (Amended, Ordinance No.
2000-63, July 17, 2000) (Amended, Ordinance No. 90-35, March 19, 1990)
16. ACTIVATION OF SERVICE. The Public Works Department shall initially
activate a new service, or restore service, upon customer request during usual business hours, at
no cost to the customer for the initial service call. Each additional service call made by the City
after the initial call will be charged to the customer as a Thirty Five Dollar ($35.00) fee. If the
customer request is for a time other than the usual business hours of the Department, a fee of
Fifty Dollar ($50.00) shall be charged for each service call, which said fee may be waived under
Chapter 64
circumstance(s) which in the opinion of the Director of said Department constitute an
emergency. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-08, February 6, 2017) (Amended, Ordinance No.
2013-20, April 1, 2013) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-112, December 19, 2005) (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2000-63, July 17, 2000) (Amended, Ordinance No. 90-35, March 19, 1990)
17. PAYMENT FOR CHARGES. Charges for water furnished from the City water
system and other charges relating to water service shall be payable at the office of the City
Treasurer, and shall not be considered paid until payment is actually received in said office. The
failure to receive a bill for charges for any particular period or periods shall not affect liability to
pay such charges when due or excuse the accrual of penalty for delinquent or non-payment.
18. DELINQUENT PAYMENTS. Charges for water furnished and other charges
relating to such services, for all routes at least partially comprised of residential customers, shall
be due and payable on or before the 21st day following the day on which the same are billed.
Charges for water furnished and other charges relating to such services, for all other routes, shall
be due and payable on or before the 14th day following the day on which the same are billed.
Water charges paid after the applicable due date shall have added thereto a late payment charge
of Five Percent (5%) of said charges. On the next business day after the due date aforesaid, the
Finance Department shall cause a delinquency notice to be sent or given the person or entity
named upon any past due bill. Such delinquent notice shall set out that water service which is
the subject of such delinquency shall be shut off after the 14th day after the date of said notice
unless payment of all delinquent charges and penalties are made before said 14th day.
Delinquent charges for furnishing water, and delinquent other charges relating to any water
service, shall be a lien upon the premises served. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-20, April 1,
2013) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-112, December 19, 2005)
Chapter 64
19. SERVICE SHUT OFF. Unless all charges for water furnished and any other
charges relating to a water service are paid on or before 14 days after the date of a delinquency
notice relating thereto, the Public Works Department shall cause such service to be shut off and
water shall not be furnished through such service until such time as any and all such charges and
penalties are fully paid. In addition to such charges, a fee for restoring the furnishing of water in
such service shall be paid in advance which said fee shall be Thirty-Five Dollars ($35.00) if
restoration of service is requested to be made during the usual business hours of the Public
Works Department or Fifty Dollars ($50.00) if such restoration of service is requested to be
made at hours other than usual departmental business hours. If the customer requires more than
one service call for the services stated n this section, the customer will be charged on their next
bill for each separate service call made by the City. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-08,
February 6, 2017) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-20, April 1, 2013) (Amended, Ordinance No.
2005-112, December 19, 2005) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-63, July 17, 2000) (Amended,
Ordinance No. 90-35, March 19, 1990)
20. WATER FROM FIRE HYDRANT. After issuance of a permit, water may be
furnished through a City fire hydrant in circumstances wherein, in the opinion of the Director of
the Public Works Department, such furnishing by other means is not practicable. Application for
such permit shall be upon forms furnished by said Department which shall show the name of the
applicant; the location of the hydrant to be used; the circumstances requiring such permit; the
purpose for, and the location at, which the water is to be used; the estimated amount of water to
be furnished; the estimated duration of hydrant use; and such other pertinent information as said
Director may deem appropriate. Such application shall be accompanied with a deposit of cash,
bank draft or certified check in the amount of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00). Quantities and
Chapter 64
service sizes shall be determined either by estimates fixed by the Director or by temporary
installation of a meter. Effective May 1, 2013 the monthly rate shall be $5.08 per 100 cubic feet
($0.68 per 100 gallons). Effective May 1, 2014 the monthly rate shall be $6.60 per 100 cubic
feet ($0.88 per 100 gallons), and on May 1, 2015 the monthly rate shall be $8.25 per 100 cubic
feet ($1.10 per 100 gallons). If a hydrant location requires additional City services or resources,
a site specific hydrant charge shall be determined by said Director and billed to said customer.
All charges shall be paid within fifteen (15) days of the billing date otherwise the permit and
furnishing of water shall terminate and the deposit be forfeited. Upon the payment of all charges
and the return, in good working condition, of any equipment furnished by the Department, the
deposit shall be returned to the depositor. All costs to the City for non working, damaged, lost or
missing equipment will be billed to the applicant. All connections to fire hydrants for water shall
comply with the appropriate backflow prevention requirements of the State of Illinois Plumbing
Code, City Code and City policies. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-08, February 6, 2017)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-20, April 1, 2013) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-42, June 16,
2008) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-112, December 19, 2005) (Amended, Ordinance No.
2000-63, July 17, 2000) (Amended, Ordinance No. 90-35, March 19, 1990)
21. WATER FURNISHED AT WATER STATIONS. Water may be furnished other
than through a water service or fire hydrant, as provided in this Code, only at a City water
station. Effective May 1, 2013 the monthly rate shall be $5.08 per 100 cubic feet ($0.68 per 100
gallons). Effective May 1, 2014 the monthly rate shall be $6.60 per 100 cubic feet ($0.88 per
100 gallons), and on May 1, 2015 the monthly rate shall be $8.25 per 100 cubic feet ($1.10 per
100 gallons). Charges not paid within 30 days of the billing date will result in the termination of
water station use by said customer. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-20, April 1, 2013)
Chapter 64
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-42, June 16, 2008) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-112,
December 19, 2005)
22. RULES AND REGULATIONS.
A. In order to implement and administer the provisions of this Chapter and other
applicable provisions of ordinance and to administer the concerned departments of the City, the
City Manager is authorized and empowered to cause reasonable rules, regulations, and
directives, not contrary to said provisions, to be promulgated and enforced, the same to be filed
with the City Clerk, and kept and made available for public inspection at the office of said Clerk.
B. In addition to the authority granted in paragraph A hereof, the City Manager is hereby
further authorized to issue and promulgate rules and regulations which limit the amount of water
which may be consumed by the various classifications of water services established herein. Such
limitations may be for specific periods of time or may be indefinite in duration, may prohibit or
limit certain types of water use and must be uniform as to all users within a particular water
service classification. Said rules and regulations shall be filed with the City Clerk as provided in
subsection A hereof.
23. PENALTY. No person shall connect or cause the connection of a water service to
the water system of the City except as provided by the City Code. No person shall restore water
service from the water system of the City after such service has been turned off by the Public
Works Department without first obtaining written permission from the City to do so. No person
shall resell water furnished through a water service from the water system of the City except
upon express contract in writing approved by the City Council. No person other than an
authorized employee of the City or an authorized permittee of the City shall open, take water
from, or interfere with City fire hydrants. No person shall use or consume water in violation of
Chapter 64
any duly authorized rule or regulation established pursuant to Section 22 hereof. Any person,
firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor shall
more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) and each day upon which a continuing violation
occurs be viewed as a separate offense. In addition thereto any person, firm or corporation who
shall violate this section, or found to be in violation of any of the other provisions of this
Chapter, or any regulation duly established hereunder, may, by such violation, be deemed to
have forfeited the privilege or right, as the case may be, of being furnished water from the water
system of the City, and any and all water service of such person may be shut off or disconnected
from said water system. The City may also institute any other action provided by law for the
recovery of the value of any water appropriated from the City water system in violation of any
provision of this Chapter. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-08, February 6, 2017) (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2011-73, October 31, 2011) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-112, December 19,
2005) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-63, July 17, 2000) (Amended, Ordinance No. 90-35,
March 19, 1990)
24. SEWER USER CHARGES. Sewer user charges of the Sanitary District of
Decatur, or of the City, including stormwater utility fees, and sanitary sewer connection charges
of the City are and shall be recognized and treated as other charges relating to water service
along with all other such charges as provided for in this Code. (Amended Ordinance 2014-15,
April 21, 2014)
25. TAMPERING WITH WATER INFRASTRUCTURE. Any person who tampers,
injures, alters, obstructs, prevents the action of, or breaks the seal on any City water
infrastructure component, including, but not limited to water meters and their accessories, curb
Chapter 64
stops, water mains, water valves, air release valves, hydrants, storage reservoirs, elevated tanks
and treatment facilities served by the City without the permission of the City, or who, without
such permission, by-passes or jumps a water infrastructure component shall be fined not less
than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) nor more than One Thousand Five Hundred Dollars
($1,500.00) for each offense and each day upon which a continuing violation occurs shall be
viewed as a separate offense. Said conviction is grounds for the termination of water service to
that meter and to any other water service carried in the name of the person, firm or corporation,
so convicted. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-73) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-112)
26. ANNUAL AUDIT. The water fund shall be reviewed, not less often than annually,
by Certified Public Accountants for the City in the annual audit report. (Amended, Ordinance
No. 2013-20, April 1, 2013) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2001-17)
27. REVENUES. All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the water
system shall be deposited in the water account of the water fund. (Amended, Ordinance No.
2013-20, April 1, 2013) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-112, December 19, 2005) (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2001-17, March 19, 2001)
28. ACCOUNTS. The City Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be
made of all transactions relative to the water system, and at regular annual intervals shall cause
to be made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the water system.
In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual financial report shall also
reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the water facilities, including replacement costs.
The financial information to be shown in the annual financial report shall include the following:
Chapter 64
1. Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal year.
2. Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
3. Number of users connected to the system.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-20, April 1, 2013) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2001-17, March
19, 2001)
29. ACCESS TO RECORDS. The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency, or his authorized representative, shall have access to any books, documents, papers and
records of the City which are applicable to the City’s system of user charges for the purpose of
making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to insure compliance with the
terms of the State Loan. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-112) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2001-
17)
30. APPEALS. The method of computation of rates and service charges established
for user charges in this Chapter shall be made available to a user within ten (10) days of a written
request for such. Any disagreement over the method used or in the computations thereof shall be
resolved by the Finance Director within thirty (30) days after notification of a formal written
appeal outlining the discrepancies. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2001-17, March 19, 2001)
31. DEFINITIONS. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this ordinance shall be as follows:
“Federal Act” means the Federal 1996 Safe Drinking Water Acts
Amendments.
“Administrator” means the Administrator of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency.
“State Act” means the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.
Chapter 64
“Director” means the Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency.
“State Loan” shall mean the State of Illinois participation in the financing
of the construction of water works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution
Bond Act and for making such loans as filed with the Secretary of State of the
state of Illinois.
“City” means the City of Decatur, Illinois.
“Water Fund” is the principal accounting designation of all revenues
received in the operation of the water system.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2001-17, March 19, 2001)
CHAPTER 65
WATER MAIN CONNECTION CHARGES
1. PERMIT REQUIRED. Before any water main or lateral water main of the City
is tapped, or any connection is made therewith, a permit shall be obtained from the City upon
application made upon forms furnished by the City accompanied by the payment, or proof of
payment, of such connection charges, if any, as may be provided herein. Water service may only
be provided in accordance with Section 12 of Chapter 64 of the City Code of Decatur.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-23)
2. CONNECTION CHARGE NOT REQUIRED. If the water main or lateral water
main to be tapped or connected to was constructed at the cost of the then owner of the property
to be served by such tap or connection, whether by special assessment or otherwise, a connection
charge shall not be required. In all other cases a connection charge in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter shall be paid. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-23)
3. CHARGE FOR SPECIAL ASSESSMENT MAIN. If the main or lateral was
constructed by special assessment against property other than that to be served by such tap or
connection, the connection charge shall be computed upon the same basis and rate as that used to
spread the special assessment by which said main or lateral was constructed.
4. COMPUTATION OF CHARGE. If the main or lateral to be tapped or connected to
is a city main or lateral, whether the same was constructed by the City, or others, the connection
charge shall be as follows:
Water
Connection Size
Water Main
Connection Charge
Water
Connection Size
Water Main
Connection Charge
1” $3,500 3” $10,500
1 ½” $5,250 3 ½” $12,250
2” $7,000 4” $14,000
2 ½” $8,750 Greater than 4” See Note 1
Note 1: As approved by the City Manager
Revised 02/2017
Properties within the City Corporate Limits at the time of application will receive a
seventy-five percent (75%) discount to the water main connection charge.
The required connection charge may be paid as a single payment, or may be paid in
installments by making a down payment of forty percent (40%) and six subsequent annual
payments, including simple interest at a rate to be determined by the Director of Financial
Management and agreed upon by owner and permittee prior to connection. The down payment
shall accompany the application for the permit to tap or to connect to the main or lateral. The
succeeding annual installments shall become due, and are payable, on or before the annual
anniversary date of the application. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-23)
5. CONNECTION CHARGE ADJUSTMENT. The Water Main Connection Charge
shall be adjusted annually, at the beginning of each fiscal year. The adjustment shall be based on
the Construction Cost Index for Midwestern cities, as published by Engineering News-Record.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-23)
6. SERVICE SHUT OFF. If any connection is made with, or any such main or lateral
is tapped, without the payment of the applicable connection charge as herein provided, or if any
such connection charge, or installment thereof, is provided, or if any such connection charge, or
installment thereof, is not timely paid upon the due date thereof, a delinquency notice shall be
directed to the owner or occupant of the premises served by the connection to which such charge
is applicable, and unless such delinquent charge, or charges, is, or are, paid in full within ten (10)
days of the date of such notice, the Public Works Department shall turn off the supply of water to
such service. Both delinquent payments and deferred installments shall be a lien upon the
premises served by the service to which such payments or installments are applicable.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-08, February 6, 2017) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-23)
7. EXISTING WATER WELLS ON PROPERTY. Prior to connecting to a City of
Decatur water main, properties with existing and operable wells must comply with all conditions
of this section.
A. Except as set forth in Section 7(B), the existing and operable well must be
abandoned in accordance with all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other
laws and requirements of the State of Illinois, City of Decatur and Macon County.
B. Existing and operable wells may be used solely for irrigation purposes only and
not for potable water. The existing and operable well must be disconnected from
any structure which will be supplied water by a City of Decatur water main. All
work must be done in accordance with all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances
and other laws and requirements of the State of Illinois, City of Decatur and
Macon County.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-23)
8. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of
this Chapter shall be fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense and each day upon which a violation occurs or
continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-73)
CHAPTER 66
REGULATION OF LAKE DECATUR
(Adopted Ordinance 2012-12, April 2, 2012)
1. DEFINITIONS. Terms used in this Chapter shall have the following meanings:
"Watercourse" shall mean any stream, channel, or natural or artificial spring of any kind
in which water flows continuously or intermittently over any part of the drainage area into any
part of the reservoir directly or indirectly.
"Drainage Area" shall refer to that area of land or water over which the City has
jurisdiction that drains to the Sangamon River above the Decatur public water supply dam.
"Reservoir" shall mean the artificial reservoir formed by the dam constructed near the
U.S. Route 51 Bridge south of the City, or by other structures required at a later date within the
limits of the present drainage area, which reservoir or reservoirs are to be used as a source of the
public water supply for the City, which reservoir is hereby named and designated as Lake
Decatur, also referred to herein as "the Lake". The upstream limits of such reservoir, which is
located within the Sangamon River Valley, is the West side of Macon County Highway 25
running North and South across what is known as the Oakley Bridge, hereinafter described.
"High Water Mark" shall mean the contour known as 615 feet above sea level, referring
to United States Government elevations as obtained from bench mark established in the City.
"Intake" shall mean the place where the water supply for the City is taken into the conduit
or pipe from the reservoir.
Revised 02/2017
"Oakley Bridge" shall mean that bridge which spans the original channel of the
Sangamon River in Section 24, Whitmore Township, and Section 24, Oakley Township, Macon
County, Illinois, situated North of the Village of Oakley, Macon County, Illinois, and is
commonly known as the Oakley Bridge.
"William Street Bridge" shall mean that bridge which spans the original channel of the
Sangamon River on U.S. Route 105 and in Section 8, Decatur Township, Macon County,
Illinois, and is commonly known as the William Street Bridge.
"U.S. Route 36 Bridge" shall mean that bridge which spans the original channel of the
Sangamon River on U.S. Route 36 and in Section 18, Decatur Township, and Section 19, Long
Creek Township, Macon County, Illinois, near Nelson Park, and commonly known as Route 36
Bridge.
"Lost Bridge" shall mean that bridge which spans the original channel of the Sangamon
River in Section 24, Decatur Township, Macon County, Illinois, and commonly known as Lost
Bridge.
"U.S. Route 51 Bridge" shall mean the bridge which spans the original channel of the
Sangamon River on U.S. Route 51 and in Section 22, Decatur Township, Macon County,
Illinois, and is commonly known as Route 51 Bridge.
"Rea's Bridge" shall mean the bridge which spans the original channel of the Sangamon
River on County Highway 24 and in Section 33, Township 17 North, Range 3 East of the Third
Principal Meridian, in Whitmore Township, Macon County, Illinois, and is commonly known as
Rea's Bridge.
"Shore Line" means the extended point where the plane of the surface of the waters of the
reservoir touches the land.
"Front Footage" means that amount of shore line space along which a dock or pier is
constructed.
"Shore Line Zone 1" is that shore line lying to the north and west of the eastern edge of
the breakwater located south of the Lake Office and that area lying to the south and west of the
property formerly used as the Beach House.
"Shore Line Zone 2" is that shore line located to the west and south of Route 36 and north
and west of Lost Bridge Road not included in Shore Line Zone 1.
"Shore Line Zone 3" is all other shore line not included in Shore Line Zone 1 or Shore
Line Zone 2.
"Terms" as defined by the current Boat Registration and Safety Act, Article I, 625 ILCS
45/1-2, shall also apply to this Chapter.
(Amended, Ordinance 2017-05, February 6, 2017)
2. ZONES DEFINED. Zone "A" shall consist of all land lying within the high water
mark or below the high water mark, in the reservoir site, whether flooded or not. This zone
includes tributary watercourses upstream to the aforesaid high water mark.
Zone "B" shall consist of that portion of the drainage area within 100 feet of the high
water mark around the reservoir and within the same distance of said high water mark of any of
its tributaries extending upstream (following the channel of the stream) and a distance of onehalf
mile from the high water mark upstream of said tributaries, and shall include at certain
places all land extended from the 100 foot limit to the top of the bluffs and to the end of ravines
where slopes are steep.
Zone "C" shall consist of territory within 100 feet of Zone "B" as specified.
Zone "D" shall constitute the territory within 500 feet of Zone "C" as specified.
Zone "E" shall constitute the remainder of the drainage area.
3. BUILDINGS PROHIBITED. No buildings or any structure, tent, camp car or
trailer, whether for habitation or otherwise, shall be built or maintained within the limits of
Zones A, B or C unless upon permit in writing by the City. No permit will be granted except
upon proof of ability to comply with the provisions of Section 4 of this Chapter.
4. DEPOSIT OF WASTE.
A. No human wastes or excreta shall be deposited or stored in any manner whatever in
Zone A. Such wastes in Zones B and C shall be deposited or stored in one of the ways here
following, to-wit:
(1) In a water tight receptacle equipped with a power driven pump or ejector for
emptying the same through water tight pipes or conduits only into a public sewer or a sewage
treatment plant or septic tank located in Zone D, or at a point outside the restricted zone;
(2) An approved chemical toilet;
(3) An Imhoff-sprinkling filter unit or other method of final treatment, provided
that no septic tank shall be placed closer than 200 feet to the high water mark nor any Imhoffsprinkling
filter unit or other method of final treatment closer than 165 feet to said high water
mark.
B. Any method chosen for deposit of waste, as provided herein, shall be maintained in
good working order by the owners, and be at all times subject to the inspection of the City and its
officers.
C. Any cesspool, privy, urinal, water closet or other place of depositing or storage of
human excreta now situated in Zone D must be made sanitary, and comply with the plans and
specifications of said City of the Board of Health of the County of Macon or of the State of
Illinois, or of equal sanitary construction.
D. No cesspool, privy, urinal, water closet or other place for depositing or storing human
excreta shall hereafter be constructed within Zone D until a permit in writing has been obtained
from the City.
E. No sewer or drain conveying sewage or other putrescible wastes shall be constructed
in Zones A, B, C or D until a permit in writing has been obtained from the City. All such
installations must be approved by the Public Works Director or designee both before and after
installation. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-08, February 6, 2017)
5. DISCHARGE OF WASTE. House slops, sink wastes, laundry or like wastes of any
other kind shall not be discharged at any point in Zones A, B or C. In Zone D such slops and
wastes other than that including human excrement may be disposed of beneath the ground
surface or in such manner that it shall not cause or threaten pollution of the reservoir or any
tributary watercourses.
6. POLLUTION IN ZONE A. No person, firm or corporation shall permit the territory
known as Zone A, or water situated therein, to be used, kept or maintained so as to cause
pollution of the water in the reservoir.
7. COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL WASTE. No filth, decaying or putrescible
matter, unsanitary waste products or polluted liquid from any factory, slaughter house, creamery,
dairy or milk handling plant, mill, cannery, garage, or similar establishment of any kind, shall be
discharged in such manner as to drain directly into the reservoir or its tributaries within the
drainage area so as to threaten or cause pollution or nuisance.
8. INTERNMENTS. No internment shall be made in any cemetery or other place of
burial within Zones A, B, C or D or in Zone E within 1,500 feet of Zone A below the William
Street Bridge.
9. GARBAGE AND ANIMAL MANURE.
A. No garbage, manure or other unsanitary putrescible refuse of any kind shall be thrown
into the reservoir or onto or into the ground at any point in Zones A and B, or in Zone C, except
animal manure and commercial fertilizers for agricultural and horticultural purposes.
B. No animal manure or commercial fertilizer for agricultural purposes shall be spread
on the ground within Zones C and D in such quantities as to cause or threaten pollution of the
reservoir or any tributary watercourses.
C. No dead animal or fish of any kind, or any part thereof, shall be thrown into the
reservoir or tributary watercourses or on the ground or buried in Zones A, B or C, or buried in
Zone D, which will result in or threaten pollution of the reservoir or tributary watercourses.
10. ANIMAL YARDS.
A. No stable, pigsty, hog yard, barn yard, chicken yard, hitching or standing place for
animals, or any other place where dung and urine accumulate, shall be constructed or maintained
within Zones A or B, or in Zone C below Oakley Bridge, except on the written approval of the
City.
B. No stables, pigsty, hog yard, barn yard, chicken yard, hitching or standing place for
animals or any other place where dung and urine accumulate, shall be located, constructed or
maintained in Zone C or Zone D so as to threaten pollution of the reservoir or any tributary
watercourses.
11. WASHING; BURNING. No animals of any kind or clothing or other articles shall
be washed in the reservoir or tributaries thereof. The burning of trash, garbage or offensive
material is prohibited on any portion of Lake Decatur and adjacent areas owned by the City of
Decatur.
12. DEPOSIT OF DEBRIS. No person, firm, or corporation shall deposit, or cause or
permit to be deposited, any debris or other materials such as, but not limited to, construction
materials, concrete, trees, brush, weeds, soil or paint into Lake Decatur or any adjacent areas
owned by the City of Decatur or so as to cover, disturb, or destroy any City maintained property
on or near the Lake.
13. BOATING PROHIBITED - LAKE. Boating of any kind or character is hereby
prohibited in Lake Decatur in that area lying west of a line 300 feet upstream from the east side
of the public highway known as U. S. Route 51.
14. BOATING PROHIBITED - RIVER. Boating of any kind or character is hereby
prohibited on the Sangamon River between the Lake Decatur Reservoir Dam and 300 feet
downstream of the Dam in the City of Decatur.
(Amended, Ordinance 2017-05, February 6, 2017)
15. MOORING. No boats shall be moored in an area adjacent to the Municipal Pier at
the Lake Office, except by written permit from the Lake Maintenance Supervisor or designee.
(Amended, Ordinance 2017-05, February 6, 2017)
16. BOAT HARBOR. The northern and western lake shore between U.S. Route 36 and
Lost Bridge Road and the water adjacent thereto is designated the boat harbor.
17. BOATING REGULATIONS. All boats and craft in Lake Decatur shall be subject
to the following regulations:
(a) No boat, craft or float shall be left in the Lake adrift, sunk or insecurely fastened.
(b) No person or persons shall take, use or board any boat, craft or dock in the Lake
without permission of the owner or persons in charge.
(c) The hoist at the boat house shall not be used except under the supervision of city
personnel.
(d) All boats or craft passing under bridges shall pass under the right hand arch or as
directed by official signs or buoys authorized by the Lake Maintenance Supervisor or designee.
(e) No boats, craft or docks shall be constructed on Lake Decatur, or on City-owned
property adjacent thereto, unless permission is granted by the Lake Maintenance Supervisor or
designee.
(f) All boats, craft, or docks must be removed from Lake Decatur and City-owned
property on or before November 15 of each year, unless written permission is granted by the
Lake Maintenance Supervisor or designee.
(g) When two boats are approaching each other "head on" or nearly so (so as to involve
risk of collision), each boat must bear to the right and pass the other boat on its left side.
(h) When boats approach each other obliquely or at right angles, the boat approaching on
the right side has the right of way.
(i) One boat may overtake another on either side but must grant right of way to the
overtaken boat.
(j) When a motorboat is approaching a boat propelled solely by sails or oars, the
motorboat must yield the right of way to the sailboat or rowboat, except, when a large craft is
navigating in a confined channel, the large craft has the right of way over a boat propelled solely
by oars or sails.
(k) No boat or craft shall collide with, run against, strike, injure, deface, or damage any
buoy, stake, sign, piling or other structure installed by the City or with the City's consent, or be
anchored or moored so as to obstruct any bridge opening or approach or to obstruct the view of
any buoy or navigation sign or signal.
(l) No boat or craft shall pass another while passing under any bridge.
(m) No boat or craft shall travel at a speed in excess of "no wake" speed while within
200 feet of either shore line, dock, or pier, or while passing under any bridge; for purposes of this
section "wake" is defined as a movement of water created by a boat underway great enough to
disturb a boat at rest.
(n) Racing of any boats is hereby prohibited except for special events and in no event
without a permit from the Lake Maintenance Supervisor or designee.
(o) Watercraft operation:
(1) Careless operation. No person shall operate any water craft in a careless or
heedless manner so as to endanger any person or property or at a rate of speed greater than will
permit him in the exercise of reasonable care to bring the water craft to a stop within the assured
clear distance ahead.
(2) Reckless operation. No person shall operate any water craft, specialty propcraft,
personal water craft or manipulate any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device in such a
manner as to willfully or wantonly endanger the life, limb or property of any person, to weave
through congested traffic, to jump the wake of another vessel unreasonably or unnecessarily
close to the other vessel or when visibility around the other vessel is obstructed, to wait until the
last possible moment to swerve to avoid collision, or operate any water craft so as to approach or
pass another water craft in such a manner or at such a rate of speed as to create a hazardous wake
or wash.
(p) All cabin boats must be inspected by the Lake Maintenance Supervisor or designee
before a license is issued.
(q) No bottles, cans or other refuse shall be dumped into the Lake or onto adjacent shores
from any boat or craft.
(r) Operating a watercraft under the influence:
(1) A person shall not operate or be in actual physical control of any watercraft
on Lake Decatur while:
(a) The alcohol concentration I such person’s blood or breath is a
concentration at which driving a motor vehicle is prohibited under subdivision (1) of subsection
(a) of Section 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code;
(b) Under the influence of alcohol;
(c) Under the influence of any other drug or combination of drugs to a
degree which renders such person incapable of safely operating any watercraft;
(d) Under the influence of any intoxicating compound or combination of
intoxicating compounds to a degree that renders the person incapable of safely operating any
watercraft;
(e) Under the combined influence of alcohol and any other drug or drugs
to a degree which renders such person incapable of safely operating a watercraft; or
(f) There is any amount of a drug, substance, or compound in the person's
blood or urine resulting from the unlawful use or consumption of cannabis listed in the Cannabis
Control Act, a controlled substance listed in the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, or an
intoxicating compound listed in the Use of Intoxicating Compounds Act.
(2) The fact that any person charged with violating this Section is or has been
legally entitled to use alcohol, other drug or drugs, any intoxicating compound or compounds, or
any combination of them, shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating this
Section.
(s) All boats shall be subject to a no wake speed limit between the hours of 10:00 P.M.
and sunrise, provided that this section shall not apply to official patrol or rescue craft.
(t) No motorboat shall be equipped with any motor or other propulsion machinery
beyond its safe power capacity and safe carrying capacity, taking into consideration the type and
construction of such motorboat and other existing operating conditions.
(u) It is unlawful to operate a motorboat without a mouth, hand or power operated
whistle, horn or other appliance, capable of producing a blast of two seconds or more duration
and audible for at least one-half mile.
(v) Carburetors on all engines of motorboats other than those propelled by a detachable
outboard motor shall be fitted with or protected by a U.S. Coast Guard approved device for
arresting backfire.
(w) Except for open boats, all motorboats which use fuel having a flashpoint of 110
degrees Fahrenheit or less shall have at least two ventilator ducts, fitted with cowls or their
equivalent, for the efficient removal of explosives or flammable gases from the bilges of every
engine and fuel tank compartment. There shall be at least one exhaust duct installed so as to
extend from the open atmosphere to the lower portion of the bilge and at least midway to the
bilge or at least below the level of the carburetor air intake. The cowls shall be located and
trimmed for maximum effectiveness and in such a manner so as to prevent displaced fumes from
being recirculated.
(x) Every motorboat equipped with storage batteries shall be provided with suitable
supports and secured against shifting with the motion of the boat. Such storage batteries shall be
equipped with non-conductive shielding means to prevent accidental shorting of battery
terminals.
(y) Lanyard cut-off switch. No person may operate any motor boat, including personal
water craft or specialty prop-craft, which is equipped with a lanyard type engine cut-off switch
unless such lanyard is properly attached to his or her person, clothes or worn PFD, as appropriate
for the specific vessel.
(z) No person shall operate a personal water craft or a specialty prop craft between the
hours of sunset and sunrise.
18. LIGHTS REQUIRED.
A. It is unlawful to operate any vessel less than 26 feet in length from sunset to sunrise
unless the following lights are carried and displayed when underway:
(1) A bright, white light aft to show all around the horizon, visible for a distance
of 2 miles. The word "visible" as used herein means visible on a dark night with clear
atmosphere;
(2) A combination light in the forepart of the boat lower than the white light aft,
showing green to starboard and red to port, so fixed as to throw a light from dead ahead to 2
points abaft the beam on their respective sides and visible for a distance of not less than one
mile;
(3) Lights under International Rules may be shown as an alternative to the above
requirements.
B. Watercraft propelled by muscular power when underway shall carry on board from
sunset to sunrise, but not fixed to any part of the boat, a lantern or flashlight capable of showing
a white light visible all around the horizon at a distance of two miles or more, and shall display
such lantern in sufficient time to avoid collision with another water craft.
C. Every vessel 26 feet or more in length shall carry and display when underway such
additional or alternate lights as shall be required by the U. S. Coast Guard for water craft of
equivalent length and type.
D. Sailboats equipped with motors and being propelled partly or solely by such motors
shall carry and display the same lights required for motorboats of the same class. Sailboats of
less than 26 feet in length, equipped with motors but being propelled entirely by sail between
sunset and sunrise, shall have lighted the combination running light, but not the white light aft.
Sailboats 26 feet or more in length, equipped with motors but being propelled entirely by sail
between sunset and sunrise, shall have lighted the colored side lights suitably screened, but not
the white lights prescribed for motorboats.
E. Dinghies, tenders and other water craft, whose principal function is as an auxiliary to
other larger water craft, when so operating need carry only a flashlight visible to other craft in
the area.
F. Vessels at anchor between the hours of sunset and sunrise shall display such anchor
lights as shall be required by the U. S. Coast Guard for water craft of equivalent length and type.
19. BOAT LICENSURE AND REGISTRATION.
A. No boat or craft of any kind shall be kept or used on or in Lake Decatur, by the
current owner, at any time unless the same is registered and currently licensed by the City of
Decatur, as provided herein, or alternatively, there is a current permit issued by the City of
Decatur therefore, also as provided herein.
B. Applications for registration, license or permit shall be made upon forms to be
furnished by the City containing such information as may be required by those Departments
concerned with the operation of the Lake or the policing thereof as may be reasonably required
by them to administer the provisions of law or code or ordinance applicable thereto.
C. Applications for initial registration shall be accompanied by a then current license.
* D. Applications for license shall be accompanied by a fee as follows for each boat or
craft:
Effective: March 1, 2014 March 1, 2015 March 1, 2016
Row boats, canoes, kayaks and other
craft propelled by muscle power $22.00 $23.00 $24.00
Sail boats
$37.00 $39.00 $41.00
Motor boats
1-50 horsepower $44.00 $46.00 $48.50
51-100 horsepower $53.50 $56.00 $59.00
101-150 horsepower $62.00 $65.00 $68.50
151-200 horsepower $71.50 $75.00 $79.00
over
200 horsepower $80.00 $84.00 $88.00
The horsepower of an engine is that determined by the manufacturer thereof. In case a boat or
craft is so constructed or rigged to be propelled by more than one type or size of propulsion, the
fee to be paid shall be the higher fee specified herein for the several sizes or types of propulsion.
Boat or craft owned or operated by government agencies, and boat or craft participating in an
event preapproved by the City Manager or designee, are exempt from licensing fees. (Amended,
Ordinance 2017-05, February 6, 2017) (Amended Ordinance 2014-05, March 3, 2014)
E. Licenses and permits shall be evidenced by such tags, tickets, plates, decals, stickers
or other such devices as may be determined by the departments concerned therewith, may be
furnished by the City and shall be so affixed to and continuously displayed on the subject boat or
craft for the time the same is currently in effect as may be directed by the Lake Maintenance
Supervisor or designee.
F. A boat or craft may be kept or used on or in the Lake without a license or registration
for a period of twenty-four (24) hours, if a temporary permit is issued therefore and is displayed
thereon, which said permits may be issued upon payment accompanying the application of Ten
Dollars ($10.00) for each boat or craft for each respective twenty-four (24) hour period.
G. A boat or craft may be kept or used on or in the Lake without registration if the same
is owned by a boat dealer licensed by the state and is used for business purposes and said dealer
obtains a City license upon application accompanied by a fee of:
Effective: March 1, 2014 March 1, 2015 March 1, 2016
Boat dealer license $285.50 $300.00 $315.00
for not to exceed four units. (Amended Ordinance 2014-05, March 3, 2014)
H. Boat registration numbers shall remain with the boat upon transfer of title thereto. No
part of a license fee shall be refundable, or shall fees be prorated, or licenses be transferred
between boats.
I. Licenses shall be issued for the period of one year commencing March l, and expire on
the last day of February next after issuance.
20. BOAT RENTALS. The business of renting boats for hire or carrying passengers for
hire on the Lake is prohibited except as may be authorized by permit issued by the Lake
Maintenance Supervisor or designee and only to those persons licensed by the State of Illinois
pursuant to Illinois Revised Statutes 1985, Chapter 95 1/2, Section 317.1. All provisions of this
Chapter shall apply to such boats and craft; and all such boats or craft may be inspected by the
City from time to time during their period of operation on the Lake. Any such boats or craft
failing to have adequate life preservers in place as when licensed, or otherwise failing to pass
inspection, shall be made to comply with the provisions hereof before further operation. No
individual operator or employee or anyone operating any boat carrying passengers for hire shall
be permitted to operate such boat unless he is physically fit for such duty, has adequate
knowledge of the boat mechanism, is familiar with the ordinances, rules and regulations for the
operation of boats on the Lake and with the commonly approved safety regulations and measures
to be used in case of accident or emergency, including instructions of passengers in the use of
safety equipment and their conduct in case of emergency. Each such operator or employee shall
at all times be subject to an examination and approval by the City as to such qualifications; and
any determination by the City as to such qualifications shall be conclusive. The provisions of
this section shall apply to the owner or operator of such boat or boats or to the person, firm or
corporation in whose name a permit was obtained. It shall be unlawful for an agent or employee
of a permittee to allow the operation of such boat for hire in violation of this Chapter or any
applicable state law. Such permit shall apply to all boats or craft rented by any person, firm or
corporation and may be revoked upon evidence that the permit holder has been convicted of any
violation of this Chapter or applicable State law.
21. FIRE EXTINGUISHERS. It is unlawful to operate a motorboat equipped with an
internal combustion engine on the Lake without at least one U. S. Coast Guard approved fire
extinguisher, so placed as to be readily accessible and in such condition as to be ready for
immediate and effective use.
22. PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICES.
A. It is unlawful to operate any water craft on Lake Decatur unless at least one Coast
Guard approved Personal Flotation Device (hereinafter "PFD") of the following types, or their
equivalent, is on board for each person: Type I, Type II or Type III.
B. No person may operate on Lake Decatur a water craft 16 feet or more in length,
except a canoe or kayak, unless at least one Type IV Coast Guard approved PFD or its equivalent
is on board in addition to the PFD's required in subparagraph (a) of this Section.
C. No person may operate a water craft on Lake Decatur unless each device required by
this section is:
(1) Readily accessible;
(2) In serviceable condition;
(3) Of the appropriate size for the person for whom it is intended; and,
(4) Legibly marked with the U. S. Coast Guard approval number.
D. Approved PFD's are defined as follows:
(1) Type I - A Type I personal flotation device is an approved device designed to
turn an unconscious person in the water from a face downward position to a vertical or slightly
backward position and to have more than 20 pounds of buoyancy.
(2) Type II - A Type II personal flotation device is an approved device designed
to turn an unconscious person in the water from a face downward position to a vertical or slightly
backward position and to have at least 15 1/2 pounds of buoyancy.
(3) Type III - A Type III personal flotation device is an approved device to keep
a conscious person in a vertical or slightly backward position and to have a least 15 1/2 pounds
of buoyancy.
(4) Type IV - A Type IV personal flotation device is an approved device
designed to be thrown to a person in the water and not worn. It is designed to have at least 16
1/2 pounds of buoyancy.
(5) Type V - A Type V personal flotation device is an approved device for
restricted use and is acceptable only when used in the activity for which it is approved.
E. No person may operate a personal water craft or specialty prop-craft unless each
person aboard is wearing a Type I, Type II, Type III or Type V personal flotation device
approved by the United States Coast Guard. No person may operate a water craft unless a Type
I, Type II, Type III or Type V personal flotation device is being properly worn by each person
under the age of 13 on board the water craft at all times in which the water craft is underway;
however, this requirement shall not apply to persons who are below decks in totally enclosed
cabin spaces.
F. A U. S. Coast Guard approved Type V personal floatation device may be carried in
lieu of the Type I, II, III or IV personal flotation device required in this Section, if the Type V
personal flotation device is approved for the activity in which it is being used.
23. MUFFLERS REQUIRED.
A. All motorboats shall be equipped and maintained with an effective muffler or
underwater exhaust system. For the purpose of this Section, an effective muffler or underwater
exhaust system is one which does not produce sound levels that create excessive or unusual
noise, or sound levels that are in excess of 90 decibels when subjected to a stationary sound level
test as prescribed by the Society of Automotive Engineers in its procedure J2005.
B. No person may operate a motorboat so as to exceed a noise level of 75 decibels
measured as specified by the society of Automotive Engineers in its procedure J1970.
C. This Section does not apply to: (1) A motorboat tuning up for or participating in
official trials for a sanctioned race or regatta conducted under a permit by the Lake Maintenance
Supervisor or designee; or (2) a motorboat being operated by a boat or marina engine
manufacturer for the purpose of testing or development, as authorized by the Lake Maintenance
Supervisor or designee.
D. Any person violating subsections A or B of this Section: (1) shall be required to
install an effective muffler system on the motorboat in violation; and (2) shall be required to pass
the sound level test prescribed by the Society of Automotive Engineers in its procedure J2005
before putting the motorboat back into use.
E. Any person who operates any motorboat upon Lake Decatur shall be deemed to have
given consent to the test or tests prescribed in this Section to determine if the motorboat is in
compliance with the provisions of this Section.
24. BREACH OF THE PEACE. It shall be unlawful for any person on or in the Lake,
whether boating, swimming or otherwise, to do any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm
or disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace, or to cause or permit in any manner loud
and raucous sounds to be audible as such to any other craft, premises, or residence on or near the
Lake.
25. TOILETS ON BOATS. No boat or craft used or operated on the Lake shall be
equipped with toilet facilities except closed chemical toilets which must be approved by the Lake
Maintenance Supervisor or designee.
26. OPERATION OF BOATS; ABANDONED BOATS.
A. Persons using or operating any boat or craft on the waters of the Lake shall do so in
such manner as not to create any unsanitary condition in or about said waters by the discharge in
any material amount of oil or other polluting liquid tending to make said waters unwholesome or
unfit for water supply purposes or injurious to the aquatic life thereof.
B. No boat or craft shall be used or operated, nor any horn or sound device sounded so as
to create a nuisance or disturb the peace and quiet of any neighborhood.
C. The City shall at all times have the power and authority to prohibit, restrict or
otherwise limit or regulate the keeping, maintenance, or operation of any or all boats or craft on
the waters of the Lake should it become necessary to do so in the interest of the public health or
safety, or for the protection or improvement of the Lake or other causes.
D. Any boat or craft found abandoned or adrift in the Lake or any boat or craft without a
current license plate secured thereon shall be taken up by the City and disposed of as other lost or
stolen property under the ordinances of the City. Nothing herein shall be construed as
exonerating the owner or operator of any boat or craft from personal liability to the City, or any
other person, for any damage or injury caused by such boat or craft.
The City shall have the right to require an owner to pay a fee of Fifty Dollars $50.00 or
the actual cost of removal as determined by the Lake Maintenance Supervisor or designee before
reclaiming any boat or craft.
E. Nothing herein shall be construed as permitting any boat or craft to be operated at a
speed greater than is safe and prudent under the circumstances, and the operator thereof shall
observe all signs and other regulations placed by the City on or near the Lake.
F. The City and its authorized agents shall have the right and power to order a boat or
craft removed from the Lake which by reason of its physical condition is no longer safe for use.
If the owner does not remove such boat or craft, the City shall have the right to remove such boat
or craft from the Lake. The owner thereof must pay a fee of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) before
reclaiming any such boat or craft, or a sum equal to the cost of labor, material and equipment use
to the City connected with such action, whichever is higher and with a charge of Ten Dollars
($10.00) for each day or part thereof during which the same is in the custody of the City, which
said custody shall be at the risk of the owner thereof.
G. No person under 10 years of age may operate a motorboat. Persons at least 10 years
of age and less than 12 years of age may operate a motorboat only if they are accompanied on
the motorboat and under the direct control of a parent or guardian. Persons at least 12 years of
age and less than 18 years of age may operate a motorboat only if they are accompanied on the
motorboat and under the direct control of a parent or guardian or a person at least 18 years of age
designated by a parent or guardian, or such motorboat operator is in possession of a Boating
Safety Certificate issued by the Department of Natural Resources, Division of Law Enforcement,
authorizing the holder to operate motorboats. Other Boating Safety Certificates, approved by the
Illinois Department of Natural Resources, are deemed acceptable for the provisions of this
Section.
(Amended, Ordinance 2017-05, February 6, 2017)
H. All boats and craft may be ordered off the Lake at the direction of the Lake
Maintenance Supervisor or designee due to actual or impending inclement weather conditions.
I. Any boat or craft located, constructed, operated or maintained in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, or the rules or regulations promulgated thereunder, shall be removed
from the Lake upon notice from the Lake Maintenance Supervisor or designee. If a boat or craft
is not removed on the date herein set forth or when requested by the Lake Maintenance
Supervisor or designee, the same may be removed by the City and expense thereof charged to the
boat or craft owner.
27. WATER SKIING.
A. No person may operate a vessel having in tow, or otherwise be assisting, a person on
water-skis, aquaplane or similar device from the period of one-half hour after sunset to one-half
hour before sunrise.
(Amended, Ordinance 2017-05, February 6, 2017)
B. All water skiers, personal water craft and specialty prop-craft operators, sail or surf
board riders, or any person being towed or otherwise assisted by a boat or craft of any kind must
wear a U.S. Coast Guard approved Type I, Type II, Type III or Type V PFD.
C. No water skiing, surf board riding, or any type of towing or dragging of a person
behind a boat or craft is permitted within 200 feet of the shore line, docks or piers, or under any
bridge, or in a no-wake area as herein defined, or in any other areas designated by the Lake
Maintenance Supervisor or designee.
D. When towing a person on waterskis, aquaplane or similar device, the towing vessel
must have a capacity of at least three persons and must be occupied by at least two competent
people. All persons being towed are considered part of the watercraft’s carrying capacity. The
operator of any watercraft that is towing a person or persons shall display on the watercraft a
bright or brilliant orange flag measuring not less than 12 inches per side. The flag shall be
displayed at the highest point of the area surrounding the boat’s helm as to be visible from all
directions, continuously, while the person or persons being towed depart the boat in preparation
for towing and until reentry into the boat when the activity has ceased. Display of the flag for
purposes other than the activity described in this Section is prohibited. The operator of such boat
must be at least fifteen (15) years of age and the observer must be at least ten (10) years of age.
(Amended, Ordinance 2017-05, February 6, 2017)
E. No person or persons shall sit on the side of any motor or engine driven boat or craft
or on any portion of such boat or craft that was not designed for that purpose by the manufacturer
while said boat or craft is underway. No person or persons shall ride on any boat or craft in such
a manner that any part of the body protrudes over the front, sides or rear of the boat or craft.
28. SWIMMING. Swimming out of boats is allowed only in no wake areas, within 25
feet of boats. Swimming out of boats is prohibited in areas adjacent to Shore Line Zones 1 and
2, all boat ramps, bridges and navigational channels. Diving "head first" is prohibited in all lake
locations. Swimming from bridges, bridge piers, or bridge approaches is prohibited. Skin diving
or scuba diving is prohibited except that permission may be granted by the Lake Maintenance
Supervisor or designee to a certified diver. The owner of any property adjacent to the lake shall
permit no swimming from the adjacent property of children under the age of 16 years unless an
adult who is an expert swimmer is present. No person shall swim from any adjacent property
without owner's consent. There shall be no swimming from such adjacent property beyond 50
feet from shore. Swimming, skin diving or scuba diving, under all provisions of this Section, is
prohibited from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise.
29. INFECTIOUS DISEASES.
A. No person or persons having any communicable or infectious disease or skin
infection shall bathe or swim in Lake Decatur.
B. All persons using Lake Decatur for bathing and swimming purposes shall use the
same so as not to create unsanitary conditions in or about said waters, so as not to pollute said
waters, or make them unwholesome or unfit for use.
30. HUNTING. Hunting on Lake Decatur is hereby prohibited except the hunting of
water fowl in season on that portion of Lake Decatur upstream from the Basin 6 sediment trap.
(Amended, Ordinance 2017-05, February 6, 2017)
31. BLINDS AND PITS DEFINED. A blind or pit shall mean any cover, whether
natural vegetation or a structure, used for concealment by anyone in an act of hunting migratory
waterfowls.
32. LOCATION OF BLINDS AND PITS. No person shall establish or use any blind
or pit for the hunting of migratory water fowl on Lake Decatur except above the Basin 6
sediment trap, which blind or pit shall not be set up within 200 yards of any other blind or pit.
No blind or pit shall be built within 300 yards of any building, bridge, roadway or developed
area of public access. The restrictions herein shall not apply to blinds in existence and properly
licensed as of January 1, 1988.
(Amended, Ordinance 2017-05, February 6, 2017)
33. PERMITS FOR BLINDS AND PITS. No such blind or pit shall be established on
Lake Decatur, on property of the City adjacent to such Lake, or on any property from which a
person fires a weapon over such Lake or Lake property, until a written permit therefore has been
first obtained from the Lake Maintenance Supervisor or designee.
34. APPLICATION FOR BLINDS AND PITS. Applications for permits to construct
blinds as required in Section 33 herein shall be made upon forms to be furnished by the City and
shall be accompanied by an initial fee of:
Effective: March 1, 2014 March 1, 2015 March 1, 2016
Blinds and pits initial fee $44.00 $46.00 $48.50
for each new permit issued after January 1, 1988 and a fee of:
Effective: March 1, 2014 March 1, 2015 March 1, 2016
Blinds and pits annual fee $37.00 $39.00 $41.00
for all other blinds. (Amended Ordinance 2014-05, March 3, 2014)
35. ONE PERMIT. No person shall obtain more than one permit to construct a blind as
required in Section 33 herein.
36. PERMIT NOT TRANSFERABLE. Permits obtained in accordance with Section
33 herein are for privileges personal to the permit holder and are not transferable and no blind
shall be used by other than the permit holder without written permission of the permit holder
thereof.
37. REGULATIONS FOR BLINDS AND PITS.
A. Construction of a blind shall be completed by opening day of the first Fall Central
Zone waterfowl season as established by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources.
(Amended, Ordinance 2017-05, February 6, 2017)
B. Any blind site not registered and with payment received by the Finance Department
on opening day of the first Fall Central Zone waterfowl season of that year is hereby declared
open and available for registration by another person.
(Amended, Ordinance 2017-05, February 6, 2017)
C. Any and all material left on an unregistered blind site becomes the property of the
City of Decatur to be removed and disposed of at the expense of the last registered owner.
D. A duck blind permit may be revoked upon conviction of the permit holder of a
violation of any rule or regulation concerning duck blinds or hunting duly established hereunder
or any other hunting ordinance or statute the violation of which occurred on or adjacent to Lake
Decatur.
E. When a permit for a duck blind has been revoked, no permit shall be issued to the
former permit holder for a period of one (3) years thereafter.
F. Existing blinds that are not registered by January l, l988, are hereby deemed
abandoned and may be eliminated or removed by the City or re-issued to another person.
G. Any permit may in the discretion of the Lake Maintenance Supervisor or designee be
revoked, terminated or temporarily suspended as deemed necessary for the public good or safety.
H. A City-furnished permit number plate shall be displayed on the front of the blind
when unoccupied; the permit holder shall affix thereto a decal or sticker evidencing payment of
the permit fee for the then current year.
38. DISCHARGING FIREARMS. The discharge of firearms on or over Lake Decatur
is forbidden except for the hunting of water fowl in season as permitted herein.
39. AIRCRAFT. The landing of aircraft is hereby prohibited on Lake Decatur.
40. CAMPING. Any person or persons using the drainage area of Lake Decatur for
picnic, camping or other recreational purposes shall keep the premises neat and clean, pick up
and remove in a satisfactory manner all paper, garbage, rubbish and debris, and before leaving
the premises put out any fires made by such person or persons. Picnics and camping are
prohibited below the high water level.
41. FISHING.
A. Fishing from boats is hereby prohibited in Lake Decatur in that area lying west of a
line 300 feet upstream from the east side of the public highway known as U.S. Route 51. Fishing
from the Lake Decatur dam, dam spillway and water intake structure is prohibited.
(Amended, Ordinance 2017-05, February 6, 2017)
B. No person shall take, catch, or attempt to take or catch, any fish in the reservoir by
any method whatsoever except by hooks attached to a single line. The use of any seine of any
character, or any dip, hook, fyke, gill, pound or basket net or of any trap for the taking or
catching of aquatic life is hereby prohibited except as herein provided. The use of snares, spears,
gigs or firearms for the taking or catching of aquatic life is hereby prohibited except as herein
provided. All fish species of carp, buffalo, sucker and carpsucker may be taken by gig or pitch
fork effective April 1, 1993.
C. Any properly licensed person, in any one day, may take up to thirty (30) gizzard shad
for personal use by using a shad trawl not larger than 30 inches in diameter or a shad throw net
not larger than eight (8) feet in diameter. Any other species of aquatic life taken in this manner
must immediately be returned to the reservoir. The taking of gizzard shad or any other aquatic
life from the Lake for commercial use or resale is allowed only with written approval by the
Lake Maintenance Supervisor or designee.
D. Any person possessing a valid sport fishing license may use a gig to take bullfrogs.
E. It shall be unlawful to use, set or place or control any bank lines, bank poles, limb
lines, trotlines, snag lines, fishing jugs or any similar devices.
F. All persons using said waters for fishing purposes shall use the same so as not to
create any unsanitary conditions in or about said waters or so as not to pollute the said waters and
make them unwholesome or unfit for use.
G. Nothing herein enumerated in subsections (a) to (f) inclusive of this section, shall
apply to or be construed to prevent or penalize anything done or caused to be done by the City or
by agents of the Department of Natural Resources of the State in protecting or caring for the
reservoir or the aquatic life therein.
(Amended, Ordinance 2017-05, February 6, 2017)
42. WALLEYE AND BASS. No person shall take from Lake Decatur walleye
(stizostedion vitreum) sauger (stizostedion canadense), small mouth bass (micropterus
dolomieui), or large mouth bass (micropterus salmoides) less than fourteen (14) inches in length,
by any means.
43. CITY AUTHORITY. The City shall at all times have and retain full power and
authority to prohibit, limit or restrict bathing, swimming, boating, skiing, hunting and fishing in
said Lake Decatur and its tributaries thereto for the purpose of preventing, suppressing, or
arresting any epidemic or any communicable or infectious disease or for the purpose of safety to
persons or property, or for the purpose of preserving the public water supply.
44. REVOCATION OF PERMITS. For violation of the rules or regulations hereof in
whole or in part any license or permit issued under the provisions of this Chapter may be
revoked or suspended. Under no condition may the holder of a boat license which has been
suspended or revoked operate any other licensed boat during such period of revocation or
suspension.
45. ICE SKATING AND ICE FISHING. No persons shall skate or otherwise be upon
the ice of Lake Decatur except that persons may skate and ice fish within fifty (50) feet of an
authorized dock in Zone 3 with the permission of the owner. Ice skating is allowed on Bayview
Cove which is located north of Cantrell Street, south of Bayview Drive and Irving Drive, east of
North Country Club Road, and west of Lake Ridge Avenue. Ice skating is also allowed on Sand
Creek Cove which is located north of Grove Road, south of South Shores Drive, east of
Southland Road and west of Shoreline Drive. No person shall operate a motorized vehicle on the
Lake ice except for emergency purposes.
(Amended, Ordinance 2017-05, February 6, 2017)
46. ICE BOATING.
A. No person shall operate or use any ice boat upon the ice of Lake Decatur unless such
boat or craft is licensed therefor. Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Finance
Department. No license for any ice boat shall be issued unless and until the owner of such boat
agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City from and against all causes of action arising out
of the operation of said boat upon the Lake, in a form to be approved by the Corporation
Counsel. Such licenses shall be effective from December 1 through the last day of February of
the succeeding year. The fee for such license shall be Thirty Five Dollars ($35.00).
B. A temporary license for an ice boat, good for not to exceed three (3) days, may be
obtained by a non-resident of the City. Such temporary licenses shall be issued in like manner
and with such indemnities as are provided for in Section A hereof. The fee for such license shall
be Fifteen Dollars ($15.00).
47. PIERS AND DOCKS. Piers or docks may be constructed upon Lake Decatur under
the following conditions only:
(a) No pier or dock shall be placed, constructed, operated or maintained in or on the
Lake without a permit issued by the Finance Department after application for the same has been
approved by the Lake Maintenance Supervisor or designee.
(b) No pier or dock shall be constructed immediately in front of another owner's private
property; provided that, owners of property abutting the Lake may grant easements appurtenant
to owners of property lying within 500 feet of the shoreline of the Lake, as the same exists at
high water mark, for purposes of dock construction and maintenance, and ingress and egress
therefrom and thereto, and such grantees of said easements, and their heirs, successors and
assigns, may be issued a permit for, and may construct and maintain, a dock on said abutting
property, for personal use. Not more than three such docks belonging to grantees of easements,
as described herein, or their heirs, successors or assigns, may be constructed on abutting
property.
(c) No pier or dock shall be constructed except in locations approved by the Lake
Maintenance Supervisor or designee.
(d) Each pier or dock shall be securely attached to the shore line and shall be of a type of
construction, of such size, length and materials as may be approved by the Lake Maintenance
Supervisor or designee.
(e) The pier or dock must at all times be kept in good state of repair.
(f) Temporary piers or docks shall be removed from the lake on or before November 15
of each year and not replaced before March 15 of each year unless such pier or dock is approved
as a permanent pier or dock by the Lake Maintenance Supervisor or designee. Temporary piers
or docks adjacent to Shore Line Zones 1 and 2 must be installed no later than May 15 of each
year.
(g) The owner of any pier or dock shall permit no swimming from the pier or dock of
children under the age of 16 years unless an adult who is an expert swimmer is present. No
person shall swim from any pier or dock without the owner's consent. There shall be no
swimming from such pier or dock beyond 50 feet from shore. Swimming, under all provisions
of this Section, is prohibited from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise.
(h) The location, construction, operation or maintenance of a pier or dock anywhere in or
on the Lake is a revocable license privilege.
(i) Any pier or dock located, constructed, operated or maintained in violation of the
provisions of this Section, or the rules or regulations promulgated thereunder, shall be removed
from the Lake upon notice from the Lake Maintenance Supervisor or designee.
(j) If a pier or dock is not removed on the date herein set forth or when requested by the
Lake Maintenance Supervisor or designee, the same may be removed by the City and expense
thereof charged to the permit holder as per Section 48 (p)
(k) A City furnished permit number plate shall be displayed at the Lake end and at the
shore end of each pier or dock, and on the plate at the Lake end a decal or sticker evidencing
payment of the permit fee for the then current year shall be affixed.
(l) Application for an initial permit or for annual renewal of a permit shall be filed with
the Finance Department upon forms provided by the City requiring such information as shall be
deemed reasonably necessary or desirable to aid in the administration of the provisions of this
Chapter and which application shall be accompanied by the payment of the appropriate annual
fees as follows:
Effective: March 1, 2014 March 1, 2015 March 1, 2016
Shore Line Zone 1:
For each front foot of sh ore line $6.50 $7.00 $7.50
plus for the first boat space
$105.00 $110.50 $116.00
plus for each boat space above one $131.50 $138.00 $145.00
Shore Line Zone 2:
For each front foot of sh ore line $5. 50 $6. 00 $6. 50
plus for the first boat space
$105.00 $110.50 $116.00
plus for each boat space above one $124.50 $130.50 $137.00
Shore Line Zone 3:
$52.50 $55.00 $58.00
In Shore Line Zones 1 and 2 the minimum front foot charge is for twelve feet of shore line; and,
if the application is for an initial permit, not a renewal, a fee of:
Effective: March 1, 2014 March 1, 2015 March 1, 2016
Initial permit
$44.00 $46.00 $48.50
shall accompany payment of the annual fee. In Shore Line Zone 3, if a pier or dock, or the
adjacent real property permitted as the physical location of the pier or dock, is not inside the
corporate limits of the City, the initial or annual permit fees shall be two times the fees for piers
or docks of the same classification situated within the corporate limits. (Amended Ordinance
2014-05, March 3, 2014)
(m) In Shore Line Zones l and 2 permits will be issued for docks or piers only to the
extent that space is available in the judgment of Lake Maintenance Supervisor or designee with
preference being given to multiple boat installations and in Shore Line Zone 3 permits will be
issued only to persons owning property abutting the Lake for piers or docks located at such
abutting property, except as provided in subsections (b) and (n). Docks or piers owned or
operated by government agencies are exempt from permit fees.
(n) Where sufficient room is available at locations other than those adjacent to privately
owned premises, permits may be issued to groups or clubs, applications for which, whether
initial or annual renewal, shall be accompanied by a list of the names of those officers and
members thereof, their respective home addresses, a telephone number for each, the license
number of each boat to be operated from such pier or dock, and location of each boat at the pier
or dock.
Group or club boat dock permits issued for locations adjacent to privately owned
premises in Shore Line Zone 3, and issued prior to February 28, 1997, may be renewed, but only
if the number of boat spaces does not exceed the number of such spaces permitted in 1996.
Except as expressly authorized hereby, no other permits for groups or clubs may be issued.
(o) The applicant in each application must agree to indemnify and to hold the City
harmless for any and all liability for damages to person or property for which it may be held
liable by reason of the maintenance or operation of a permitted pier or dock on the lake.
(p) If any pier or dock is physically retrieved, recovered or removed from the Lake by
the City, the owner thereof shall pay a charge of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) along with a sum equal to
the cost of labor, material and equipment use to the City connected with such action in excess of
Fifty Dollars ($50.00) and with a charge of Ten Dollars ($10.00) for each day or part thereof in
which the same is in the custody of the City which custody shall be at the risk of the owner
thereof.
(q) No boat shall be moored in the Lake unless it is moored within fifty (50) feet of the
shore line, and a pier permit endorsed to authorize such mooring is obtained.
(r) In Shore Line Zones 1 and 2 only owners of boats registered with the City for
operation on the Lake shall be eligible for permits and as to multiple boat dock permits shall be
issued only when such boat registration is shown for each boat space thereon.
(s) No boat shall be docked at a pier or dock without permission of the permit holder
thereof.
(t) Permit holders shall not loan the use of the permitted dock or pier in Shore Line
Zones 1 and 2 or space thereon or lease, sublease or rent the same, except temporarily for short
spaces of time with permission of the Lake Maintenance Supervisor or designee and without
payment of any fee or charge for the same.
(u) All piers or docks in Shore Line Zones 1 and 2 and those in Shore Line Zone 3
located under the provisions of subsections (m) and (n) shall be furnished with a gate suitable to
limit entry to such pier or dock when closed, and which gate shall be closed and locked except
during use by an authorized user.
(v) Determinations and decisions of the Lake Maintenance Supervisor or designee under
subsections (c), (d), (f), (i) and (m) of this Section may be reviewed by the City Manager
provided a written request for such review is filed with the City Manager within five (5) days
after notice of such determination or decision.
(w) In Shore Line Zones 1 and 2, the terms of the annual dock and pier permits include
the City's right to limit access, limit use, and allow other organizations the temporary use of the
dock and pier facility, for the purpose of conducting public events on and adjacent to Lake
Decatur. This section shall become effective March 1, 1994.
48. PERMITS ARE PERSONAL PRIVILEGES. Permits issued pursuant to Section
47 are for privileges personal to the permit holder and spouse and may not be transferred. All
such permits expire on the last day of February next after issuance.
49. REVOCATION OF PIER PERMIT. A pier or dock permit may be revoked upon
conviction of the permit holder of a violation of any rule or regulation duly established hereunder
or any other ordinance or statute of like nature the violation of which occurred on or adjacent to
Lake Decatur.
50. TRESPASSING ON DAM. No person shall, at any time, go onto or be upon the
Lake Decatur dam across the Sangamon River, the dam spillway, water intake structure or the
Sangamon River downstream of the Lake Decatur dam for a distance of 300 feet for any purpose
except to conduct City business.
(Amended, Ordinance 2017-05, February 6, 2017)
51. PROPERTY ADJACENT TO LAKE.
A. The Public Works Director shall have charge of all real estate owned by the City and
adjacent to the Lake. He shall see that such real estate is properly maintained and protected. He
shall have authority to lease such property or portions thereof upon such terms deemed most
advantageous to the City. Such leases must be approved by the City Manager. (Amended,
Ordinance 2017-08, February 6, 2017)
B. Employees of the Lake Services Section of the Public Works Department are hereby
authorized to perform all the duties and responsibilities of Parking Meter Checker, at the
direction of the Chief of Police, but only as to those City-owned or City-leased premises directly
adjacent to Lake Decatur. (Amended, Ordinance 2017-08, February 6, 2017)
52. PENALTIES. A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of Section 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 or 12 of this chapter shall be fined not less than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00) nor more than One Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($1,500.00) for
each offense, and each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
B. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of Section 51
subparagraph B of this chapter shall be fined not less than Twenty Five Dollars ($25.00) for each
offense, and each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall be considered a separate
offense. (Amended, Ordinance 2017-05, February 6, 2017)
C. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of any section
of this Chapter not enumerated in subparagraph A and B above shall be fined not less than One
Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense,
and each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall be considered a separate offense.
53. VIOLATION NOTICE AND COMPLAINT. Whenever a Lake Patrol or full time
Lake Services Section employee witnesses or has knowledge based on reasonable grounds of a
violation by any person, firm or corporation of any section of this Chapter, such person may be
issued a Violation Notice and Complaint for said violation by the Lake Patrol or full time Lake
Services Section employee, as set forth in Chapter 29 of this Code.
54. PAYMENT OF VIOLATION NOTICE AND COMPLAINT.
A. A person cited by a Lake Patrol employee for a violation of any section of this
Chapter is herein provided may terminate any further proceedings by the City due to said
violation by making payment to the City at the office of the City Treasurer. Payment is
considered as being made only when the City Treasurer is in receipt of the full amount.
B. If a person is given a citation for a violation as herein provided, no complaint may be
filed by an attorney on behalf of the City in any court having jurisdiction thereof seeking to
prosecute and fine such person for said violation sooner than ten (10) days after such citation is
issued, and no complaint may be filed if the citation is timely paid.
55. ANNUAL PERMIT FEE ADJUSTMENT. Effective March 1, 2017, and
continuing annually on March 1 thereafter, all permit fees contained in Sections 19.D., 19.G., 34.
And 47. (l) of this Chapter will increase by 2.5 percent or by the annual percentage change of the
U.S. Department of Labor Midwest Urban Consumer Price Index for each corresponding
preceding January 1 to December 31 time period, whichever is greater, and rounded up to the
next $0.50 increment. (Amended Ordinance 2014-05, March 3, 2014)
CHAPTER 67
BUILDING CODE
1. APPLICABILITY. This Chapter shall have, along with the Code adopted hereby,
the scope and applicability set out in said code, except as modified by the provisions of this
Chapter.
2. BUILDING CODE. The same having been duly placed and remained on filed as
required by law, and subject to the additions, modifications, changes or deletions set out in this
Chapter, 2015 International Building Code the same being found and declared by the Council to
be regulations as defined by applicable statute, is hereby adopted by reference and the same to be
known, and which may be cited, as the "The Building Code" of the City, and which shall have
the scope and applicability as therein set out, except as modified by the provisions of this
Chapter.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-59, October 3, 2011)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-19, April 2, 2007)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-23, March 15, 2004)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2001-57, July 30, 2001)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-64, November 5, 2018, Effective January 1, 2019)
3. SUBSTITUTIONS. (A) Whenever in said Code the words, "name of the
jurisdiction" or "jurisdiction" appear in brackets, said Code is modified by removal of said
brackets and substitution of the words "the City of Decatur, Illinois," in lieu of the words
contained therein, and said Code shall be taken and construed as if such were expressly so set out
therein.
Revised January, 2019
Chapter 67
(B) Whenever in said Building Code any of the other codes listed first in each of
subsections (i) through (iv) hereof is mentioned, such code shall be deleted therefrom and the
code listed immediately thereafter said subsection shall be substituted in lieu thereof, as
indicated, and said Code shall be taken and construed as if such latter code were expressly so set
out therein: (i) International Electric Code, to be replaced by the National Electrical Code,
Edition of the National Fire Protection Association; (ii) International Plumbing Code, to be
replaced by the Plumbing Code of the State of Illinois Department of Public Health; (iii)
International Private Sewage Disposal Code, to be replaced by the Illinois Private Sewage Code;
and, (iv) ICC A117.1 accessibility code, to be replaced by the Illinois Accessibility Code.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-59, October 3, 2011)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-19, April 2, 2007)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-23, March 15, 2004)
4. BUILDING INSPECTIONS. Whenever in said Code reference is made to the code
official such shall be taken to mean and shall be construed to refer to the Building Inspection
Manager or his designee as fully as if said designation was set out therein in lieu of such words
and whenever reference is therein made to the department of building inspections or similar
reference such shall be taken to mean and shall be construed to refer to the Building Inspections
Division of the Economic and Community Development Department as fully as if said
designation was set out therein in lieu of such words.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-19, April 2, 2007)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-11, March 13, 2000)
5. BOARD OF APPEALS. Whenever in said Code reference is made to the Board of
Appeals such shall be taken to mean and shall be construed to refer to the Construction and
Chapter 67
Housing Board of Appeals of the City. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-64, November 5, 2018
Effective January 1, 2019)
6. DELETIONS. The following numbered Articles or sections of said Code are deleted
therefrom and the provisions thereof are not adopted hereby:
Section No. (inclusive)
103
105.2 (item #2)
110.3.2
113
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-59, October 3, 2011)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-19, April 2, 2007)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-23, March 15, 2004)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2001-57, July 30, 2001)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-64, November 5, 2018, Effective January 1, 2019)
7. AMENDMENTS. The following numbered sections in said Code are hereby
modified and amended as herein indicated:
(a) All Appendices shall likewise be deleted with the exception of Appendix G, “Flood
Resistant Construction”;
(b) Where terminology in the body of the Code reads “by the fire code official” change
to read “by the code official”.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-59, October 3, 2011)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-19, April 2, 2007)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-23, March 15, 2004)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2003-28, May 27, 2003)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-64, November 5, 2018, Effective January 1, 2019)
Chapter 67
8. APPLICATION FOR PERMIT. Application for a permit required by said Code or
this Chapter shall be made by the owner or the person or entity in or entitled to possession of the
premises where the proposed work is to be done, or by the agent of either, or by the engineer,
architect or contractor connected with such work.
9. FEE. The amount of the fee required to accompany the application for a permit and
to be paid to the City Treasurer shall be determined by the building official as follows:
(a) For all permits other than those particularly specified herein said amount shall be
based upon the value of the proposed work in amounts as follows:
WORK VALUE FEE
$ 0 - $2,000 $35
$2,001 - $3,000 $45
$3,001 - $5,000 $50
$5,001 - $1,000,000 $50 plus $5 for each
$1,000 or fraction
thereof over $5,000
Over $1,000,000 $5,025 plus $4 for each
$10,000 or fraction thereof
over $1,000,000
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-59, October 3, 2011)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 96-38, June 17, 1996).
(b) For permits to demolish structures the amount shall be as follows:
1 - 4 Unit Residential Structures $50
Buildings which are accessory $25
to residential structures
(garages, sheds, etc)
Other $50 or per work value as listed in item
(a) above, whichever is greater
Chapter 67
(Amended, Ordinance No. 96-38, June 17, 1996).
(c) For permits to erect new one or two-family residential structures, room additions to
such structures, accessory buildings to such structures, or additions to accessory structures the
amount shall be as follows:
Square footage of finished living space x $.25 plus square footage of unfinished space
(includes basements, garages, decks, porches and other accessory) x $.15, minimum fee shall be
$50. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-59; Ordinance No. 96-38)
(d) For permits to alter or repair one and two family residential structures or residential
accessory buildings, the amount shall be as follows:
Building/structural alteration or repair $50
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-59; Ordinance No. 96-38)
(e) For permits to alter or repair other than one and two family residential structures or
residential accessory buildings, the amount shall be per work value as listed in item (a) above.
(f) For permits to erect or construct new buildings or additions to buildings other than
one or two family residential or residential accessory buildings, the amount shall be per work
value as listed in item (a) above.
(g) For permits to erect, construct, replace, repair or alter any sign or outdoor display
structure, the amount shall be as follows:
Sign without electrical work Use fee schedule in Section 9
Add $25 for new electrical circuit(s) for signs
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-59, October 3, 2011)
(h) For permits to erect or install swimming pools, the amount shall be as follows:
Inground pool including electrical and $70
plumbing required but not including any
Chapter 67
deck associated with pool
Aboveground pool with electrical but $50
not including associated decks
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-38, May 2, 2005)
(i) For permits to erect tents, air supported structures or other temporary structures,
the fees shall be as follows:
For tents, air supported or temporary structure $30
(including concessions)
If electrical required $50
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-59, October 3, 2011)
(j) For permits to erect fences $10
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
(k) Two (2) plan reviews for other than one and two family dwellings shall be included
in the permit fees. After the second review, there shall be a fee of $100 for each subsequent
review. (Amended, Ordinance No. 96-38, June 17, 1996).
10. WORK DONE WITHOUT PERMIT. Should any work for which a permit is
required be commenced or be done before such permit is issued and obtained, the required
permit may nonetheless be issued for such and subsequent work; however, the amount of the
required fee as provided herein for all work, both that commenced before and that proposed to be
done after said permit is issued, shall be double that otherwise so provided, and issuance of such
permit shall not, and shall not be, and shall not be construed to be, an excuse from, or waiver of,
or defense to or absolution from any penalty, liability or action otherwise provided for in said
Code or this Chapter but shall be cumulative of and in addition thereto.
11. SITE IMPROVEMENT BOND. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
Chapter or any other ordinance of the City, whenever site improvements are shown, or required
Chapter 67
to be shown, on plans upon which a building permit is, or building permits are, to be issued, the
applicant for such permit, before the same is issued, may be required to furnish to the City, to be
filed with the Public Works Department, a bond with penalty in an amount approved by the
Public Works Department to be sufficient to pay the costs of such improvements in event of
default, and in form and with security approved by the Corporation Counsel and conditioned
upon the furnishing, installation and construction of said site improvements in compliance with
said plans and with applicable ordinances, rules, regulations and standards within a reasonable
period to be determined by said Public Works Department not to exceed two years from the date
of such bond; provided, that successive bonds for additional periods may be authorized by the
Public Works Director, upon reasonable request; and provided, further, that in the event such
permit is, or such permits are, issued without such bond being so furnished, and without regard
to the progress, stage or extent of performance of work or completion thereunder, such permit or
permits may be revoked and all work thereunder stopped until such bond is so furnished,
approved and filed; and provided, further, that no such bond shall be required hereunder for
improvements the furnishing, installation or construction of which are a part of the condition of a
bond furnished pursuant to the requirements of the provision of an ordinance other than this
Code, or the permit or permits are for the construction of a single or two family dwelling being
built separately and not as a part of the development of a group of such dwellings.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-63, July 17, 2000)
12. BOND RULES AND REGULATIONS. The City Manager is hereby authorized to
promulgate and enforce by administrative order rules and regulations for the administration of
the provisions of Section 12 of this Chapter, which rules shall include provisions by which it
may be determined when such bonds shall or shall not be required considering the cost, type and
Chapter 67
extent of improvements to be required, the cost, type and character of the development or
improvements for which the permit, or permits, may be requested, and such other reasonable
objective considerations as may be necessary or desirable to administer said provisions to carry
out the intention and purpose of the same. Any person affected by the application and
enforcement of such rules may request review by the Council by, within ten days from the date
of any decision thereunder, filing such request in writing with the City Clerk specifying the
decision sought to be reviewed.
13. SIGNS. Billboards, sign boards and electrical signs shall be subject to provisions of
the Zoning Ordinance of the City. The owner or person in control of a display sign suspended
over a street or extending into a street more than fifteen (15) inches beyond the building line,
shall file with the City a public liability insurance policy with the City as the named insured,
indemnifying the City against loss or damage to person or property in the minimum amount
of One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence, combined single limit, and Two Million
Dollars ($2,000,000) aggregate, with a provision that the same may not be canceled except after
thirty (30) days prior notice to the City. (Amended, Ordinance No. 96-48, July 15, 1996).
14. DEMOLITIONS. Application is to be presented to the Construction Inspections
Division along with the proper fee. A permit will not be released and work is not to commence
until said Division has received verification that all utilities (electric, gas, water, sewer) have
been satisfactorily removed and / or disconnected from structure. Masonry foundations must be
removed to at least three (3) feet below grade before backfilling. In the case of residential
properties, all accessory structures must also be removed from the lot where a main residential
structure is removed. It is the responsibility of the applicant to comply with all local, state, and
federal regulations regarding removal and disposal of demolition debris.
Chapter 67
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-19, April 2, 2007)
15. CONCESSIONS (Temporary Restaurants). (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-59)
(a) Definition – establishments within a movable, temporary building, or mobile trailer
or similar vehicle created for seasonal sales of food or confections. Concessions erected for an
event of four days duration or less are not subject to these requirements. Concessions shall be
allowed to operate only between March 15 and November 30 of each calendar year.
(b) Permit – any concession that wishes to operate within City limits must first obtain a
permit from the Building Inspections Division, of the Economic and Community Development
Department. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(c) Inspection – concessions must pass inspection by the aforementioned division prior
to opening for business.
(d) Electrical – any electrical services required to operate a concession must be installed
by a City Licensed Electrical Contractor.
(e) Restrooms – restroom facilities (toilet and lavatory) must be available for employees
and customers and must be located within 300 feet of the concessions. If the restroom is located
inside an adjacent building, a written agreement with the owner of that building must be
presented to the Building Inspections Division.
(f) Fire Extinguishers – if the concession utilizes any grilling or frying, a Class K fire
extinguisher must be in a visible location mounted on hangers or brackets.
(g) Outdoor cooking – appliances for outdoor cooking shall not be located less than ten
feet from the facility or any other combustible surfaces.
Chapter 67
(h) Location – the concession must be located on property zoned B-2 Commercial
District or M-1 Intense Commercial District. The concession facility cannot displace any
required parking spaces.
(i) Removal – the building trailer, or other vehicle used as a concession must be removed
from the front yard setback between December 1 and March 14 of each calendar year.
16. RISK OF INJURY. Whenever application for a permit indicates that a part of a
public way or other property of the City will be used for storage of material, or be closed, or
otherwise used appurtenant to the work to be done under such permit, or application is made for
a permit to move a building or structure, or application is made for a permit to demolish a
building or structure other than one not exceeding 20 feet in height above grade and with a
minimum separation from the nearest other existing structure of five feet and the nearest property
line of a public way of not less than ten feet, if by reason of the size, condition, or location
thereof it appears to the building official there will exist the possibility or risk of injury to
persons or property, such official may withhold such permit unless there is on file with the
Finance Department an enforceable contract of insurance, with the person or the entity that is to
perform the work and the City as named insured, affording coverage for each occurrence of
personal injury of not less than $500,000 and for property damage of not less than $100,000 and
expressly provided that the same remain in effect for the term thereof absent written notice of
cancellation received by said Clerk, in which event said permit shall automatically terminate to
the same extent as if the same had been physically withdrawn and canceled.
17. PENALTY. Any person or entity that erects, constructs, alters, repairs, removes or
demolishes a building or structure without a permit required by said Code or this Chapter, or in
departure from or not in compliance with an approved plan, or that uses or occupies a building or
Chapter 67
structure, or part thereof, contrary to the provisions of this Code or without a required permit,
whether or not notice is received that such is a violation, or that continues work after a stop-work
order has been issued, served or posted, or that removes such a posted order, or that procures or
causes another to do, or to omit, as the case may be, any of the foregoing, or that having been
given notice thereof otherwise violates or fails to comply with the provisions of said Code or this
Chapter shall upon conviction of any such offense be fined no less than One Hundred Fifty
Dollars ($150.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each
day upon which a violation occurs or is allowed to continue, or a condition is not brought into
compliance after notice, shall be viewed and may be prosecuted as a separate and distinct
offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-75, October 31, 2011)
18. OTHER REMEDIES. The penalties provided herein are and shall be cumulative of
and in addition to any other remedy, or remedies, provided for in said Code of this Chapter.
19. RE-INSPECTION FEES. A re-inspection fee of $30.00 shall be assessed against
the applicant for a construction permit, or in the case of a combined permit, against the licensed
subcontractor, who has requested an inspection which cannot be completed and/or approved by
the Inspection Division for any of the following reasons:
1) the work for which the inspection has been requested is not installed or completed to
the extent that an inspection can be made;
2) The inspection reveals that there are violations which should have been found and
corrected by workers while simply checking their work before calling for an inspection;
3) the work for which the inspection has been requested has been covered up or hidden
from view so that an inspection cannot be made;
4) The Inspector is unable to gain entry at the time requested by the contractor; or
Chapter 67
5) When previously noted violations have not been corrected.
Fees assessed as herein provided may be appealed to the Construction and Housing
Board of Appeals by filing a notice of such appeal with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days
of the mailing of notice of such assessment. An appeal shall stay the due date for payment until
the date of the final order of the Board.
Such fees shall be assessed by mailing notice of same to the owner or other person by
certified mail, return receipt requested. Payment thereof shall be due fourteen (14) days after
mailing of such notice, which notice must contain a statement of the right of the owner or other
person to appeal the same to the Board and the time limitation thereon.
In any judicial proceeding brought by the City to collect fees which have not been paid as
required by the provisions hereof, failure to receive notice of the assessment of such fee may be a
defense thereto, but only if such notice was not sent to the proper mailing address of the
defendant or was received thereat by someone other than a person upon whom substituted
service may be made pursuant to the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure.
Any fee or fees assessed as herein provided, and any judgment entered for same, shall be
in addition to any fine imposed by the Circuit Court under Section of this Chapter.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building for which re-inspection fees
are unpaid.
20. WITHHOLDING OF PERMITS. Building permits may be withheld from permit
applicants, or in the case of combined permits from the licensed subcontractor, who is in
violation of Chapters 67, 67.2, 68, 69, or 70.1 of the City Code at a location other than that for
which a permit is being sought. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-59, October 3, 2011)
Such violation may include, but shall not be limited to the following:
Chapter 67
(a) Failure to arrange for inspections required under Chapters 67, 67.2, 68, 69, and/or
70.1 of the City Code within a reasonable time frame. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-59)
(b) Failure to take reasonable requested action to uncover work which requires
inspection but has been hidden from view of the inspector.
(c) Failure to pay required permit or re-inspection fees.
(d) Failure to obtain a building permit for work which required a building permit.
(e) Failure to take reasonable action to notify and obtain approval from division of
changes made to approved building permits.
(f) Falsifying information on building permit applications.
(g) Performance of building permit work under an invalid or voided building permit.
(h) Failure to obtain a required Certificate of Occupancy before occupying or allowing
occupancy of new construction or change in use.
Permit applicants from which permits are to be withheld must be notified by mailing
notice of same to the permit applicant or licensed subcontractor by certified mail, return receipt
requested. Said notice shall inform the permit applicant or licensed subcontractor of the
violations, which if corrected, will allow the City to issue to the permit applicant or licensed
subcontractor additional permits. Corrections shall be made within fourteen (14) days after
mailing of such notice, which notice must contain a statement of the right of the permit applicant
or licensed subcontractor to appeal the same to the Construction and Housing Board of Appeals
and the time limitation thereon.
The withholding of permits as herein provided may be appealed to the Construction and
Housing Board of Appeals by filing a notice of such appeal with the City Clerk within fourteen
Chapter 67
(14) days of the mailing of notice of such withholding. An appeal shall stay the due date for
corrections required until the date of the final order of the Board.
21. SEVERABILITY. The provisions hereof are, and shall be construed to be,
severable and invalidity of any section or provision of this Chapter of or the codes and standards
hereby adopted shall not invalidate other sections or provisions hereof.
22. REPEALED. That existing provisions of ordinances not in conformity with
the provisions of this Chapter are, to the extent of such non-conformity, amended, modified or
repealed so as to conform with the provisions hereof.
CHAPTER 67.1
FLOODPLAIN PROTECTION PROVISIONS
1. DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following definitions apply to
any building, structure and/or use of land determined to be located within the identified Floodplain:
A. BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood. The base flood
elevation at any location is as defined in Section 2 below.
B. BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood.
C. BASEMENT: That portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level)
on all sides.
D. BUILDING: A walled and/or roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank that is
principally above ground including manufactured homes, prefabricated buildings and gas or liquid
storage tanks. The term also includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days in any calendar year. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-
30, June 5, 2017)
E. CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of the
population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster. Damage to these
critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital services, can cause greater damage to other sectors
of the community, or can put special populations at risk.
Examples of critical facilities where flood protection shall be required include: emergency
services facilities (such as fire and police stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior
Revised 06/2017
care facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations or
electrical transformers, and hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals,
hazardous or toxic substances).
F. DEVELOPMENT:
i. Any man-made change to real estate including, but not necessarily limited to:
a. Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a building, or any
structural alteration to a building;
b. Substantial improvement of an existing building (See definition of “Substantial
Improvement”);
c. Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a manufactured
home, or placement of a travel trailer on a site for more than one hundred eighty
(180) days in any calendar year; (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
d. Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or similar projects;
e. Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls, fences or other barriers which
impede or divert the flow of water;
f. Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other alterations
of the ground surface;
g. Storage of materials, equipment, vehicles, including the placement of gas and liquid
storage tanks of any kind; or,
h. Channel modifications or any other activity that might change the direction, height,
or velocity of flood or surface waters.
ii. “Development” does not include the following:
a. Routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities;
b. Resurfacing or grading public and private roads, provided there are no changes to
the grade or elevation;
c. Construction or installation activities which have been approved by the Illinois
Department of Transportation, Division of Water Resources, Permits 2 through 13,
and/or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Permit 404, provided the accumulated
effect of construction does not increase the base flood;
d. Gardening, plowing, tilling the soil and similar practices that do not involve filling,
grading, or construction of levees;
e. Construction, installation of wood utility poles by a public entity or utility, traffic
signs or similar traffic control devices by a unit of local government; or,
f. Construction, maintenance or replacement of sidewalks, driveways, solidly
anchored playground equipment or the creation of public open space, athletic fields,
trails for hiking, walking or biking and similar uses, provided no structures or
buildings are erected, no fences built and all activities take place at existing grade
which involves no placement of fill, no alteration of the drainage and no changes
in any watercourse.
G. EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which
the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed (including, at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
H. EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities,
the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
I. FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency
J. FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation, or the runoff of surface
waters from any source.
K. FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory floodway.
L. FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: A map prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict floodways and
show base flood elevations.
M. FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
N. FLOODPLAIN and/or SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): These two terms
are synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Decatur, the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City of Decatur, or lands that may be annexed into the City of Decatur, that are
subject to inundation by the Base Flood. The floodplains in the City of Decatur are principally
identified as such on panel numbers 17115C0175, 17115C0186, 17115C0187, 17115C0188,
17115C0189, 17115C0190, 17115C0193, 17115C0195, 17115C0215, 17115C0220,
17115C0285, 17115C0301, 17115C0305, 17115C0310, 17115C0315, 17115C0320, 17115C0330
and 17115C0340 of the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map for the City of Decatur, prepared
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated June 7, 2017. Floodplain also includes
areas of known flooding as identified by the community and those parts of unincorporated Macon
County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City or that may be annexed into the
City are generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate map prepared for Macon County
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, dated June 7, 2017. (Amended, Ordinance No.
2017-30, June 5, 2017)
O. FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions, changes,
or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate, property and
their contents.
P. FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify
that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood
protection elevation.
Q. FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood plus two
(2) feet of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
R. FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base flood.
The floodway for the floodplains of Sangamon River, Long Creek (East of Big Creek), Long
Creek, Big Creek, Big Creek Arm of Lake Decatur, Spring Creek, Spring Creek Tributary, Spring
Creek Tributary East, Stevens Creek, Stevens Creek Tributary A, Stevens Creek Tributary B and
the Northeast Drainage Ditch shall be as delineated on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map
of Macon County, Illinois, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated
June 7, 2017. The floodways for each of the remaining floodplains of the City of Decatur shall be
according to the best data available from the Federal, State or other sources. (Amended, Ordinance
No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
S. FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to provide a
factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed development, unknown localized
conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams. (See
definition of “Flood Protection Elevation”)
T. HISTORIC STRUCTURES: Any structure that is:
i. Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily
determined by the U. S. Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing
on the National Register.
ii. Certified or preliminarily determined by the U. S. Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined by said Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district.
iii. Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the Illinois Historic
Preservation Agency.
iv. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been certified by the
Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
U. IDNR/OWR: The Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources.
V. IDNR/OWR JURISDICTIONAL STREAM: The Illinois Department of Natural Resource
Office of Water Resources has jurisdiction over any stream serving a tributary area of 640 acres
or more in an urban area, or in the floodway of any stream serving a tributary area of 6,400
acres or more in a rural area. Construction on these streams requires a permit from the
IDNR/OWR per Illinois Administrative Code, Title. 17, Part 3700.30. IDNR/OWR may grant
approval for specific types of activities by issuance of a statewide permit which meets the
standards defined in section 1(F) of this ordinance. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June
5, 2017)
W. LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor surface of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An enclosed area, unfinished or constructed with flood resistant materials that is
designed and intended to be used solely for parking vehicles, building access or storage of
incidental items in an area other than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable
non-elevation design requirements of this Ordinance. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5,
2017)
X. MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one (1) or more sections that is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation
when connected to required utilities. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
Y. MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into two (2) or more lots for rent or sale. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June
5, 2017)
Z. NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or
after the effective date of the adoption by the City of Decatur of floodplain management
regulations which includes all subsequent improvements of such structures or buildings.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
AA. NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
BB. NFIP: National Flood Insurance Program.
CC. RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
i. Built on a single chassis;
ii. Four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
iii. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck and
designed, built and intended as intermittent living quarters for solely
recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use, not for use as a permanent
dwelling.
DD. REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two separate
occasions during a ten year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event
on the average equals or exceeds twenty-five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
EE. SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): See the definition of “Floodplain.”
FF. START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued. This, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement, was within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
GG. STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any changes other than normal maintenance which
would tend to prolong the life of a supporting member of a structure such as a bearing wall, column,
beam, girder, or any substantial change in the roof or exterior walls.
HH. STRUCTURE: See the definition of “Building.”
II. SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cumulative percentage of damage during a ten (10) year period equals or exceeds fifty percent
(50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair
work performed. Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. The term
includes “Repetitive Loss Buildings” (See the definition of “Repetitive Loss Building”).
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
JJ. SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT:
i. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, enlargement or improvement of a structure
taking place during a ten (10) year period in which the cumulative percentage of
improvements: (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
a. Equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before
the improvement or repair is started; or, (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
b. Increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
“Substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive
loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done. (Amended, Ordinance No.
2017-30, June 5, 2017)
ii. The term does not include:
a. Projects which are purely for and directly related to the improvement of a
structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living or use of a building; or,
b. Alteration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the
Illinois Register of Historic Places. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
KK. VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant
with the City’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the
required federal, state, and/or local permits and elevation certification is presumed to be in
violation until such time as the documentation is provided.
LL. ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The Director of Economic and Community
Development or his/her designee shall be responsible for the administration of this Ordinance.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
2. BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. This Ordinance’s protection standard is the Base Flood.
The best, most reliable available base flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with
the best available data, it shall be the responsibility of that party to pay the cost of the required
engineering study needed to replace the existing data with better data. The findings in the study
shall be submitted to FEMA and IDNR/OWR for approval prior to any development of the site.
A. The base flood elevation for the floodplains of the Sangamon River, Long Creek
(East of Big Creek), Long Creek, Big Creek, Big Creek Arm of Lake Decatur,
Spring Creek, Spring Creek Tributary, Spring Creek Tributary East, Stevens Creek,
Stevens Creek Tributary A, Stevens Creek Tributary B and the Northeast Drainage
Ditch shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the countywide Flood
Insurance Study for Macon County, Illinois, prepared by FEMA, dated June 7,
2017. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
B. The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an “AH Zone” or “AO
Zone” shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the county wide Flood
Insurance Rate Map for Macon County, Illinois.
C. The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains delineated as an “A
Zone” on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map for Macon County, Illinois,
shall be according to the best data available from federal, state or sources. Should
no other data exist, an engineering study must be financed by the applicant to
determine base flood elevations.
D. The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Macon
County, Illinois, that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City, or that
may be annexed into the City, shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles
in the countywide Flood Insurance Study of Macon County, Illinois, prepared by
FEMA, dated June 7, 2017. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
3. ADMINISTRATION OF FLOOD PROTECTION PROVISIONS. The Zoning
Administrator shall be responsible for the administration of these provisions and shall ensure that
all development activities within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the City meet the
minimum requirements of this ordinance. Specifically, the Zoning Administrator shall:
A. Process, or have processed, permits in accordance with Section 4;
B. Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no delineated
floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of Section 5;
C. Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings subject to Section 6
are met and maintain a record of the “as-built” elevation of the lowest floor (including
basement) or floodproofing certificate;
D. Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of Section 7;
E. Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the Public Health standards
of Section 8;
F. If variances are requested, ensure that the requirements of Section 10, are met and
maintain detailed documentation of any variances granted;
G. Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions outlined in Section
12 as necessary to ensure compliance with this Ordinance;
H. Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all required local, state, and
federal permits;
I. Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any proposed alteration
or relocation of a watercourse;
J. Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about the floodplain
regulations, permit procedures and construction techniques;
K. Cooperate with State and Federal floodplain management agencies to coordinate base
flood data and to improve the administration of this ordinance;
L. Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps, copies of State and
Federal permits, and documentation of compliance for development activities subject
to this ordinance;
M. Perform site inspections as needed to ensure compliance with this ordinance and make
substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain; and,
N. Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR and/or
submitting information to FEMA within six months whenever a modification of the
floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to the floodplain
map.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
4. PERMIT REQUIREMENTS. No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not
exempted by law shall commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining the
required permits from the Zoning Administrator, or other designee. The Zoning Administrator
shall not issue any permits if the proposed development does not meet the requirements of this
ordinance.
A. Permit applications shall be accompanied by:
i. Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions;
ii. Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or
filling;
iii. The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings;
iv. The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings
subject to the requirements of Section 6; and,
v. Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed professional
engineer, architect or contractor. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5,
2017)
B. After receiving a permit application, the Zoning Administrator shall compare the
elevation of the site to the base flood elevation. Any development located on land that
can be shown by survey data to be higher than the current base flood elevation and
which has not been filled after the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map is
not in the floodplain and therefore not subject to the requirements of this
ordinance. Any development located on land shown by survey elevation to be below
the current base flood elevation is subject to the provisions of this ordinance. In
addition, any development located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation
and hydraulically connected to a flood source, but not identified as floodplain on the
current Flood Insurance Rate Map, is subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
i. The Zoning Administrator shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site along with the owner(s) certification that this
ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate
Map identification.
ii. The applicant shall supply to the Zoning Administrator and the Zoning
Administrator shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of all
other Federal, State, and local permits, approvals or permit-not-required letters
that may be required for this type of activity. The Zoning Administrator shall
not issue a permit unless all Federal, State, and local permits have been
obtained. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
5. PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS & DAMAGES. Within any
floodway identified on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map, and within all other floodplains
where a floodway has not been delineated, the following standards shall apply:
A. Except as provided in Section 5(B) of this Ordinance, no development shall be allowed
which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated development will cause any
increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to public health and safety. The
following specific development activities shall be considered as meeting this
requirement: (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
i. Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the conditions
of the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources
Statewide Permit Number 2;
ii. Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit Number 3;
iii. Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit Number 4;
iv. Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit Number 5;
v. Minor, non-obstructive activities such as underground utility lines, light
poles, sign posts, driveways, athletic fields, patios, playground equipment,
minor storage buildings not exceeding 70 square feet and raising buildings on
the same footprint which does not involve fill and any other activity meeting
the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 6;
vi. Outfall Structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 7;
vii. Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 8;
viii. Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 9;
ix. Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings meeting
the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 10;
x. Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 11;
xi. Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening meeting the
following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide Permit Number 12;
xii. Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide Permit Number 13; and,
xiii. Any Development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely within
a flood fringe area shall be exempt from State Floodway permit requirements.
B. Other development activities not listed in Section 5(A) of this Ordinance may be
permitted only if:
i. A permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required); or
ii. Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and approval
obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
6. PROTECTING BUILDINGS.
A. In addition to the State permit and damage prevention requirements of Section 5 of this
ordinance, all existing buildings located in the floodplain shall be protected from flood
damage below the flood protection elevation. These building protection requirements
apply to the following situations:
i. Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or addition to an
existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or
seventy (70) square feet; (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
ii. Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an existing
building that equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started, or increases the floor
area by more than twenty percent (20%). Alterations shall be figured
cumulatively during the life of the building. If substantially improved, the
existing structure and the addition must meet the flood protection standards
of this section; (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
iii. Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs shall be
figured cumulatively during the life of the building. If substantially
damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection standards of this
section within twenty-four (24) months of the date the damage occurred;
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
iv. Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home
to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood
damage; (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
v. Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per calendar year; and, (Amended, Ordinance
No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
vi. Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in Section 1.
B. Existing Residential or Non-Residential Buildings can meet the building protection
requirements by one of the following methods:
i. Buildings may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the
following: (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
a. The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation;
b. The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six (6) inches
before compaction and should extend at least ten (10) feet
beyond the foundation before sloping below the flood protection
elevation; (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
c. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or another approved
structural measures;
d. The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and shall not contain
building debris, vegetation or refuse materials; and
e. Shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or
onto neighboring properties, and when necessary stormwater
management techniques such as swales or basins shall be
designed, incorporated and maintained. (Amended, Ordinance
No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
ii. An existing building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
a. The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawlspace, or other foundation that is permanently open
to flood waters;
b. The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters
shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation;
c. If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the
automatic entry and exit of flood waters. Flood protection
designs must be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
by having a minimum of one (1) permanent opening on each
wall no more than one (1) foot above grade with a minimum of
two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1)
square inch per one (1) square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding below the base flood elevation; and, (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
d. All components below the flood protection elevation shall be
constructed of materials resistant to flood damage; (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
(i) Water and sewer pipes, electrical and
telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other
service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed;
(ii) The area below the flood protection elevation shall
be used solely for parking or building access and not
later modified or occupied as habitable space; or,
(iii) In lieu of the above criteria, all design methods
intended to comply with these requirements shall be
certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June
5, 2017)
e. The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified by a licensed engineer, to minimize
exposure to hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice,
and floating debris.
iii. An existing building may have a crawlspace located below the flood
protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
a. The building must be designed and be adequately anchored to
resist floatation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including
the effects of buoyancy; (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30,
June 5, 2017)
b. Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing
for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of
one opening on each wall having a total net area of not less than
one (1) square inch per one (1) square foot of enclosed area. The
openings shall be no more than one (1) foot above final grade;
c. The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two (2) feet below the lowest
adjacent exterior grade;
d. The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior
grade of the crawl to the top of the foundation wall must not
exceed four (4) feet at any point;
e. An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a
reasonable period of time after a flood event;
f. Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
and,
g. Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above
the flood protection elevation.
C. Non-Residential Buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation)
provided a licensed professional engineer or architect certifies that: (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
i. The structure and attendant utilities located below the flood protection
elevation are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood;
ii. The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of rise,
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the impact
from debris and ice;
iii. Floodproofing measures shall be incorporated into the building design and
fully operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity; and,
iv. Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing
for the purpose of this subsection.
D. Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on site shall be:
i. Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance with Section
6(B); and, (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
ii. Anchored to resist floatation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied
down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois Mobile
Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code § 870.
E. Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on a site for more than one hundred eighty
(180) days per calendar year shall meet the elevation requirements of Section 6(B)
unless the following conditions are met: (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5,
2017
i. The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty truck;
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
ii. The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times;
iii. The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as decks and
porches;
iv. The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel, or
intermittent seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling;
v. The vehicle’s largest horizontal projections must be no larger than four
hundred (400) square feet;
vi. The vehicle’s wheels must remain on axles and tires properly inflated;
vii. Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be safe for
movement of the floodplain; (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5,
2017)
viii. Propane tanks and all electrical and sewage disposal connections must be
quick-disconnect;
ix. The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or park
model; and, must either:
a. Be entirely supported by jacks; or,
b. Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by blocks in a manner that will
allow the blocks to be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
F. Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed ancillary to an existing
residential use may be permitted provided the following conditions are met:
i. The garage or shed must be non-habitable;
ii. The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and tools
and cannot be modified later into another use;
iii. The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have the
appropriate state and/or federal permits;
iv. The garage or shed must be on a single family lot and be accessory to an
existing principle structure on the same lot;
v. Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of materials
not susceptible to flood damage;
vi. All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical must be
elevated above the flood protection elevation;
vii. The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each wall
not more than one (1) foot above grade with one (1) square inch of opening
for every one (1) square foot of floor area;
viii. The garage or shed must be less than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000) in
market value or replacement cost whichever is greater or less than five
hundred seventy-six (576) square feet; (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30,
June 5, 2017)
ix. The structure shall be anchored to resist floatation and overturning;
x. All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides, fertilizers, etc.)
shall be stored above the flood protection elevation; and,
xi. A licensed Illinois surveyor shall document the lowest floor elevation and the
owner advised of the flood insurance implications.
7. SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS. The City Council shall take into account known
hazards related to land use and development, with significant regard and understanding of the
sensitive yet potentially destructive aspects associated with activities in areas prone to flooding. In
recognition of the potential, the City Council shall take into account the following: (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
A. New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, planned
developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet
the damage prevention and building protections standards contained in Sections 5 and
6 of this Ordinance. Proposals for such development shall include the following data;
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
i. The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where the base
flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant shall be
responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
ii. The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and,
iii. A signed statement by an Illinois Licensed Professional Engineer that the
proposed plat and development plan accounts for changes in the drainage of
surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2).
B. Streets, blocks lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid out in such
a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels. Floodplains within
the proposed developments shall be reserved for activities such as parks, public grounds
and other open space whenever possible. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5,
2017)
8. PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS.
A. Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In addition to the
other requirements in this Ordinance the following standards apply:
i. No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing chemicals,
explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, tanks or any
hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless such
materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and certified
by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed according to
the requirements of Section 6 of this Ordinance. (Amended, Ordinance No.
2017-30, June 5, 2017)
ii. Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
iii. Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters;
iv. New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal systems
shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding. Manholes or other above ground openings located
below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight;
v. Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities shall be located
outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new critical facilities may
be permissible within the floodplain if it is specifically documented that no
feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the
SFHA shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally
dry floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three (3) feet
above the level of the 100-year flood frequency where a 500-year flood
elevation has not been determined. Floodproofing and sealing measures must
be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released into
floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood
elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities; and, (Amended, Ordinance
No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
B. All other activities which may be determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
development shall be designed so as not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood
damages.
9. CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION. For all projects involving channel
modification, fill, or stream maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the
watercourse shall be maintained and not diminished. In addition, the City of Decatur shall notify
adjacent communities in writing, thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for such
alteration or relocation of the watercourse. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
10. VARIANCES. Whenever the standards of this ordinance place undue hardships on a
specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the City for a variance, subject to the
conditions set forth below. Upon its filing, City staff shall review the application and submit its
recommendation to the Zoning Board of Appeals, who shall hold the required public hearing. The
Zoning Board of Appeals may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems
necessary to further the intent of this ordinance.
A. No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates by a preponderance of
evidence that all of the following conditions are met:
i. The development activity cannot be established anywhere in the City in a
location outside the floodplain;
ii. An exceptional and documented hardship would result if the variance were
not granted;
iii. The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
iv. No additional threat, nuisance or damage will occur to the public health and
safety of nearby owners or to other properties in the area;
v. There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, rescue or
relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other public
facilities;
vi. The applicant’s circumstances are unique and do not establish a pattern
inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and,
vii. All other State and Federal permits have been obtained.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from
the requirements of the building protections standards of Section 6 of this Ordinance
that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
i. Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
ii. Increase the risk to life and property; and,
iii. Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that
the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
C. Historic Structures. Variances to the building protection requirements of Section 6
which are requested in connection with reconstruction, repair, or alteration of a historic
site or historic structure as defined in “Historic Structures”, may be granted using
criteria more permissive than the requirements of Sections 5 and 6 of this ordinance
subject to the conditions that:
i. The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure; and,
ii. The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being removed
as a certified historic structure.
D. Agriculture. Any variance granted for an agricultural structure shall be decided
individually based on a case by case analysis of the building’s unique circumstances.
Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as well as those criteria and
conditions set forth in this ordinance. In order to minimize flood damages during the
100-year flood and the threat to public health and safety, the following conditions shall
be included for any variance issued for agricultural structures that are constructed atgrade
and wet-floodproofed.
i. All agricultural structures considered for a variance from the floodplain
management regulations of this ordinance shall demonstrate that the varied
structure is located in wide, expansive floodplain areas and no other
alternate location outside of the special flood hazard area exists for the
agricultural structure. Residential structures or animal confinement
facilities, such as farm houses, cannot be considered agricultural structures.
ii. Use of the varied structures must be limited to agricultural purposes in zone
A only as identified on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
iii. For any new or substantially damaged agricultural structures, the exterior
and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation, wall
framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base flood
elevation, must be built with flood-resistant materials in accordance with
Section 6 of this ordinance.
iv. The agricultural structures must be adequately anchored to prevent
floatation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structures in accordance
with Section 6 of this ordinance. All of the building's structural components
must be capable of resisting specific flood-related forces including
hydrostatic, buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces.
v. Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be located above
the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they are contained within a
watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of resisting damage
during flood conditions in accordance with Section 6 of this ordinance.
vi. The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the 100-
year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters in accordance with Section 6(B) of this ordinance.
vii. The agricultural structures must comply with the floodplain management
floodway provisions of Section 5 of this ordinance. No variances may be
issued for agricultural structures within any designated floodway.
viii. Wet-floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and
approved by the Zoning Administrator and a registered professional
engineer or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development
permit for construction.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
11. DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY. The degree of protection required by this section is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. This Ordinance does not imply or guarantee that
development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free from flooding or damage. This
Ordinance does not create liability on the part of the City of Decatur or any of its officers or
employees for any flood damage that results from proper reliance on this Ordinance or any
administrative decision made lawfully thereunder. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5,
2017)
12. PENALTY. Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a violation of this
ordinance. Upon due investigation, the Zoning Administrator may determine that a violation of
the minimum standards of this ordinance exists. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the owner
in writing of such violation.
A. If such owner fails after a ten (10) day notice to correct the violation:
i. The City may make application to the circuit court for an injunction requiring
conformance with this section or such other order as the court deems
necessary to secure compliance; (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5,
2017)
ii. Any person who violates this ordinance shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than seven hundred fifty ($750.00)
for each offense;
iii. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues; and,
iv. The City may record with the Macon County Recorder a notice of violation
for the property.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the owner that any such violation is considered
a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause coverage by a Standard
Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended.
C. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of
the subject development. The stop-work order shall be in writing, indicate the reason
for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances
requiring the stop-work order. The stop-work order constitutes a suspension of the
permit. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-30, June 5, 2017)
D. Nothing herein shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action to prevent
or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person or
persons responsible.
13. ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS. This ordinance repeals and
replaces other ordinances adopted by the City Council to fulfill the requirements of the National
Flood Insurance Program. This ordinance does not repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this ordinance and other ordinances, easements,
covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
14. SEVERABILITY. The provisions and sections of this ordinance shall be deemed
separable and the invalidity of any portion of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of the
remainder.
15. EFFECTIVE DATE. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon approval and
adoption by the City Council.
CHAPTER 67.2
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE
1. APPLICABILITY. This Chapter shall have, along with the Code adopted hereby,
the scope and applicability set out in said code except as modified by the provisions of this
Chapter.
2. RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE. The same having been duly placed and
remained on file as required by law and subject to the additions, modifications, changes or
deletions set out in this Chapter, The International Residential Code/2015 of the International
Code Council, the same being found and declared by the Council to be regulations as defined by
applicable statute, is hereby adopted by reference and the same to be known, and which may be
cited as, “The Residential Building Code” of the City, and which shall have the scope and
applicability as therein set out, except as modified by the provisions of this Chapter. (Amended,
Ordinance 2018-65, November 5, 2018, Effective January 1, 2019)
3. SUBSTITUTIONS. Whenever in said Code the words, “name of the jurisdiction” or
“jurisdiction” appears in brackets, said Code is modified by removal of said brackets and
substitution of the words “the City of Decatur, Illinois”, in lieu of the words contained therein,
and said Code shall be taken and construed as if such were expressly so set out therein.
4. BUILDING INSPECTIONS. Whenever in said Code reference is made to the
“code official”, such shall be taken to mean and shall be construed to refer to the Building
Inspections Manager or his designee as fully as if said designation was set out therein in lieu of
Revised January, 2019
such words; whenever reference is therein made to the Department of Building Inspections or
similar reference, such shall be taken to mean and shall be construed to refer to the Building
Inspections Division of the Economic and Community Development Department as fully as if
said designation was set out therein in lieu of such words.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
5. BOARD OF APPEALS. Whenever in said Code reference is made to the Board of
Appeals, such shall be taken to mean and shall be construed to refer to the Construction and
Housing Board of Appeals of the City. (Amended, Ordinance 2018-65, November 5, 2018,
Effective January 1, 2019 )
6. REFERENCES. All references in the International Residential Code to other codes
shall be deleted and shall instead refer to the current city adopted property maintenance,
electrical, mechanical, and plumbing codes. All references in said code to “wood foundations”
shall not apply.
7. DELETIONS. The following numbered Chapters, Articles or Sections of said Code
are deleted therefrom and the provisions thereof are not adopted hereby:
Section Number (inclusive)
R103
R109.1.1
R309.5
R313
R314 (in lieu of 425 ILCS 60 Smoke Detector Act)
R315 (in lieu of 430 ILCS 135 Carbon Monoxide Alarm Detector Act)
(Amended, Ordinance 2018-65, November 5, 2018, Effective January 1, 2019)
8. AMENDMENTS.
(a) R105.2 – subsection 2. delete as an exemption; subsection 3. Insert the words, “All
retaining walls are exempt” in lieu of “walls over four feet in height”; subsection 10. delete as
exemption.
(b) R105.5 - Include the words “or verbally” after the words in the second sentence, “The
building official is authorized to grant, in writing.” Add to paragraph “Additional fees may be
assessed not to exceed $50.00.
(c) Table R301.2(1) - Add the following values to the table: Roof Snow Load, 20 PSF;
Wind, Speed 115 MPH, Seismic Design Category, B; Weathering, Severe; Frost Line Depth, 36
inches; Termite, moderate to heavy; Decay, slight to moderate. Ice Barrier underlayment
required, yes; Flood Hazards, 8/1/79; Air Freezing Index, 1152; Mean Annual Temp. 52.
(d) R302.1 - Change first paragraph to: “Exterior walls with a fire separation distance
less than three (3) feet shall have not less than a one (1) hour fire resistive rating with exposure
from both sides.”
(e) R317.1(2) Delete the last part that reads “and are less than 8 inches from the exposed
ground.”
APPENDIX ADOPTIONS
(f) Appendix J, “Existing Building and Structures” - adopt in entirety.
(Amended, Ordinance 2018-65, November 5, 2018, Effective January 1, 2019)
9. APPLICATION FOR PERMIT. Application for a permit required by said Code or
this Chapter shall be made by the owner or the person or the person or entity in or entitled to
possession of the premises where the proposed work is to be done, or by the agent of either, or
by the engineer, architect or contractor connected with such work.
10. FEE. The amount of the fee required to accompany the application for a permit and
to be paid to the City Treasurer shall be determined by the building official as follows:
(a) For permits to demolish structures the amount shall be as follows:
1-4 Unit Residential Structures $50
Buildings which are accessory to residential structures $25
(garages, sheds, etc.)
Other $50 or per work value as
listed in item (a) above,
whichever is greater.
(b) For permits to erect new one or two-family residential structures, room additions to
such structures, accessory buildings to such structures, or additions to accessory structures, the
amount shall be as follows:
Square footage of finished living space x $.25 plus square footage of unfinished space
(includes basements, garages, decks, porches and other accessory) x $.15.
(c) For permits to alter or repair one and two family residential structures or residential
accessory buildings, the amount shall be as follows:
Building/structural alteration or repair $50
Electrical:
Add up to 2 circuits, or install additional new $25 per unit
outlets, or repair damaged wiring
Change or upgrade electrical service or add more than $35 per unit
2 new circuits, or install new wiring for more than 2
Circuits
Mechanical:
Furnace or air conditioning unit or equipment $25 per unit
replacement, or installation
Electrical wiring for new/add on furnace or air $25 per unit
Conditioning
Plumbing $6 per fixture with a
minimum of $25 per unit
(d) For permits to alter or repair other than one and two family residential structures or
residential accessory buildings, the amount shall be per work value as listed in item (a) above.
(e) For permits to erect or construct new buildings or additions to buildings other than
one or two family residential or residential accessory buildings, the amount shall be per work
value as listed in item (a) above.
(f) For permits to erect or install swimming pools, the amount shall be as follows:
Inground pool including electrical and plumbing required $70
but not including any deck associated with pool
Above ground pool but not including associated decks $25
Above ground pool with electrical but not including $50
but not including associated decks.
(g) For permits to erect boathouses, shore walls, or $30
permanent docks
(h) Fences (all types) $10
(i) An additional fee of $50 will be assessed for permits to erect or construct new
buildings or for additions or alterations to buildings whereby the work has not been completed
and/or has not received “satisfactory” final inspections by the expiration date of the permit. This
fee may be waived by the Building Inspections Manager if he determines that the reasons for
delay are justified.
11. WORK DONE WITHOUT PERMIT. Should any work for which a permit is
required be commenced or be done before such permit is issued and obtained, the required
permit may nonetheless be issued for such and subsequent work; however, the amount of the
required fee as provided herein for all work, both that commenced before and that proposed to be
done after said permit is issued, shall be double that otherwise so provided, and issuance of such
permit shall not, and shall not be, and shall not be construed to be, an excuse from, or waiver of,
or defense to or absolution from any penalty, liability or action otherwise provided for in said
Code or this Chapter but shall be cumulative of and in addition thereto.
12. RISK OF INJURY. Whenever application for a permit indicates that a part of a
public way or other property of the City will be used for storage of material, or be closed, or
otherwise used appurtenant to the work to be done under such permit, or application is made for
a permit to move a building or structure, or application is made for a permit to demolish a
building or structure other than one not exceeding 20 feet high above grade and with a minimum
separation from the nearest other existing structure of five feet and the nearest property line of a
public way of not less than ten feet, if by reason of the size, condition, or location thereof it
appears to the building official there will exist the possibility or risk of injury to persons or
property, such official may withhold such permit unless there is on file with the Finance
Department an enforceable contract of insurance, with the person or the entity that is to perform
the work and the City as named insured, affording coverage for each occurrence of personal
injury of not less than $500,000 and for property damage of not less than $100,000 and expressly
provided that the same remain in effect for the term thereof absent written notice of cancellation
received by said Clerk, in which event said permit shall automatically terminate to the same
extent as if the same had been physically withdrawn and canceled.
13. PENALTY. Any person or entity that erects, constructs, alters, repairs, removes or
demolishes a building or structure without a permit required by said Code or this Chapter, or in
departure from or not in compliance with an approved plan, or that uses or occupies a building or
structure, or part thereof, contrary to the provisions of this Code or without a required permits,
whether or not notice is received that such is a violation, or that continues work after a stop-work
order has been issued, served or posted, or that removes such a posted order, or that procures or
causes another to do, or to omit, as the case may be, any of the foregoing, or that having been
given notice thereof otherwise violates or fails to comply with the provisions of said Code or this
Chapter shall be fined no less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each day upon which a violation occurs or is
allowed to continue, or a condition is not brought into compliance after notice, shall be viewed
and may be prosecuted as a separate and distinct offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-75)
14. OTHER REMEDIES. The penalties provided herein are and shall be cumulative
of and in addition to any other remedy, or remedies, provided for in said Code of this Chapter.
15. RE-INSPECTION FEES. A re-inspection fee of $30.00 shall be assessed the
applicant for a construction permit, or in the case of a combined permit, against the licensed
subcontractor, who has requested an inspection which cannot be completed and/or approved by
the Inspection Division for any of the following reasons:
1) The work for which the inspection has been requested is not installed or
completed to the extent that an inspection can be made;
2) The inspection reveals that there are violations which should have been found and
corrected by workers while simply checking their work before calling for an inspection.
3) The work for which the inspection has been requested has been covered up or
hidden from view so that an inspection cannot be made;
4) The Inspector is unable to gain entry at the time requested by the contractor, or
5) When previously noted violations have not been corrected.
Fees assessed as herein provided may be appeals to the Construction and Housing Board
of Appeals by filing a notice of such appeal with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days of the
mailing of notice of such assessment. An appeal shall stay the due date for payment until the
date of the final order of the Board.
Such fees shall be assessed by mailing notice of same to the owner or other person by
certified mail, return receipt requested. Payment thereof shall be due fourteen (14) days after
mailing of such notice, which notice must contain a statement of the right of the owner or other
person to appeal the same to the Board and the time limitation thereon.
In any judicial proceeding brought by the City to collect fees which have not been paid as
required by the provisions hereof, failure to receive notice of the assessment of such fee may be a
defense thereto, but only if such notice was not sent to the proper mailing address of the
defendant or was received thereat by someone other than a person upon whom substituted
service may be made pursuant to the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure.
Any fee or fees assessed as herein provided, and any judgment entered for same, shall be
in addition to any fine imposed by the Circuit Court under Section of this Chapter.
No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any building for which re-inspection fees
are unpaid.
16. WITHHOLDING OF PERMITS. Building permits may be withheld from permit
applicants, or in the case of combined permits from the license subcontractor, who is in violation
of Chapters 67, 67.2, 68, 69, or 70.1 of the City Code at a location other than that for which a
permit is being sought.
Such violation may include, but shall not be limited to the following:
(a) Failure to arrange for inspections required under Chapters 67, 67.2, 68, 69, and/or
70.1 of the City Code within a reasonable time frame.
(b) Failure to take reasonable requested action to uncover work which requires
inspection but has been hidden from view of the inspector.
(c) Failure to pay required permit or re-inspection fees.
(d) Failure to obtain a building permit for work which required a building permit.
(e) Failure to take reasonable action to notify and obtain approval from division of
changes made to approved building permits.
(f) Falsifying information on building permit applications.
(g) Performance of building permit work under an invalid or voided building permit.
(h) Failure to obtain a required Certificate of Occupancy before occupying or
allowing occupancy of new construction or change in use.
Permit applicants from which permits are to be withheld must be notified by mailing
notice of same to the permit applicant or license subcontractor by certified mail, return receipt
requested. Said notice shall inform the permit applicant or license subcontractor of the violations
which, if corrected, will allow the City to issue to the permit applicant or licensed subcontractor,
additional permits. Corrections shall be made within fourteen (14) days after mailing of such
notice, which notice must contain a statement of the right of the permit applicant or licensed
subcontractor to appeal the same to the Construction and Housing Board of Appeals and the time
limitation thereon.
The withholding of permits as herein provided may be appealed to the Construction and
Housing Board of Appeals by filing a notice of such appeal with the City Clerk within fourteen
(14) days of the mailing of notice of such withholding. An appeal shall stay the due date for
corrections required until the date of the final order of the Board.
17. SEVERABILITY. The provisions hereof are, and shall be construed to be
severable, and invalidity of any section or provision of this Chapter of or the codes and standards
hereby adopted shall not invalidate other sections or provisions hereof.
18. REPEALED. That existing provisions of ordinances not in conformity with the
provisions of this Chapter are, to the extent of such nonconformity, amended, modified or
repealed so as to conform with the provisions hereof.
CHAPTER 68
MECHANICAL CODE
1. APPLICABILITY. This Chapter shall have, along with the Code adopted hereby,
the scope and applicability set out in said Code, except as modified by the provisions of this
Chapter.
2. MECHANICAL CODE. The same having been duly placed and remained on file as
required by law, and subject to the additions, modifications, changes or deletions set out in this
Chapter, the International Mechanical Code 2015 and the International Fuel Gas Code 2015 of
the International Code Council, the same being found and declared by the Council to be
regulations as defined by applicable statute, is hereby adopted by reference, the same to be
known, and which may be cited, as "The Mechanical Code" of the City, and which shall have the
scope and applicability as therein set out, except as modified by the provisions of this Chapter.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-50, August 15, 2011)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-20, April 2, 2007)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-10, February 21, 2005)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-44, June 3, 2002)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-26, April 17, 2000)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 97-94, October 20, 1997)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-66, November 5, 2018, Effective January 1, 2019)
3. SUBSTITUTIONS. Whenever in said Code the words, "name of jurisdiction" or
"jurisdiction" appear in brackets, said Code is modified by removal of said brackets and
substitution of the words, "the City of Decatur, Illinois," in lieu of the words contained therein
and whenever the words "name of state" or "State" so appear said Code is so modified and the
word "Illinois" so substituted, and said Code shall be taken and construed as if such was
Revised January, 2019
Chapter 68
expressly so set out therein.
4. BUILDING INSPECTIONS. Whenever in said Code reference is made to the code
official such shall be taken to mean and shall be construed to refer to the Manager of
Building Inspections or his designee as fully as if said designation was set out therein in lieu
of such words and whenever reference is therein made to the department of building inspections
or to the department of mechanical inspection or similar reference such shall be taken to mean
and shall be construed to refer to the Inspections Division of the Economic and Community
Development Department as fully as if said designation was set out therein in lieu of such words.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-10, February 21, 2005)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-11, March 13, 2000)
5. BOARD OF APPEALS. Whenever in said Code reference is made to the board of
appeals such shall be taken to mean and shall be construed to refer to the Construction and
Housing Board of Appeals of the City.
6. DELETIONS. The following numbered articles or sections of said Code are deleted
therefrom and the provisions thereof are not adopted hereby:
M Section No. (inclusive)
103.1 - 103.3 106.5.2 - 106.5.3
108.4 109
603.5
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-50, August 15, 2011)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-20, April 2, 2007)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-10, February 21, 2005)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-44, June 3, 2002)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-26, April 17, 2000)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-66, November 5, 2018, Effective January 1, 2019)
Chapter 68
International Fuel Gas Code Section No. (inclusive)
103.2
106.6.2
109 (IFGC)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-50, August 15, 2011)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-44, June 3, 2002)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-66, November 5, 2018, Effective January 1, 2019)
7. AMENDMENTS. The following numbered sections in said Code are hereby
modified and amended as herein indicated:
(a) M-106.5.2 by substituting the words “See Section 9 of Chapter 68 of the City Code”
after the words “following schedule”. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-26, April 17, 2000)
(b) M-108.4 by deleting the words “of not less than (amount) dollars or more than
(amount) dollars".
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-10, February 21, 2005)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-26, April 17, 2000)
(c) Reference to ICC International Plumbing Code in Chapter 16 changed to reference
Illinois State Plumbing Code, latest edition, as amended.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-50, August 15, 2011)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-44, June 3, 2002)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-26, April 17, 2000)
(d) M603.5. Nonmetallic ducts. Fibrous duct construction, specifically duct board
material, shall not be used as Class 0 or Class 1 air duct.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-10, February 21, 2005)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-44, June 3, 2002)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-66, November 5, 2018, Effective January 1, 2019)
Chapter 68
8. PERMIT REQUIRED. It shall be unlawful to do mechanical work in the City unless
and until permit for the same has been obtained when required by and issued in accordance with
the provisions of the Building Code.
9. FEES REQUIRED. The amount of the fee required to accompany the application
for a permit and to be paid to the City Treasurer shall be determined by the building official as
follows:
a. For all permits other than those specified herein said amount shall be based upon the
value of the proposed work in the amounts as follows:
WORK VALUE FEE
$0 - $2,000 $35
$2,001 - $3,000 $45
WORK VALUE FEE
$3,001 - $5,000 $50
$5,001 - $1,000,000 $50 Plus $5 for each
$1,000 or fraction thereof
over $5,000
Over $1,000,000 $5,025 plus $4 for each
$10,000 or fraction thereof
over $1,000,000
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-50, August 15, 2011)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 96-38, June 17, 1996)
b. For permits to alter or repair one or two family residential accessory buildings, the
amount shall be as follows:
Furnace and/or air conditioning unit
or equipment replacement or installation...... $35 per dwelling unit
Air conditioning add-on to existing
mechanical.................................... $35 per dwelling unit
Chapter 68
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-50, August 15, 2011)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 96-38, June 17, 1996)
c. For permits to alter or repair mechanical work in other than one or two family
residential structures or residential accessory buildings, the amount shall be as per work value
listed in item (a) above, with a minimum fee of $35.00.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-50, August 15, 2011)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 96-38, June 17, 1996)
d. For permits to install new mechanical work in new one or two family residential
structures, room additions to such structures, or accessory buildings to such structures, the
amount shall be included as part of a combined permit for building, electrical, mechanical, and
plumbing and shall be included in the total fee as set forth in Chapter 67, Section 9 (c).
e. For permits to install new mechanical work in new buildings other than one or two
family residential or residential accessory, the amount shall be per work value as listed in item
(a) above.
10. WORK DONE WITHOUT PERMIT. Except for work performed in response to
an unanticipated emergency at a time other than the regular business hours of the mechanical
official and for which a permit is later obtained during the next succeeding regular business day
of said official, should any work for which a permit is required be commenced or be done before
such permit is issued and obtained the required permit may nonetheless be issued for such and
subsequent work; however, the amount of the required fee as provided herein for all work, both
that commenced before and that proposed to be done after said permit is issued, shall be double
that otherwise so provided, and issuance of such permit shall not, and shall not be construed to
be, an excuse from, or waiver of, or defense to or absolution from any liability or action
otherwise provided for in said Code or this Chapter but shall be in cumulative of and in addition
Chapter 68
thereto. Failure to obtain a permit by such means as described previously and occurring three (3)
times within a calendar year, shall constitute automatic suspension of contractor’s mechanical
license for a period of (90) days. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-20, April 2, 2007)
11. PENALTY. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect,
construct, alter, repair, remove, demolish, install or operate mechanical equipment regulated by
said Code of this Chapter, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in conflict with or in
violation of any of the provisions thereof. It shall be unlawful to continue work after a stop order
has been issued, served or posted under said provisions. Any person, firm or corporation
violating or found to be in violation of any of said provisions shall be fined not less than One
Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense,
and each day upon which a violation occurs or is allowed to continue, or a condition is not
brought into compliance after notice, shall be viewed and shall be prosecuted as a separate and
distinct offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-75, October 31, 2011)
12. OTHER REMEDIES. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not
preclude the institution of appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain,
correct or abate a violation or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or operation of mechanical
equipment or systems in or about any premises.
13. RE-INSPECTION FEES. A re-inspection fee of $30.00 shall be assessed against
the applicant for a construction permit, or in the case of a combined permit, against the licensed
subcontractor, who has requested an inspection which cannot be completed and/or approved by
the Inspection Division for any of the following reasons: (1) The work for which the inspection
has been requested is not installed or completed to the extent that an inspection can be made; (2)
The inspection reveals that the mechanical system has code violations due to: Mechanical
Chapter 68
equipment and appliances not being installed in accordance with manufacturer's installation
instructions for the labeled equipment; or (3) the work for which the inspection has been
requested has been covered up or hidden from view so that an inspection cannot be made.
If an inspection can be made, but 3 or fewer items are found which need correction to
fully comply with the Mechanical Code, the permit applicant or licensed subcontractor shall be
notified in writing by the Inspection Division of the corrections required, and a re-inspection fee
of $30.00 shall be assessed against the permit applicant or licensed subcontractor only when any
subsequently requested inspection reveals that any of the previously noted code violations have
not been corrected. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-26, April 17, 2000)
Fees assessed as herein provided may be appealed to the Construction and Housing
Board of Appeals by filing a notice of such appeal with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days
of the mailing of notice of such assessment. An appeal shall stay the due date for payment until
the date of the final order of the Board.
Such fees shall be assessed by mailing notice of same to the owner or other person by
certified mail, return receipt requested. Payment thereof shall be due fourteen (14) days after
mailing of such notice, which notice must contain a statement of the right of the owner or other
person to appeal the same to the Board and the time limitation thereon.
In any judicial proceeding brought by the City to collect fees which have not been paid as
required by the provisions hereof, failure to receive notice of the assessment of such fee may be
a defense thereto, but only if such notice was not sent to the proper mailing address of the
defendant or was received thereat by someone other than a person upon whom substituted
service may be made pursuant to the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure.
Chapter 68
Any fee or fees assessed as herein provided, and any judgment entered for same, shall be
in addition to any fine imposed by the Circuit Court under Section 11 of this Chapter. No
Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any building for which re-inspection fees are unpaid.
14. WITHHOLDING OF PERMITS. Building permits may be withheld from a
permit applicant, or in the case of combined permits from the licensed subcontractor, who is in
violation of Chapters 67, 68, 69, or 70.1 of the City Code at a location other than that for which a
permit is being sought.
Such violation may include, but shall not be limited to the following:
a. Failure to arrange for inspections required under Chapters 67, 68, 69, and/or 70.1 of
the City Code within a reasonable time frame.
b. Failure to take reasonable requested action to uncover work which requires inspection
but has been hidden from view of the inspector.
c. Failure to pay required permit or re-inspection fees.
d. Failure to obtain a building permit for work which required a building permit.
e. Failure to take reasonable action to notify and obtain approval from the Inspections
Division of changes made to approved building permits.
f. Falsifying information on building permit applications.
g. Performance of building permit work under an invalid or voided building permit.
h. Failure to obtain a required Certificate of Occupancy before occupying or allowing
occupancy of new construction or change in use.
Permit applicants from which permits are to be withheld must be notified by mailing
notice of same to the permit applicant or licensed subcontractor by certified mail, return receipt
Chapter 68
requested. Said notice shall inform the permit applicant or licensed subcontractor of the
violations, which if corrected, will allow the City to issue to the permit applicant or licensed
subcontractor additional permits. Corrections shall be made within fourteen (14) days after
mailing of such notice, which notice must contain a statement of the right of the permit applicant
or licensed subcontractor to appeal the same to the Construction and Housing Board of Appeals
and the time limitation thereon.
The withholding of permits as herein provided may be appealed to the Construction and
Housing Board of Appeals by filing a notice of such appeal with the City Clerk within fourteen
(14) days of the mailing of notice of such withholding. An appeal shall stay the due date for
corrections required until the date of the final order of the Board.
15. SEVERABILITY. The provisions hereof are, and shall be construed to be severable
and invalidity of any section or provision of this Chapter or of the codes and standards hereby
adopted, shall not invalidate other sections or provisions hereof.
CHAPTER 69
ELECTRICAL CODE
1. APPLICABILITY. This Chapter shall have, along with the Code adopted hereby,
the scope and applicability set out in said Code, except as modified by the provisions of this
Chapter.
2. ELECTRICAL CODE. The same having been duly placed and remained on file as
required by law, and subject to the additions, modifications, changes or deletions set out in this
Chapter, the National Electrical Code, 2014 Edition of the National Fire Protection Association,
the same being found and declared by the Council to be regulations as defined by applicable
statute, is hereby adopted by reference and the same to be known, and which may be cited, as
"The Electrical Code" of the City, and which shall have the scope and applicability as therein set
out, except as modified by the provisions of this Chapter.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-51, August 15, 2011)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-09, March 17, 2008)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-81, September 6, 2005)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-16, April 1, 2002)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-96, November 6, 2000)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 99-33, April 5, 1999)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-67, November 5, 2018, Effective January 1, 2019)
3. SUBSTITUTIONS. Whenever in said Code the jurisdiction or governmental body
having jurisdiction is referred to, such reference shall mean the City of Decatur, Illinois, and
whenever the state is referred to it shall mean the State of Illinois and said Code shall be taken
and construed as if the same were expressly set out therein.
4. BUILDING INSPECTIONS. Whenever in said Code reference is made to the
Revised January, 2019
Chapter 69
authority having jurisdiction such shall be taken to mean and shall be construed to refer to the
Building Inspection Manager as fully as if said designation was set out therein.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
5. BOARD OF APPEALS. Whenever in said Code reference is made to the board of
appeals such shall be taken to mean and shall be construed to refer to the Construction and
Housing Board of Appeals of the City. (Amended, Ordinance 2018-67, November 5, 2018,
Effective January 1, 2019)
6. PERMIT REQUIRED. It shall be unlawful to do electrical work, including all
raceway systems and all conductor installations, in the city unless and until permit for the same
has been obtained when required by and issued in accordance with the provisions of the Building
Code, with the following exceptions: (Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-16, April 1, 2002)
A. Minor maintenance such as changing a switch, receptacle, light fixture, ballasts, and
bulbs.
B. Replacing a grounded receptacle with GFCI receptacle.
C. Low voltage wiring for thermostats and other related controls for heating and air
conditioning units in existing buildings. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-42, May 20, 2002)
D. Low voltage wiring for T.V., sound systems, alarm systems, computer data and
telephones in existing buildings. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-16, April 1, 2002)
E. Coax cable for antenna or computers in existing buildings.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-81, September 6, 2005)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-16, April 1, 2002)
F. Wiring replacement furnace or air conditioning equipment from the existing switch or
disconnect where circuit wires are of adequate size.
Chapter 69
G. Wiring required for installation of industrial machinery from the existing switch or
disconnect where circuit wires are of adequate size.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-16, April 1, 2002)
H. Wiring for replacement signs from existing switch or disconnect where circuit wires
are of adequate size.
I. Service related work such as replacing fuses, circuit breakers, motors, or controls in
existing buildings or appliances. This would include heating elements of ranges, furnaces, water
heaters, etc.
J. Replacing broken meter sockets or masts on services where no new conduit or
conductors are changed, enlarged, or replaced.
K. Permits are valid for a period of six (6) months for new construction and ninety (90)
days for renovation; or with an approved extension.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-09, March 17, 2008)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-16, April 1, 2002)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 99-33, April 5, 1999)
7. WORK DONE WITHOUT PERMIT. Except for work performed in response to an
unanticipated emergency at a time other than the regular business hours of the building official
and for which a permit is later obtained during the next succeeding regular business day of said
official, should any work for which a permit is required be commenced or done before such
permit is issued and obtained the required permit may nonetheless be issued for such and
subsequent work; however, the amount of the required fee as provided herein for all work, both
that commenced before and that proposed to be done after said permit is issued, shall be double
that otherwise so provided, and issuance of such permit shall not, and shall not be construed to
be, an excuse from, or waiver of, or defense to or absolution from any liability or action
Chapter 69
otherwise provided for in said Code or this Chapter but shall be cumulative of and in addition
thereto.
8. FEES REQUIRED. The amount of the fee required to accompany the application for
a permit and to be paid to the City Treasurer shall be determined by the building official as
follows:
A. For all permits other than those specified herein said amount shall be based upon the
value of the proposed work in amounts as follows:
WORK VALUE FEE
$ 0 - $2,000 $35
$2,001 - $3,000 $45
$3,001 - $5,000 $50
$5,001 - 1,000,000 $50 plus $5 for each $1,000 or
fraction thereof over $5,000
Over $1,000,000 $5,025 plus $4 for each $10,000 or
fraction thereof over $1,000,000
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-51, August 15, 2011)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 96-38, June 17, 1996).
B. For permits to alter or repair one or two family residential structures or residential
accessory buildings, the amount shall be as follows:
Adding up to two (2) new circuits,
installing or replacing, outlets,
performing minor repairs to damaged wiring....... $35 per unit
Changing or upgrading electrical service
or adding more than (2) new circuits or
installing wiring for more than two (2) new
circuits......................................................... $45 per unit
Electrical wiring for new/add on
furnace or air conditioning ............................. $35 per unit
(Amended, Ordinance No. 96-38, June 17, 1996)
Chapter 69
C. For permits to install new electrical work in one and two family residential structures,
room additions to such structures, or accessory buildings to such structures, the amount shall be
included as part of a combined permit for building, electrical, mechanical, and plumbing and
shall be included in the total fee as set forth in Chapter 67, Section 9 (c).
D. For permits to erect or install swimming pools with electrical work, the amount shall
be as follows:
Inground swimming pool with electric work $70
Above-ground swimming pool with electric work $50
(Amended, Ordinance No. 96-38, June 17, 1996).
9. SERVICE SPECIFICATIONS.
A. All newly installed electrical services shall be in conformance with the 2011 edition
of the National Electrical Code and with the following:
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-51, August 15, 2011)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-09, March 17, 2008
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-81, September 6, 2005)
(1) N.E.C. 230.2 Number of services - only one service drop or lateral shall be
permitted unless written approval by the Inspection Division is obtained for the conditions (a)
through (d) of said Article 230.2. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-81, September 6, 2005)
(2) N.E.C. 230.43 Service - entrance conductors shall be installed in accordance with
the applicable requirements of this code covering the type of wiring method used and shall be
limited to the following methods:
(a) Rigid metal conduit;
(b) Intermediate metal conduit;
(c) Rigid nonmetal conduit.
Chapter 69
Any other method described shall have written consent of the Inspection Division and
local utility company.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-81, September 6, 2005)
(3) N.E.C. 230.70 (a) Location. The service disconnecting means shall be installed at a
readily accessible location either outside of a building or structure, or inside nearest point of
entrance of the service conductors, but not to exceed ten feet.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-81, September 6, 2005)
(4) Where city water is available, the electrical service shall be bonded to the cold water
piping with a jumper around the water meter.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-81, September 6, 2005)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-16, April 1, 2002)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-96, November 6, 2000)
(5) Sizing of service entrance conductors shall be one of the following: (a) to main
breaker with no reduction of ampere rating; (b) to approved calculated load where multiple
disconnects are used, with no reduction of ampere rating; (c) to rated buss of equipment when no
calculated load is provided with no reduction of ampere rating.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-09, March 17, 2008)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-81, September 6, 2005)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-42, May 20, 2002)
(6) PVC risers up utility poles shall be Schedule 80.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-09, March 17, 2008)
(7) Metal elbows and conduits at utility poles and building service shall be connected to
an effective grounding path, by the electrical contractor and installed as per N.E.C. 250.80.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-09, March 17, 2008)
10. CODE APPLICATIONS - SPECIFIC.
A. New buildings of all types:
Chapter 69
1) The 2014 edition of the National Fire Protection Association will be the accepted
code for all electrical wiring installations.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-51, August 15, 2011)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-09, March 17, 2008)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-81, September 6, 2005)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-16, April 1, 2002)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-96, November 6, 2000)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 99-33, April 5, 1999)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-67, November 5, 2018, Effective January 1, 2019)
2) Where emergency lighting is required, an adequate numbers of battery back-up type
fixtures shall be used to provide lighting for exiting. This shall be required in all installations
including buildings supplied with alternate power supply such as generators or separate services.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-51, August 15, 2011)
3) Smoke detectors shall be as per 907.2.10 of the International Fire Code - 2015
Edition. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-51, August 15, 2011) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-
67, November 5, 2018, Effective January 1, 2019 )
B. Existing buildings:
1) Other than dwelling:
(a) All new wiring shall be installed as per this Electrical Code;
(b) When it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the
occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets,
improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, such defects shall
be corrected.
Chapter 69
(c) Whenever construction remodeling calls for walls or ceilings (including suspended
ceilings) to be opened up, all wiring, boxes, conduit, etc. exposed by this work shall be in
accordance with the code at the time of installation or brought up to current code standards.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-51, August 15, 2011)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-16, April 1, 2002)
2) Buildings or part of buildings used as human dwellings:
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-16, April 1, 2002)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 95-15, April 3, 1995)
(a) Whenever a new electrical service or wiring of new building additions or rewiring
with three (3) or more additional circuits, the following shall also apply:
1. Service: The size and usage of appliance and equipment shall be used as the
basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with the latest adopted
edition of this Electrical Code. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-81, September 6, 2005)
2. Receptacles: Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two
separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounded
type receptacle. Every bathroom shall contain at least one duplex wall receptacle and be
protected by a GFCI. Any new receptacle must be of the grounded type and installed as per the
NEC. Existing 3-wire grounded type receptacles, wired to a 2-wire system, shall either be
grounded as per the NEC, protected by a GFCI, or replaced by a 2-wire receptacle.
3. Lighting fixtures: Every public hall, interior stairway, bathroom, laundry room,
furnace room, basements, and attics or utility rooms used for storage or contain equipment
requiring servicing shall contain at least one electric lighting fixture controlled by a wall switch
at the usual point of entry. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-81, September 6, 2005)
Chapter 69
4. Electrical system hazards: The following items are declared to be hazardous
and it shall be unlawful to create, maintain or permit the same to exist.
a. Conductors or devices carrying electrical energy in excess of the
approved rated capacity;
b. Electrical wiring, of all types, not supported in an approved manner
(existing wiring will be allowed on bottom of joists in basements if secured at intervals to
eliminate sagging);
c. Splices unenclosed in approved boxes other than knob and tube wiring
inside walls and attics;
d. Absence of or use of unapproved connectors for splices and termination
into boxes or cabinets;
e. Exposed fuse blocks or cleat type light fixtures;
f. Wiring with insulation deterioration or other damaged conditions;g.
Flexible cords, commonly known as lamp or extension cords, used as a substitute for fixed
wiring; or where run through walls, ceilings, floors, doorways, windows, or where attached to, or
run behind building surfaces such as walls, ceilings, baseboard, and floors;
h. The use of the grounded circuit conductor used for grounding, except as
provided by NEC 250.140, Exception, for such listed appliances;
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-81, September 6, 2005)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-96, November 6, 2000)
i. Broken porcelain fixtures in basements or cord type fixtures with frayed
or deteriorated insulation;
j. Electrical wiring with metal outer covering in contact with dissimilar
metals such as copper water piping, etc.;
Chapter 69
k. Boxes or conduits with excessive number of conductors;
l. Knob and tube wiring in areas other than inside walls or attics.
In keeping with safe electrical installations, all unsafe conditions other than specifically
noted above, should be disclosed to the owner by the electrical contractor and corrected before
inspection.
C. Swimming Pools
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-51; Ordinance No. 2010-48)
N.E.C. 680.23. Underwater Luminaries. This section covers all luminaries
(lighting fixtures) installed below the normal water of the pool. (a) Voltage Limitation. No
luminaries (lighting fixtures) shall be installed for operation on supply circuits over 15 volts
between conductors.
11. SERVICE CONNECTIONS. The local utility company may connect the
electrical service to the structure when the service is installed permanently on the structure and
upon order of the Inspection Division. Where services have been damaged due to weather
conditions, a permit and inspection will be necessary only when new conductors are being
installed. Such inspections will be of the electrical service only.
During severe weather conditions the Building Inspection Manager may waive all
permits and inspections. Under such conditions the repaired services must remain the same size
and materials must be used accordingly. If a larger size service is requested by the owner, then
all such provisions of this code shall apply.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-16, April 1, 2002)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 95-15, April 3, 1995)
Chapter 69
12. INSPECTIONS: All electrical wiring installed under a permit issued as herein
provided must be inspected before being concealed and must have a final approved inspection
before the Certificate of Occupancy is eligible for issuance. It is the responsibility of the
electrical contractor, or those making electrical installations or alterations, to give such timely
notice requesting inspections. It may be necessary at various times to lengthen the time before
inspections can be made and shall be at the discretion of the Building Inspection Manager.
Failures to call for final electrical inspections before structures are occupied or after job
completion, will be cause for the Inspection Division to submit the case before the Electrical
Commission for possible license suspension or revocation. The Inspection Division may revoke
a permit or withhold approval of work in case there has been a false statement or representation
as to a material fact in the application, the plans, or specifications upon which such approval of
such permit was based.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 95-15, April 3, 1995)
13. PENALTY. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect,
construct, alter, repair, remove, demolish, install or operate electrical equipment regulated by
said Building Code or said Electrical Code or this Chapter or cause the same to be done, contrary
to or in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions thereof. It shall be unlawful to
continue work after a stop order has been issued, served or posted under said provisions. Any
person, firm or corporation violating or found to be in violation of any of said provisions shall be
fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars
($500.00) for each offense, and each day upon which a violation occurs or is allowed to
continue, or a condition is not brought into compliance after notice, shall be viewed and may be
prosecuted as a separate and distinct offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-75)
Chapter 69
14. OTHER REMEDIES. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not
preclude the institution of appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain,
correct or abate a violation, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or operation of electrical
equipment or systems in or about any premises.
15. RE-INSPECTION FEES. A re-inspection fee of $30.00 shall be assessed against
the applicant for a construction permit who has requested an inspection which cannot be
completed and/or approved by the Inspection Division for any of the following reasons:
(1) the work for which the inspection has been requested is not installed or
completed to the extent that an inspection can be made,
(2) the inspection reveals that the electrical system has more than three code
violations due to: equipment not installed per instructions included in the listing or labeling;
equipment installed without correct polarity; components not properly grounded; wiring not
installed as to be free from short circuits; equipment installed with improper ratings; devices and
fixtures not energized because of loose connections or broken wires,
(3) the Inspector is unable to gain entry at the time requested by the contractor,
(4) when previously noted violations have not been corrected.
Fees assessed as herein provided may be appealed to the Construction and Housing
Board of Appeals by filing a notice of such appeal with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days
of the mailing of notice of such assessment. An appeal shall stay the due date for payment until
the date of the final order of the Board.
Such fees shall be assessed by mailing notice of same to the owner or other person by
certified mail, return receipt requested. Payment thereof shall be due fourteen (14) days after
Chapter 69
mailing of such notice, which notice must contain a statement of the right of the owner or other
person to appeal the same to the Board and the time limitation thereon.
In any judicial proceeding brought by the City to collect fees which have not been paid as
required by the provisions hereof, failure to receive notice of the assessment of such fee may be a
defense thereto, but only if such notice was not sent to the proper mailing address of the
defendant or was received thereat by someone other than a person upon whom substituted
service may be made pursuant to the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure.
Any fee or fees assessed as herein provided, and any judgment entered for same, shall be
in addition to any fine imposed by the Circuit Court under this Chapter.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building for which re-inspection fees
are unpaid.
16. WITHHOLDING OF PERMITS. Building permits may be withheld from permit
applicants, or in the case of combined permits from the licensed subcontractor, who is in
violation of Chapters 67, 68, 69, or 70.1 of the City Code at a location other than that for which a
permit is being sought. Such violation may include, but shall not be limited to the following:
A. Failure to arrange for inspections required under Chapters 67, 68, 69, and/or 70.1 of
the City Code within a reasonable time frame.
B. Failure to take reasonable requested action to uncover work which requires inspection
but has been hidden from view of the inspector.
C. Failure to pay required permit or re-inspection fees.
D. Failure to obtain a building permit for work which required a building permit.
E. Failure to take reasonable action to notify and obtain approval from Inspection
Division of changes made to approved building permits.
Chapter 69
F. Falsifying information on building permit applications.
G. Performance of building permit work under an invalid or voided building permit.
H. Failure to obtain a required certificate of occupancy before occupying or allowing
occupancy of new construction or change in use.
Permit applicants from which permits are to be withheld must be notified by mailing
notice of same to the permit applicant or licensed subcontractor by certified mail, return receipt
requested. Said notice shall inform the permit applicant or licensed subcontractor of the
violations, which if corrected, will allow the City to issue to the permit applicant or licensed
subcontractor additional permits. Corrections shall be made within fourteen (14) days after
mailing of such notice, which notice must contain a statement of the right of the permit applicant
or licensed subcontractor to appeal the same to the Construction and Housing Board of Appeals
and the time limitation thereon.
Permits withheld as herein provided may be appealed to the Construction and Housing
Board of Appeals by filing a notice of such appeal with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days
of the mailing of notice of such withholding. An appeal shall stay the due date for corrections
required until the date of the final order of the Board.
Any action to withhold permits as herein provided and/or any judgment entered for same,
shall be in addition to any fine imposed by the Circuit Court under section of this Chapter.
17. SEVERABILITY. The provisions hereof are, and shall be construed to be severable
and invalidity of any section or provisions of this Chapter or of the codes and standards hereby
adopted shall not invalidate other sections or provisions hereof.
CHAPTER 70
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
1. APPLICABILITY. This Chapter shall have, along with the Code adopted hereby,
the scope and applicability set out in said code, except as modified by the provisions of this
Chapter.
2. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE. The same having been duly placed and
remained on file as required by law, and subject to the additions, modifications, changes or
deletions set out in this Chapter, the International Property Maintenance Code/2015, the same
being found and declared by the Council to be regulations as defined by applicable statute, is
hereby adopted by reference, the same to be known, and which may be cited as "The Property
Maintenance Code" of the City, and which shall have the scope and applicability as therein set
out, except as modified by the provisions of this Chapter.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-21, April 2, 2007) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-68,
November 5, 2018, Effective January 1, 2019)
3. SUBSTITUTIONS. Whenever in said Code the words, "name of jurisdiction"
appear in brackets, said code is modified by removal of said brackets and substitution of the
words, "the City of Decatur, Illinois," in lieu of the words contained therein, and whenever the
words "name of state" so appear said Code is so modified and the word "Illinois" so substituted,
and said Code shall be taken and construed as if such was expressly so set out therein.
Revised January, 2019
Chapter 70
4. NEIGHBORHOOD INSPECTIONS. Whenever in said Code or in the Chapter
reference is made to the building official or to the code official such shall be taken to mean and
shall be construed to refer to the Neighborhood Inspections Administrator or his designee as
fully as if said designation was set out therein in lieu of such words and whenever reference is
therein made to the department of building inspection or similar reference such shall be taken to
mean and shall be construed to refer to the Inspections Division of the Economic and
Community Development Department as fully as if said designation was set out therein in lieu of
such words.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2000-11, March 13, 2000)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-68, November 5, 2018, Effective January 1, 2019)
5. BOARD OF APPEALS. Whenever in said Code reference is made to the board of
appeals such shall be taken to mean and shall be construed to refer to the Construction and
Housing Board of Appeals of the City.
6. DELETION. The following numbered Articles or sections of said Code are deleted
therefrom and the provisions thereof are not adopted hereby:
PM Section No. (Inclusive) PM Section No. (Inclusive)
103.1 103.2
103.3 103.5
104.2 104.6
106.2
106.3 110.2
110.3 110.4
111.2 through 111.8 inclusive
112.1 through 112.4 inclusive
302.4 704.2 through 704.2.1.4 inclusive
704.2.4
Chapter 70
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-05, February 4, 2008)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-21, April 2, 2007)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 98-54, August 17, 1998)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-68, November 5, 2018, Effective January 1, 2019)
7. AMENDMENTS. The following numbered sections in said Code are hereby
modified and amended as herein indicated:
(a) 101.1 by inserting the words “City of Decatur, Illinois” for the name of
the jurisdiction.
(b) 107.2 by removing subparagraph 6
(c) 107.3 by adding the words “or the address listed in the Macon County
Tax Assessor’s Office for receipt of the property tax bill for the property” before
the semi-colon in section 107.3(2).
(d) 107.45 by removing the words “with orders and notices”.
(e) 108.2 by removing the last portion of the last sentence and replacing as
follows “It shall be unlawful for the owner of a structure having been given notice
as herein provided to fail to close the structure”.
(f) 108.4 by replacing as follows “Placarding: After determination by the
code official or his representative that a condemnation notice will be required under
the provisions of this code the code official shall post on the premises or structure
or parts thereof, or on defective equipment, a placard indicating that the structure or
equipment has been condemned as unfit for human occupancy or use, and a
statement of the penalties provided for any occupancy or use or for removing the
placard”.
(g) 111.1 by replacing “20 days” with “10 days” and adding “in the office
of the City Clerk” following “10 days”.
(h) 201.3 by removing “International Zoning Code” and replacing
“International Plumbing Code” with “Illinois Plumbing Code”
(i) 202 by adding between “(BG) Sleeping Unit” and “strict liability
offense” the following: Smoke Detector – “Approved smoke detector or ‘detector’
means a smoke detector of the ionization or photoelectric type, which complies
with all the requirements of the rules and regulations of the State Fire Marshal”.
(j) 301.2 by adding “or person in control” following the word “owner” in
the first sentence.
(k) 302.1 by adding the word “owner or” following the word “the” in the
second sentence and deleting the words “that part of” and “ that such occupant
occupies or controls”.
(l) 302.2 by removing the period at the end of the sentence and adding “and
to prevent water damage to the foundation of the structure located thereon”.
(m) 302.5 by adding “The owner of any residential or nonresidential
structure shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects or rats, or other
pests throughout the structure and on the exterior of the property. Exception: The
occupant of a single family dwelling shall be responsible for the extermination of
Chapter 70
any insects, rats or other pests in the interior of the dwelling. If the single family
dwelling is vacant, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.”
(n) 304.5 by adding “so as to carry the safe design and operating dead and
live loads” following the word “maintained” in the first sentence.
(o) 304.6 by adding “fascias and soffits” following the word “walls” in the
first sentence.
(p) 304.7 by adding the word “may” following the word “that” in the first
sentence.
(q) 304.7 by adding “properly anchored and connected” after the word
repair, and “or removed” after the word obstructions in the next to last sentence.
(r) 304.14 by deleting the words “During the period from (Date) to (Date)”
in the first sentence and deleting the “Exception” section.
(s) 304.18.1 by deleting the words “that is rented, leased or let” following
the word “unit” in the first sentence.
(t) 304.18.2 by deleting the words “that is rented, leased or let” following
the words “housekeeping unit”.
(u) 304.18.3 by deleting the words “rented, leased or let” following the
word “housekeeping unit” and adding the words “and maintained to prevent the
entrance of rats, rain and surface drainage water” at the end of the sentence.
(v) 305.2 by adding the words ‘free of deterioration” following the words
“structurally sound”.
(w) 305.3 by adding “Bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with
floors of moisture resistant materials, and every toilet, bathroom and kitchen floor
surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to permit such floor to be kept in
a clean and sanitary condition” at the end of the paragraph.
(x) 305.4 by adding: And constructed so as to be safe to use and capable of
supporting the anticipated loads and shall be free of deterioration. The maximum
riser height for the steps shall be 9” and the minimum tread depth shall be 8” with
variation not exceeding ¾” in the depth of adjacent treads or in the height of
adjacent risers.
(y) 305.7 by adding: Lead-based paint. Interior and exterior painted
surfaces of dwellings and child and day care facilities, including fences and
outbuildings, which contain in excess of 0.06 percent lead by weight shall be
removed or covered in an approved manner. Any surface to be covered shall first
be marked with warnings as to the lead content of such surface.
(z) 308.2.2 by deleting the words “without first removing the doors”
following the word “premises”.
(aa) 309.4 by deleting the last sentence of the paragraph “If infestation is
caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied,
the occupant shall be responsible for extermination”.
(bb) 404.8 by adding the following: “Below Grade Rooms. Rooms
partially or completely below grade shall not be used as habitable space unless (1)
floors and walls are water-tight so as to prevent entry of moisture; (2) all habitable
rooms shall be provided with aggregate glazing of not less than 8% of the floor area
of such rooms; (3) where windows are provided as a means of egress or rescue, the
windows shall have the bottom of the clear opening not more than 44” above the
Chapter 70
floor; (4) the minimum net clear opening for the below grade room windows to be
used for egress or rescue shall be 5 square feet; and, (5) means of egress and
emergency escape are provided in accordance with this code.
(cc) 502.5 by replacing International Plumbing Code with Illinois Plumbing
Code in the first sentence.
(dd) 505.1 by replacing the International Plumbing Code with the Illinois
Plumbing Code in the last sentence.
(ee) 602.2 by deleting the words “Appendix D of the International
Plumbing Code” and replacing with the words “the Illinois Plumbing Code”
following the words “indicated in”.
(ff) 602.3 by deleting the words “during he period from (Date) to (Date)”
following the words “shall supply heat” and, in the last sentence of number 1 under
Exceptions, by deleting the words “Appendix D of the International Plumbing
Code” and replacing with the words “the Illinois Plumbing Code”.
(gg) 602.4 by deleting the words “during the period from (Date) to (Date)
following the word “heat”.
(hh) 604.2 by replacing “NFPA 70” with “National Electrical Code (NEC)
as adopted by the City of Decatur.
(ii) 605.1 by adding “as per the National Electrical Code, as adopted by the
City of Decatur” at the end of the sentence.
(jj) 605.3 by adding “controlled by a wall switch” after the word luminaire
in the first sentence.
(kk)702.5 – Number of Exits: In nonresidential buildings, every occupied
story more than six stories above grade shall be provided with not less than two
independent exits. In residential buildings, every story exceeding two stories above
grade shall be provided with not less than two independent exits. In stories where
more than one exit is required, all occupants shall have access to a t least two exits.
Every occupied story which is both totally below grade and greater than 2,000
square feet shall be provided with not less than two independent exits. Exception:
A single exit is acceptable under any one of the following conditions: (1) where
the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system and an
automatic fire detection system with smoke detectors located in all corridors,
lobbies and common areas; (2) where the building is equipped throughout with an
automatic fire detection system and the exit is an approved smoke proof enclosure
or pressurized stairway; (3) where an existing fire escape conforming to the
building code listed in Chapter 8 is provided in addition to the single exit; and (4)
where permitted by the building code listed in Chapter 8.
(ll) 704.2 – Smoke Detectors. (1) Every dwelling unit shall be equipped
with at least one approved smoke detector in an operating condition within 15 feet
of every room used for sleeping purposes. The detector shall be installed on the
ceiling and at least 6 inches from any wall, or on a wall located between 4 and 12
inches from the ceiling measured to the top of the detector. All smoke detectors
shall be approved and listed and shall be installed in accordance with the
manufacturers instructions. (2) Every single family residence shall have at least
one approved smoke detector installed on every story of the dwelling unit,
including basements but not including unoccupied attics. In dwelling units with
Chapter 70
split levels, a smoke detector installed on the upper level shall suffice for the
adjacent lower level if the lower level is less than one full story below the upper
level; however, if there is an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke
detector shall be installed on each level. (3) Every structure which (i) contains
more than one dwelling unit, or (ii) contains at least one dwelling unit and is a
mixed-use structure, shall contain at least one approved smoke detector at the
uppermost ceiling of each interior stairwell. The detector shall be installed on the
ceiling, at least 6 inches from the wall, or on a wall located 6 to 12 inches from the
ceiling, measure to the top of the detector.
(mm) 704.2.2 Interconnection is now 704.3
(nn) 704.2.3 Power Source is now 704.4
(oo)704.5 Carbon Monoxide Alarm Detectors. Definitions: (i) “Approved
carbon monoxide alarm” or “alarm” means a carbon monoxide alarm that complies
with all the requirements of the rules and regulations of the Illinois State Fire
Marshal, bears the label of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, and complies
with the most recent standards of the Underwriters Laboratories or the Canadian
Standard Association. (ii) Dwelling Unit. A room or suite of rooms used for
human habitation, and includes a single family residence as well as each living unit
of a multiple family residence and each living unit in a mixed use building. (iii)
Section 1. Carbon Monoxide Detector. (a) Every dwelling unit shall be equipped
with at least one approved carbon monoxide alarm in an operating condition within
15 feet of every room used for sleeping purposes. The carbon monoxide alarm may
be combined with smoke detecting devices provided that the combined unit
complies with the respective provisions of the administrative code, reference
standards, and departmental rules relating to both smoke detecting devices and
carbon monoxide alarms and provided that the combined unit emits an alarm in a
manner that clearly differentiates the hazard. (b) Every structure that contains more
than one dwelling unit shall contain at lease one approved carbon monoxide alarm
in operating condition within 15 feet of every room used for sleeping purposes. (c)
It is the responsibility of the owner of a structure to supply and install all required
alarms. It is the responsibility of a tenant to test and to provide general
maintenance for the alarms within the tenant’s dwelling unit or rooming unit, and
to notify the owner or the authorized agent of the owner in writing of any
deficiencies that the tenant cannot correct. The owner is responsible for providing
one tenant per dwelling unit the written information regarding alarm testing and
maintenance. The tenant is responsible for replacement of any required batteries in
the carbon monoxide alarms in the tenant’s dwelling unit, except that the owner
shall ensure that the batteries are in operating condition at the time the tenant takes
possession of the dwelling unit. The tenant shall provide the owner or the
authorized agent of the owner with access to the dwelling unit to correct any
deficiencies in the carbon monoxide alarm that have been reported in writing to the
owner or the authorized agent of the owner. (d) The carbon monoxide alarms
required may be either battery powered, plug-in with battery back-up, or wired into
the structure’s AC power line with secondary battery back-up. Exemptions: The
following residential units shall not require carbon monoxide detectors: (1) a
residential unit in a building that: (i) does not rely on combustion of fossil fuel for
Chapter 70
heat, ventilation, or hot water; (ii) is not connected in any way to a garage; and (iii)
is not sufficiently close to any ventilated source of carbon monoxide, as determined
by the local building official, to receive carbon monoxide from that source. (2) a
residential unit that is not sufficiently close to any source of carbon monoxide so as
to be at risk of receiving carbon monoxide from that source, as determined by the
local building official.
(pp): Penalty. That no person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct,
alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, maintain, operate, use or occupy any
structure or equipment regulated by the provisions of this chapter or of the Code
adopted hereby, or by the rules or directives promulgated or notices issued
thereunder, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in conflict with or in
violation of any of said provisions, rules, directive or notices, and any person, firm
or corporation violating or found to be in violation thereof shall upon conviction be
fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than Two
Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense, and each day on which a violation
occurs or continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-21, April 2, 2007) (Amended, Ordinance No.
2018-68, November 5, 2018, Effective January 1, 2019)
8. PENALTY. (A) That no person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, alter,
extend, repair, remove, demolish, maintain, operate, use or occupy any structure or equipment
regulated by the provisions of this Chapter or of the Code adopted hereby, or by the rules or
directives promulgated or notices issued thereunder, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or
in conflict with or in violation of any of said provisions, rules, directives or notices, and, except
as provided in subsections (B) and (C) hereof, any person, firm or corporation violating or found
to be in violation thereof shall be fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor
more than Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense, and each day on which a
violation occurs or continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-75; Ordinance No. 99-21)
(B) When a person, firm or corporation is cited for a violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter, or of the Code adopted hereby or the rules or directives promulgated or notices
issued hereunder, as provided in subsection (A) hereof, which violation occurred within twelve
Chapter 70
(12) months of a prior violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter, or of the Code adopted
hereby or the rules or directives promulgated or notices issued hereunder, and such violation is
separately brought and arises out of a different series of acts or omissions, such person, firm or
corporation shall be fined not less than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) nor more than Two
Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense and each day a violation occurs or continues shall
be considered a separate offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-75; Ordinance No. 99-21)
(C) When a person, firm or corporation is cited for a violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter, or of the Code adopted hereby or the rules or directives promulgated or notices
issued hereunder, as provided in subsection (A) hereof, which violation occurred within twelve
(12) months of any two (2) prior violations of any of the provisions of this Chapter, or of the
Code adopted hereby, or the rules or directives promulgated or notices issued hereunder, which
prior violations each arose out of a different series of acts or omissions, and such present
violation is separately brought and arises out of a different series of acts or omissions from either
of the prior violations, such person, firm or corporation shall be fined not less than One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense
and each day a violation occurs or continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-75; Ordinance No. 99-21)
9. OTHER REMEDIES. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not
preclude the institution of appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain,
correct or abate a violation, or to stop an illegal act, the conduct of business or the operation of
mechanical equipment or systems in or about any premises.
Chapter 70
10. SEVERABILITY. The provisions hereof are, and shall be construed to be
severable and invalidity of any section or provision of this Chapter, or of the codes and standards
hereby adopted, shall not invalidate other sections or provisions hereof.
11. RULES AND REGULATIONS. In order to cause the purpose, intent and
provisions of this Chapter and the Code adopted thereby to be carried out and administered, and
to facilitate the same, the City Manager be, and he is hereby, authorized to cause directives,
interpretations and rules, not in conflict with said provisions, to be promulgated and enforced.
CHAPTER 70.1
PLUMBING CODE
1. APPLICABILITY. This Chapter shall have, along with the Code adopted hereby,
the scope and applicability set out in said Code, except as modified by the provisions of this
Chapter.
2. CODE ADOPTED. The same having been duly placed and remained on file as
required by law, and subject to the additions, modifications, changes or deletions set out in this
Chapter, the Plumbing Code (latest version), of the State of Illinois Department of Public Health,
including all amendments, is hereby adopted by reference, the same to be known, and which may
be cited, as the "Plumbing Code" of the City, and which shall have the scope and applicability as
therein set out, except as modified by the provisions of this Chapter. (Amended, Ordinance No.
2011-60, October 3, 2011) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2001-70, September 17, 2001)
3. AMENDMENTS. The following numbered sections in said code are hereby amended
and modified as herein indicated:
A. Section 890 Appendix A, Table A, such that said Agency note reads in its entirety as
follows: "Drainage system below ground outside of building (building sewer) - minimum on
PVC building sewer shall be schedule 40".
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2001-70, September 17, 2001)
B. Section 890 Appendix A, Table A, add note that reads in its entirety as follows:
"Water Service Pipe - water service pipe shall be SDR9 with tracer wire or K-copper for services
Revised 02/2017
up to 2 inches. Over 2 inches the pipe shall meet the water main standards of the City of
Decatur". (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-60; Ordinance No. 2001-70)
C. Section 890.510 (Add C) For new restaurant buildings grease interceptors (traps) shall
be located outside the building and shall be accessible for maintenance purposes. Interceptors
thus located shall have a minimum capacity of 1,000 gallons. Exception: The City Construction
and Housing Board of Appeals may grant a variance to the requirement (C above) if it is shown
that due to circumstances beyond the petitioner’s control locating the grease interceptor outside
the building would be unduly burdensome and that no reasonable alternative exists. (Amended
Ordinance 2014-18, April 21, 2014)
4. WORK DONE WITHOUT PERMIT. Except for work performed in response to an
unanticipated emergency at a time other than the regular business hours of the Inspection
Division and for which a permit is later obtained during the next succeeding regular business day
of said Division, no plumbing shall be commenced unless and until a city permit for the same has
been obtained from the Inspection Division in the manner provided by the Building Ordinance,
and should any work for which a permit is required be commenced or be done before such
permit is issued and obtained, the required permit may nonetheless be issued for such and
subsequent work; however, the amount of the required fee as provided herein for all work; both
that commenced before and that proposed to be done after said permit is issued, shall be double
that otherwise so provided, and issuance of such permit shall not, and shall not be construed to
be, an excuse from, or waiver of, or defense to or absolution from any liability or action
otherwise provided for in said Code or this ordinance but shall be cumulative of and in addition
thereto.
5. FEES REQUIRED. The amount of the fee required to accompany the application
for a permit and to be paid to the City Treasurer shall be determined by the building official as
follows:
A. For all permits other than those specified herein said amount shall be based upon the
value of the proposed work in amounts as follows:
WORK VALUE FEE
$0 - $2000 $35
$2,001 - $3,000 $45
$3,001 - $5,000 $50
$5,001 - $1,000,000 $50 plus $5 for each $1,000 or
fraction thereof over $5,000
Over $1,000,000 $5,025 plus $4 for each $10,000
or fraction thereof over $1,000,000
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-60; Ordinance No. 96-38).
B. For permits to alter or repair one or two family residential structures or residential
accessory buildings, the amount shall be as follows:
Repair or replace waste, vent, or water piping $35
Lawn irrigation $35
Repair or replace water service $35 per water service
Replace water heater $35
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-60; Ordinance No. 96-38)
C. For permits to alter or repair plumbing in other than one or two family residential
structures or residential accessory buildings, the amount shall be as per work value listed in item
(a) above, with a minimum fee of $35.00.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-60; Ordinance No. 96-38)
D. For permits to install new plumbing in new one or two family residential structures,
room additions to such structures, or accessory buildings to such structures, the amount shall be
included as part of a combined permit for building, electrical, mechanical, and plumbing and
shall be included in the total fee as set forth in Chapter 67, Section 9 (c).
E. For permits to install new plumbing in new buildings other than one or two family
residential or residential accessory, the amount shall be per work value as listed in item (a)
above.
6. ENFORCEMENT. This Chapter and the Code, as modified thereby, shall be
administered by the Building Inspection Manager through the Inspection Division of the
Economic and Community Development Department which, among other things, is authorized
hereby to cause stop orders to be issued and enforced as to any work not in conformance and
compliance with the provisions thereof, or of the reasonable rules and regulations promulgated to
implement the same. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-07, February 6, 2017) (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2010-03; Ordinance No. 2000-11)
7. TERM OF PERMIT. Unless, because of the nature or extent of the work, the
Superintendent of Inspections determines that a permit should be for a term longer than three
months and so endorses such longer term on the face thereof, all permits no so endorsed shall
expire and be void three months from the date the same are issued.
8. PENALTY. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install,
repair, maintain, alter or extend plumbing, or a plumbing system, or plumbing fixture or
appliance regulated by said Code or this Chapter or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in
conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions hereof or thereof. It shall be unlawful to
continue work after a stop order has been issued, served or posted under said provisions. Any
person, firm or corporation violating or found to be in violation of any of said provisions shall be
fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars
($500.00) for each offense, and each day upon which a violation occurs or is allowed to
continue, or a condition is not brought into compliance after notice, shall be viewed and may be
prosecuted as a separate and distinct offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-75)
9. OTHER REMEDIES. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not
preclude the institution of appropriate action to prevent, abate or to stop acts, activities, or
maintenance of work or systems not in compliance with code or this Chapter in or about any
premises.
10. RE-INSPECTION FEES. A re-inspection fee of $30.00 shall be assessed against
the applicant for a construction permit, or in the case of a combined permit, against the licensed
subcontractor, who has requested an inspection which cannot be completed and/or approved by
the Inspection Division for any of the following reasons: (1) the work for which the inspection
has been requested is not installed or completed to the extent that an inspection can be made; (2)
the inspection reveals that there are more than three (3) material items which need substantial
correction before an approval for code compliance can be made; or (3) the work for which the
inspection has been requested has been covered up or hidden from view so that an inspection
cannot be made.
If an inspection can be made, but 3 or fewer items are found which need correction to
fully comply with the Building Code, the permit applicant or licensed subcontractor shall be
notified in writing by the Inspection Division of the corrections required, and a re-inspection fee
of $30.00 shall be assessed against the permit applicant or licensed subcontractor only when any
subsequently requested inspection reveals that any of the previously noted code violations have
not been corrected.
Fees assessed as herein provided may be appealed to the Construction and Housing
Board of Appeals (Board) by filing a notice of such appeal with the City Clerk within fourteen
(14) days of the mailing of notice of such assessment. An appeal shall stay the due date for
payment until the date of the final order of the Board.
Such fees shall be assessed by mailing notice of same to the owner or other person by
certified mail, return receipt requested. Payment thereof shall be due fourteen (14) days after
mailing of such notice, which notice must contain a statement of the right of the owner or other
person to appeal the same to the Board and the time limitation thereon.
In any judicial proceeding brought by the City to collect fees which have not been paid as
required by the provisions hereof, failure to receive notice of the assessment of such fee may be a
defense thereto, but only if such notice was not sent to the proper mailing address of the
defendant or was received thereat by someone other than a person upon whom substituted
service may be made pursuant to the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure.
Any fee or fees assessed as herein provided, and any judgment entered for same, shall be
in addition to any fine imposed by the Circuit Court under Section 8 of this Chapter. No
Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any building for which re-inspection fees are unpaid.
11. WITHHOLDING OF PERMITS. Building permits may be withheld from permit
applicants, or in the case of combined permits from the licensed subcontractor, who is in
violation of Chapters 67, 68, 69, or 70.1 of the City Code at a location other than that for which a
permit is being sought.
Such violation may include, but shall not be limited to the following:
A. Failure to arrange for inspections required under Chapters 67, 68, 69, and/or 70.1 of
the City Code within a reasonable time frame.
B. Failure to take reasonable requested action to uncover work which requires inspection
but has been hidden from view of the inspector.
C. Failure to pay required permit fees or re-inspection fees.
D. Failure to obtain a building permit for work which required a building permit.
E. Failure to take reasonable action to notify and obtain approval from the Inspections
Division of changes made to approved building permits.
F. Falsifying information on building permit applications.
G. Performance of building permit work under an invalid or voided building permit.
H. Failure to obtain a required Certificate of Occupancy before occupying or allowing
occupancy of new construction or change in use.
Permit applicants from which permits are to be withheld must be notified by mailing
notice of same to the permit applicant or licensed subcontractor by certified mail, return receipt
requested. Said notice shall inform the permit applicant or licensed subcontractor of the
violations, which if corrected will allow the City to issue to the permit applicant or licensed
subcontractor additional permits. Corrections shall be made within fourteen (14) days after
mailing of such notice, which notice must contain a statement of the right of the permit applicant
or licensed subcontractor to appeal the same to the Construction and Housing Board of Appeals
and the time limitation thereon.
The withholding of permits as herein provided may be appealed to the Construction and
Housing Board of Appeals by filing a notice of such appeal with the City Clerk within fourteen
(14) days of the mailing of notice of such withholding. An appeal shall stay the due date of
corrections required until the date of the final order of the Board.
12. WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM. In order to protect the water
distribution system of the City, no plumbing system shall be connected thereto unless the same
conforms and complies with the provisions of this Chapter and said Code, as modified, and any
such plumbing system already connected to the water supply system may be shut off until the
same is corrected, and may, until corrected, be disconnected.
13. SEVERABILITY. The provisions hereof are, and shall be construed to be
severable and invalidity of any section or provisions of this Chapter or of the codes and standards
hereby adopted, shall not invalidate other sections or provisions hereof.
14. RULES AND REGULATIONS. The City Manager is hereby authorized to cause
to be established, promulgated, published and enforced such reasonable rules, regulations and
procedures, not in conflict with said provisions, as may to said officer appear to be necessary or
convenient to administer the provisions of said Code and this Chapter and to carry out the intent
and purpose thereof and hereof.
CHAPTER 71
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
1. DEFINITIONS. As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
(a) “Gross Charges" means the amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the
act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the City, and for all
services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise,
including cash, credits, services, and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined
without any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the
materials used, labor or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is
extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. “Gross charges" for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within the City, charges
for the channel mileage between each channel point within the City, and charges for that portion
of the interstate inter-office channel provided within the City. However, “gross charges" shall
not include:
(1) any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a charge made under: (i)
the fee imposed by this Section, (ii) additional charges added to a purchaser’s bill under
Section 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, (iii) amounts collected under Section
8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code, (iv) the tax imposed by the Telecommunications
Excise Tax Act, (v) 911 surcharges, or (vi) the tax imposed by Section 4251 of the
Internal Revenue Code;
(2) charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the City;
(3) charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data or
information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information intended to
change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, the use of
calculators, computers, data processing equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting
equipment and also includes the usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
(4) charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased or
rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are disaggregated and
separately identified from other charges;
Revised 10/11
Chapter 71
(5) charges to business enterprises certified under Section 9-222.1 of the Public
Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of time specified by
the City;
(6) charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in
connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent that the charges between the
parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries
represent expense allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit
other than a regulatory required profit for the corporation rendering such services;
(7) bad debts (“bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at
retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that has become
worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal income tax standards;
if the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report
and pay the tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is
made);
(8) charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunications devices;
or
(9) charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided to
the City.
(b) "Public Right-of-Way" means any municipal street, alley, water or public right-ofway
dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements wherein the
City has acquired the right and authority to locate or permit the location of utilities consistent
with telecommunications facilities. "Public Right-of-Way" shall not include any real or personal
City property that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not include City
buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the
public right-of-way.
(c) “Retailer maintaining a place of business in this State", or any like term, means and
includes any retailer having or maintaining within the State of Illinois, directly or by a
subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or
other place of business, or any agent or other representative operating within this State under the
authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent
or other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or
subsidiary is licensed to do business in this State.
(d) “Sale of telecommunications at retail" means the transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a
consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross charge made by one such corporation to
another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.
Chapter 71
(e) “Service address" means the location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications services are
received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of wireless telecommunications, paging
systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground systems, and the like, “service address" shall mean the
location of the customer’s primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the
location in Illinois where bills are sent.
(f) “Telecommunications" includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service, channel services,
telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange services, private line services,
specialized mobile radio services, or any other transmission of messages or information by
electronic or similar means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser,
microwave, radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise,
“telecommunications" shall also include wireless telecommunications as hereinafter defined.
“Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer processing
applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission. “Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the
service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the
end-to-end communications. Retailer access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used
as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall not be
included in gross charges as sales for resale. “Telecommunications" shall not include the
provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act
of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the City through an open
video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.D.F.
76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter amended.
(g) Telecommunications provider" means (1) any telecommunications retailer; and (2)
any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs, owns, operates or controls
equipment in the public right-of-way that is used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
(h) “Telecommunications retailer" or “retailer" or “carrier" means and includes every
person engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined in this
Section. The City may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the fee
hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this State, who, to the
satisfaction of the City, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the fee.
When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the fee upon all of the gross
charges for telecommunications in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a
retailer maintaining a place of business within the City.
(i) “Wireless telecommunications" includes cellular mobile telephone services, personal
wireless services as defined in Section 704(C) of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public
Chapter 71
Law No. 104-104), 42 U.S.C. 332(c)(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial
mobile radio services, and paging services.
2. REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS.
(a) Every telecommunications provider as defined by this Chapter shall register with
the City within 30 days after the effective date of this Chapter or becoming a
telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on a form to be provided by the City, provided,
however, that any telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to section 4 (c) of
this Chapter shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with this Section.
(b) Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the City pursuant to
2 (a) has an affirmative duty to submit an amended registration form or current return as
required by section 4 (c), as the case may be, to the City within 30 days from the date of the
occurrence of any changes in the information provided by the telecommunications provider in
the registration form or most recent return on file with the City.
3. MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE
MAINTENANCE FEE.
(a) A City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby imposed
upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of 1.0% of all gross charges charged by the
telecommunications retailer to service addresses within the City for telecommunications
originating or received in the City.
(b) Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee authorized in this
Chapter, the City infrastructure maintenance fee authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or
compensation for the use of all public rights-of-way within the City by telecommunications
retailers. Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this Chapter does not,
Chapter 71
however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or imposition of any fees otherwise
authorized by law.
(c) The City telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee authorized by this
Section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as set forth in section 4 of this Chapter.
4. COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT, AND ADMINISTRATION OF
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEES.
(a) A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each customer an
additional charge in an amount equal to the City infrastructure maintenance fee attributable to
that customer’s service address.
(b) The infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications
retailer to the City not later than the last day of the month subsequent to the month in which a bill
is issued to the customer; provided, however, that the telecommunications retailer may retain an
amount not to exceed 2% of the City infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse
itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
(c) Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the City shall be accompanied
by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the Director of Finance,
which shall contain such information as the Director of Finance may reasonably require.
(d) Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant to this
Chapter and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such telecommunications
retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the telecommunications retailer to the City. The charge
imposed under section 4 (a) by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this Chapter shall
constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who provides such services
Chapter 71
until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for such
services.
(e) If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee has been paid
that was not due under the provisions of this Chapter, whether as a result of a mistake of fact or
an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee
due, or to become due, under this Chapter, from the telecommunications retailer who made the
erroneous payment; provided, however, the Director of Finance may request, and
telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such credit. However, no
claim for such credit may be made more than three years after the date of the erroneous payment
unless, (1) the credit is used only to offset a claim of underpayment made by the City within the
applicable statutory period of limitations, and (2) the credit derives from an overpayment made
by the same telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory period of limitations.
(f) Amounts paid under this Chapter by telecommunications retailers shall not be
included in the tax base under any of the following acts as described immediately below:
(1) “gross charges" for purposes of the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act;
(2) “gross receipts" for purposes of the municipal utility tax as prescribed in
Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
(3) “gross charges" for purposes of the municipal telecommunications tax as
prescribed in Section 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code;
(4) “gross revenue" for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of public
utilities prescribed in Section 2-202 of the Public Utilities Act.
(g) The City shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the books and records of
all telecommunications retailers subject to this Chapter to determine whether the
telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to the City for the City infrastructure
Chapter 71
maintenance fee. Any underpayment of the amount of the City infrastructure maintenance fee
due to the City by the telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the City plus five (5%) percent
of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any costs incurred by the
City in conducting the audit, in an amount not to exceed five (5%) percent of the total amount of
the underpayment determined in an audit. Said sum
shall be paid to the City within twenty-one (21) days after the date of issuance of an invoice for
same.
(h) The City Manager, or his or her designee, may promulgate such further or
additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement of this Chapter, consistent
with its provisions, as may be required from time to time and shall notify all telecommunications
retailers that are registered pursuant to section 2 of this Chapter of such regulations.
5. COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS. Nothing in this Chapter shall excuse
any person or entity from obligations imposed under any law, including but not limited to:
(a) generally applicable taxes; and
(b) standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or repair of the public
rights-of-way, including standards relating to free standing towers and other structures upon the
public rights-of-way, as provided; and
(c) any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally applicable
taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under, or within, use of or repair of the public
rights-of-way; and
(d) compliance with any ordinance or provision of this Code concerning uses or
structures not located on, over, or within the right-of-way.
6. EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES. Any franchise, license, or similar
agreements between telecommunications retailers and the City entered into before the effective
date of this Chapter regarding the use of public rights-of-way shall remain valid according to
Chapter 71
and for their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other compensation to the extent
waived.
7. PENALTY. Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine
not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars
($500.00) for each offense, and each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall be
considered a separate offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-75, October 31, 2011)
8. ENFORCEMENT. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as limiting any
additional or further remedies that the City may have for enforcement of this Chapter.
9. SEVERABILITY. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of
this Chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and
such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
10. CONFLICT. This Chapter supersedes all Chapters or parts of Chapters adopted
prior hereto which are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
CHAPTER 71.1
TAXPAYERS’ RIGHTS
(Adopted, Ordinance No. 2000-113, December 18, 2000)
1. SCOPE. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the City of Decatur’s procedures
in connection with all of the City’s locally imposed and administered taxes.
2. DEFINITIONS. Certain words or terms herein shall have the meaning ascribed to
them as follows:
"Act" means the “Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act.”
"Corporate Authorities" means the City’s Mayor and City Council.
"Locally imposed and administered tax" or “tax” means each tax imposed by the City
that is collected or administered by the City and not an agency or department of the State. It
does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the Property Tax Code or fees
collected by the City other than infrastructure maintenance fees.
"Local tax administrator," the City’s Finance Director is charged with the administration
and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes, including staff, employees or
agents to the extent they are authorized by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax
administrator’s stead. The local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms
of this chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of such authority by the local tax
administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the Act.
“City" means the City of Decatur, Illinois.
"Notice" means each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or communication
in connection with each of the City’s locally imposed and administered taxes.
"Tax Ordinance" means each ordinance adopted by the City that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
"Taxpayer" means any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax
and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is placed and with
respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity required to collect and pay the locally
imposed and administered tax to the City.
3. NOTICES. Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the
notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the day fixed for
any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local tax administrator. The notice
shall be sent by the local tax administrator as follows:
(1) First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the persons concerned
at the persons’ last known address, or
(2) Personal service or delivery.
4. LATE PAYMENT. Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be
made to the City pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is (a) physically
received by the City on or before the due date, or (b) received in an envelope or other container
displaying a valid, readable U.S. Postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to
the City, with adequate postage prepaid.
5. PAYMENT. Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in
the following order: (1) first to the tax due for the applicable period; (2) second to the interest
due for the applicable period; and (3) third to the penalty for the applicable period.
6. CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS.
(A) The City shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without written protest
at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly
enacted or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall
not be deemed to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon
which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes under duress.
(B) The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be four (4) years after
the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was made. The City shall not grant a
credit or refund of locally imposed and administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who
has not paid the amounts directly to the City.
(C) The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered
taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
(1) The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a
claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
:I1224,0,1368,792> (a) the name of the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
(b) the tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
(c) the date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
canceled check or receipt for the payment;
(d) the taxpayer’s recalculation, accompanied by an amended
or revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
(e) a request for either a refund or a credit in connection with
the claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and
penalties overpaid, and, as applicable, related interest on
the amount overpaid; provided, however, that there shall
be no refund and only a credit given in the event the
taxpayer owes any monies to the City.
(2) Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of
any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
(a) grant the claim; or
(b) deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a
statement as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant
and denial.
(3) In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a
claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit shall bear
interest at the rate of five per cent (5%) per annum, based on a year of 365 days
and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the date of
mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.
7. AUDIT PROCEDURE. Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered
tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
(A) Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
(1) the tax;
(2) the time period of the audit; and
(3) a brief description of the books and records to be made available for
the auditor.
(B) Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the date and time
selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the taxpayer, another date and time may
be requested by the taxpayer within thirty (30) days after the originally designated audit and
during normal business hours.
(C) The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted. The audit
shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days, nor more than thirty (30) days from the date the
notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient
time. In the event taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the
taxpayer may request another date within the thirty (30) days, approved in writing, that is
convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
(D) Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer’s business or
activities, including original source documents and books of entry denoting the transactions
which had given rise or may have given rise to any tax liability, exemption or deduction. All
books shall be kept in the English language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by
the City.
(E) It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its books and
records for inspection by the City. If the taxpayer fails to provide the documents necessary for
audit within the time provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator’s determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer’s
tax liability.
(F) If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed and
administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the amount of overpayment shall be
given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of the City’s determination of the amount of
overpayment.
(G) In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local governmental entity,
the local tax administrator shall notify the local governmental entity imposing such tax.
8. APPEAL.
(A) The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the local tax
administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of
claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice shall include the following information:
(1) the reason for the assessment;
(2) the amount of the tax liability proposed;
(3) the procedure for appealing the assessment; and
(4) the obligations of the City during the audit, appeal, refund and collection process.
(B) A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a determination
of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax administrator a written protest and
petition for hearing, setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written
protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within forty-five
(45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and assessment.
(C) If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax administrator
shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing
shall be scheduled for a date within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and
petition for hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
(D) If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the forty-five (45) day
period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final bill due and owing
without further notice.
(E) Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of the
contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the due date of the tax, the local tax
administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing.
In no event shall the time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty-five day period.
9. HEARING.
(A) Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest and petition
for hearing under section nine, above, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding
any appeal.
(B) No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is absolutely
necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a
continuance. Any continuance granted shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
(C) At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall hear testimony and
accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of
evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply.
(D) At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall make a written
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector
shall be provided with a copy of the written decision.
10. INTEREST AND PENALTIES. In the event a determination has been made that a
tax is due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the
time frame otherwise indicated.
(A) Interest. The City hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed on a late
payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be five percent (5%) per annum, based on
a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed.
(B) Late Filing and Payment Penalties. If a tax return is not filed within the time and
manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty, of five percent (5%) of
the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment
penalty of five percent (5%) of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time
or manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the City issuing a notice of tax
delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be assessed equal to
twenty-five percent (25%) of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the
return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file
penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance.
11. ABATEMENT. The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or
abate any late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local tax administrator
shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure to make a filing.
12. INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS. The City may enter into an installment contract
with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay
any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the local tax administrator that the payment
is thirty (30) days delinquent, the taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any
delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or
fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local administrator,
the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the taxpayer.
13. STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS. The City, through the local tax administrator,
shall review all tax returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts
due and owing. The taxpayer shall have forty-five (45) days after receiving notice of the
reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still due and owing.
(A) No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4) years after
the end of the calendar year for which the return for the applicable period was filed or for the
calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
(B) If any tax return is not filed or if during any 4-year period for which a notice of tax
determination or assessment may be issued by the City, the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax
due, the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end of the calendar year in
which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was filed.
(C) No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed by the
taxpayer.
14. VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE. For any locally imposed and administered tax for
which a taxpayer has not received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from
the local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the local tax administrator
for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application
must agree to pay the amount of tax due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month,
for all periods prior to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the
date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not
be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before the date the application
was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due,
the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax,
unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case the
application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and interest must be made by
no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date
agreed to by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an
underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this Section must be paid within ninety
(90) days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount
owed or the date agreed to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer.
15. PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES. Any locally administered tax ordinance
shall be published via normal or standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax
ordinance on the Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax ordinances
shall be made available to the public upon request at the City Clerk's office.
16. LIENS. The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a determination by the
local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien shall remain in full force and effect. If the
lien is determined to be improper, the local tax administrator shall:
(a) timely remove the lien at the City’s expense;
(b) correct the taxpayer’s credit record; and
(c) correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
17. APPLICATION. This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to
supplement all of the City’s tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict
with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be controlling.
18. SEVERABILITY. If any section, paragraph or provision of this chapter shall be
held to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity or unenforceability of such
section, paragraph or provision shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
CHAPTER 72
SEWER USER CHARGE
(REPEALED, Ordinance No. 2011-08, February 7, 2011)
CHAPTER 73
OFFENSES
1. WORDS AND PHRASES. Unless otherwise expressly provided herein, words and
phrases used in this Chapter shall have and be given the same meaning and definition as set out
in the Criminal Code of 2012 of the State of Illinois. (Amended, Ordinance 2013-09)
2. DEFINITIONS. "Sexual genital stimulation" means the touching or manipulating of
the genitals, pubes, anus or breasts of a person in a manner intended to arouse, appeal to or
gratify the lust, passion or sexual desire of a person. (Repealed, Sections 2(B)-2(G) “Definitions”
and Section 20 “Unlawful Solicitation”, Ordinance 2018-52)
3. PERFORMANCE PROHIBITED. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform or
offer or agree to perform any act of sexual intercourse, deviate sexual conduct or sexual genital
stimulation for monetary consideration or its equivalent.
4. SEXUAL SOLICITATION PROHIBITED. It shall be unlawful for any person to
give or offer monetary consideration or its equivalent to another not his or her spouse to engage
in any act of sexual intercourse, deviate sexual conduct or sexual genital stimulation with such
person.
5. PREMISES AS NUISANCE. It shall be unlawful to knowingly keep, operate or
maintain, directly or indirectly, any place or premises, or knowingly lease to or permit the use by
another of such place or premises, where acts of sexual intercourse, deviate sexual conduct or
sexual genital stimulation for monetary consideration or its equivalent are performed. Any such
place or premises are hereby declared a nuisance and may be abated as such.
Revised 12/2/2019
6. INMATE. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly be an inmate, occupant,
customer or participant in the activities of any place or premises described or set out in Section 5
of this Chapter.
7. GAMBLING.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit any place or premises
owned or occupied by him or under his control to be used for purposes of gambling, except as
otherwise permitted by law.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly play a game of chance or skill for
money or other thing of value, unless the activity is allowed by state law. (Amended, Ordinance
2012-39)
8. DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS. It shall be unlawful to fire or discharge a gun,
pistol, cannon or other firearm, unless in or on a premise or facility properly licensed or
authorized as elsewhere provided by law or ordinance, or unless fired or discharged for
ceremonial purposes with a weapon that may cause a report but does not deliver a projectile
capable of causing serious injury and with the approval of the Chief of Police, provided that the
discharge of firearms by any duly appointed law enforcement officer in the performance of his
duties shall not be in violation hereof. (Amended, Ordinance 1996-39, June 17, 1996)
9. BREACH OF PEACE. It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act in such
unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace, or to
cause or permit in any manner loud and raucous sounds to be audible as such to any other
premises or residence.
10. NOISE ON PUBLIC STREET.
A. No driver of any motor vehicle within the City of Decatur shall operate or permit
operation of any sound amplification system which can be heard outside the vehicle from
seventy five (75) or more feet when the vehicle is being operated upon a street, highway or
roadway unless such system is being operated to request assistance or warn of a hazardous
situation. This section does not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. (Amended, Ordinance
No. 2003-56, September 15, 2003)
B. A written warning shall be issued prior to any penalties being assessed under this
Section. No penalties shall be assessed unless the violator was issued a prior written warning for
operating a vehicle in violation of the provisions of this Section or for owning any vehicle used
in violation of the provisions of this Section.
One written warning shall be issued to the vehicle operator, if the operator has not
previously been issued a written warning for operating a vehicle in violation of this Section or
for owning any vehicle in violation of this Section.
One written warning shall be issued to the vehicle owner, if the owner has not previously
been issued a written warning for operating a vehicle in violation of this Section or for owning
any vehicle in violation.
Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this Section after receiving a prior
written warning shall be fined Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00). (Amended, Ordinance
2003-56, September 15, 2003) (Amended, Ordinance 2014-55, November 17, 2014)
11. IMPERSONATION OF CITY EMPLOYEE. It shall be unlawful for any person
to falsely represent himself to be an officer or employee of the City, or without being duly
authorized by the City, exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of a
City officer or employee, or to wear in public any uniform, or any badge, patch, device or other
insignia, identical with or substantially similar in appearance to those worn by the officers or
employees of any Department of the City as their official uniform or insignia.
12. INTERFERENCE WITH CITY EMPLOYEE. It shall be unlawful to interfere
with or hinder any officer or employee of the City while he is engaged in the duties of his office
or employment.
13. COIN BOXES. It shall be unlawful to insert or attempt to insert into the coin box of
the money receptacle of any telephone, vending machine, weighing machine or any automatic
service or merchandising machine or parking meter, any slug, button, wire, hook, or any
implement or substance other than the coin, slug or substance designed for use in the operation
of said machine by the manufacturers thereof, with the intent to obtain service, merchandise, or
thing of value without paying therefor.
14. CORNER STONES. It shall be unlawful to willfully or heedlessly change, remove
or destroy any stone, stake, or post set or placed to mark the corner of any lot or parcel of
ground, street, or alley, or to show the grade of any street, alley or sidewalk of the City.
15. ABANDONED REFRIGERATOR. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to leave outside any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or any other container of any kind
which has an air-tight door or lock.
16. TAMPERING WITH METERS. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person
to tamper with, alter or change any gas pipe, or water pipe, gas, water or parking meter, or other
meter, public or private, or the register thereof.
17. REMOVAL OF SOD. It shall be unlawful for any person to dig, cut or remove any
sod, or earth from any street, or other public place within the City, without a permit from the
Public Works Director, or from any premises not his own, without the consent of the owner.
(Amended, Ordinance 2009-39, May 18, 2009) (Amended, Ordinance 2000-63, July 17, 2000)
18. CLIMBING ON POLES. It shall be unlawful to climb upon any street lamppost,
telegraph, telephone or electric light pole, or hang or place upon or against the same, any goods,
boxes, fuel or other material; provided, this section shall not apply to any person whose duty it is,
in the course of his occupation, to do the same.
19. AIDING AND ABETTING. Any person who shall aid, abet, assist, consult, advise
or encourage any child, lunatic, idiot or other person to violate any ordinance or portion thereof
of the City, shall be prosecuted for such offense as principal and be subject to the same penalty
as if he or she had committed the offense directly.
20. PAYMENT OF FINES AND FEES. Settlement of fines and payment of fees shall
be in the form of United States currency, money order or check, which payment shall be made to
the Finance Department of the City of Decatur, Illinois, or a private collection enterprise
designated in writing by the Director of the Finance Department to collect unpaid fines and fees.
It shall be unlawful to pay, or attempt to pay, in any other manner or to make payment of such
unreasonable manner as to alarm, disturb, harass, endanger or injure or attempt to alarm, disturb,
harass, endanger or injure any City employee or employee of a private collection enterprise
lawfully engaged in the collection of unpaid fines and fees. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-02,
January 18, 2005)
21. PUBLIC URINATION/DEFECATION. It shall be unlawful to urinate or defecate
except in urinals or commodes of public restrooms or similar facilities or to expose a person’s
private body parts in an attempt to urinate or defecate in public places other than public
restrooms or similar facilities. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-57, August 3, 2009)
22. RETALIATION AGAINST OCCUPANT. It shall be unlawful for an action for
eviction, abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry and detainer or other similar proceeding to be
threatened or instituted against an occupant of a dwelling solely because such occupant agrees to
testify or testifies at a code violation hearing.
23. DEFACEMENT OF PROPERTY.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly damage the property of another by
defacing, deforming, or otherwise damaging the property by the use of paint or any other similar
substance, or by the use of a writing instrument, etching tool, or any other similar device without
the consent of said owner.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet, allow, permit or encourage
another to violate the provisions of this Section, by words, overt act, failure to act, or by lack of
supervision and control over minors.
C. In addition to any other penalties that may be imposed for a violation of this Section,
a person convicted of Defacement of Property shall be ordered to abate, reimburse, remediate,
repair, and/or remove the effect of the damage of or to the property.
D. In addition to any other penalties that may be imposed for a violation of this Section
and as restitution for a violation of this Section, a violator shall pay for the costs of repairing any
damages to property caused by that violator’s unlawful conduct. When the violator is a person
under eighteen (18) years of age, any parent, guardian, or other person having legal custody of
the violator shall be responsible to pay for damages caused by the violator or abatement of the
nuisance which is the result of the violator’s act.
E. This Section shall not be applicable to the use of water soluble chalk on public
sidewalks.
24. POSSESSION/CONSUMPTION CANNABIS.
A. It shall be unlawful for a person to possess thirty (30) grams or less of any substance
containing cannabis. This subsection 24(A) shall be repealed on January 1, 2020. (Amended
Ordinance 2019-236, December 2, 2019. Amended, Ordinance 2016-63, September 19, 2016)
B. DEFINITIONS.
1. For purposes of this Section, cannabis includes marijuana, hashish and
other substances which are identified as including any parts of the plant
Cannabis Sativa and including derivatives or subspecies, such as indica, of
all strains of cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin
extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture,
salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin,
including tetrohydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol
derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically produced
ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or
independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of
extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks
of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the
seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted
there from), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is
incapable of germination. Cannabis does not include industrial hemp as
defined and authorized under the Illinois Industrial Hemp Act. Cannabis
also means concentrate and cannabis-infused products.
2. For purposes of this Section, public place means any place where a person
could reasonably be expected to be observed by others, including but not
limited to all parts of buildings owned in whole or in part, or leased, by the
State or unit of local government and tobacco or cannabis stores or
lounges. Public place does not include a private residence unless the
private residence is used to provide licensed child care, foster care, or
other similar social service care on the premises but does include retail
tobacco stores.
3. For purposes of this Section, retail tobacco stores means a retail
establishment that derives more than 80% of its gross revenue from the
sale of loose tobacco, plants, or herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, and
other smoking devices for burning tobacco and related smoking
accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. It
includes an enclosed workplace that manufactures, imports, or distributes
tobacco or tobacco products, when, as a necessary and integral part of the
process of making, manufacturing, importing, or distributing a tobacco
product for the eventual retail sale of that tobacco or tobacco product,
tobacco is heated, burned, or smoked, or a lighted tobacco product is
tested, provided that the involved business entity: (1) maintains a specially
designated area or areas within the workplace for the purpose of the
heating, burning, smoking, or lighting activities, and does not create a
facility that permits smoking throughout; (2) satisfies the 80% requirement
related to gross sales; and (3) delivers tobacco products to consumers,
retail establishments, or other wholesale establishments as part of its
business.
C. Effective January 1, 2020, it shall be unlawful for a person under 21 years of age
to purchase, possess, use, process, transport, grow or consume any substance containing
cannabis except where authorized by the Illinois Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Pilot Program Act or by the Illinois Community College Cannabis Vocational
Pilot Program.
D. POSSESSION. Effective January 1, 2020, it shall be unlawful for a person 21
years of age or older to possess cannabis:
1. more than 30 grams of cannabis flower, more than 500 milligrams of THC
contained in cannabis-infused product, and more than 5 grams of cannabis
concentrate;
2. in a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver
pursuant to the Illinois Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot
Program Act;
3. on the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school, unless
permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the Illinois
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act;
4. in any correctional facility;
5. in any vehicle not open to the public unless the cannabis is in a reasonably
secured, sealed container and reasonably inaccessible while the vehicle is
moving; or
6. in a private residence that is used at any time to provide licensed child care
or other similar social service care on the premises.
E. CONSUMPTION. Effective January 1, 2020, it shall be unlawful for a person
21 years of age or older to use cannabis:
1. in a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver
pursuant to the Illinois Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot
Program Act;
2. on the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school, unless
permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the Illinois
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act;
3. in any correctional facility;
4. in any motor vehicle;
5. in a private residence that is used at any time to provide licensed child care
or other similar social service care on the premises;
6. in any public place; or
7. knowingly in close proximity to anyone under 21 years of age who is not a
registered medical cannabis patient under the Illinois Compassionate Use
of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act.
25. POSSESSION DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess any item of drug
paraphernalia with the intent to use it for the purpose of unlawfully ingesting, inhaling, injecting
or otherwise introducing cannabis or a controlled substance into the human body, or in preparing
cannabis or a controlled substance for that use.
B. As used in this Section, the following terms shall include and have the following
meanings:
(1) Cannabis shall mean and include any substance defined as cannabis in
Section 3 of the Illinois Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/3 and the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.
(2) Controlled substance shall mean and include any substance defined as a
controlled substance in the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, 720 ILCS
570/201 et. seq.
(3) Drug paraphernalia means any object or device used, designed for use
or intended for use in unlawfully ingesting, smoking, administering, or
storing cannabis or a controlled substance. For the purposes of this section,
drug paraphernalia includes but is not limited to:
(a) Metal, wooden, plastic, glass, stone or ceramic pipes, with or
without screens;
(b) Water pipes;
(c) Carburetion tubes and devices;
(d) Smoking and carburetion masks;
(e) Roach clips;
(f) Cocaine spoons and vials;
(g) Bongs;
(h) One-hitters.
C. This Section shall not apply to a person who is legally authorized to possess
hypodermic syringes or needles under the Hypodermic Syringes and Needles Act.
D. Drug paraphernalia as defined herein, seized by police officers pursuant to an arrest
or issuance of a notice to appear for a violation of this Section, shall be forfeited to the City of
Decatur upon a conviction for violation of this Section, or upon payment of a minimum fine in
settlement of said violation pursuant to Chapter 29, Section 11 of this Code, without further
order of the Court.
26. LITTERING.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, leave,
cause or permit the dumping, depositing, dropping, throwing, discarding or leaving of litter upon
any public or private property or upon or into any river, lake, pond, or other stream or body of
water unless:
(1) the property has been designated by the State or any unit of local
government for the disposal of litter and the litter is disposed of on that
property in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the
Pollution Control Board and Illinois Environmental Protection Agency;
(2) the litter is placed into a receptacle or other container intended by the
owner or tenant in lawful possession of that property for the deposit of
litter; or,
(3) the person is acting under the direction of proper public officials during
special cleanup days.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard or otherwise
dispose of litter from any motor vehicle upon any public highway, upon any public or private
property or upon or into any river, lake, pond, stream or body of water except as permitted under
any of paragraphs (1) through (3) of Section A.
C. Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle not
carrying passengers for hire, the presumption is created that the operator of that motor vehicle
has violated this Section.
27. RESISTING, INTERFERING OR OBSTRUCTING.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly resist, interfere or obstruct the
performance by one known to the person to be a peace officer or firefighter of any authorized act
within the peace officer’s or firefighter’s official capacity. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-35, June
4, 2012)
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to persist in any attempt to engage a peace officer
or firefighter in conversation in person when the person knows the person to be a peace officer or
firefighter while the peace officer or firefighter is attempting to control other persons or traffic
after a peace officer or firefighter directs the person to cease the attempt at conversation.
28. DAMAGE TO PROPERTY. It shall be unlawful for any person to damage,
destroy, deface or interfere, without lawful authority, the property of another.
29. TRESPASS.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) knowingly and without lawful authority, enter or remain within or on a
building; or
(2) enter upon the land of another, after receiving, prior to such entry,
notice from the owner or occupant that such entry is forbidden; or
(3) remain upon the land of another, after receiving notice from the owner
or occupant to depart; or
(4) present false documents or falsely represent his or her identity orally to
the owner or occupant of a building or land in order to obtain permission
from the owner or occupant to enter or remain in the building or on the
land; or
(5) knowingly and without lawful authority enter or remain upon any
vehicle, aircraft or watercraft of another; or
(6) enter upon the vehicle, aircraft or watercraft of another, after receiving,
prior to such entry, notice from the owner or occupant that such entry is
forbidden; or
(7) remain upon the vehicle, aircraft or watercraft of another, after
receiving notice from the owner or occupant to depart.
B. A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within the meaning of
Subsection A. if he or she has been notified personally, either orally or in writing or if a printed
or written notice forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main
entrance to such land or the forbidden part thereof.
C. This Section shall apply to land owned or supported in whole or in part with City
funds, or Federal or State funds administered or granted through the City or any of its agencies,
or any building on such land.
30. TOBACCO.
A. No person shall sell, buy for, distribute samples of or furnish any cigar, cigarette,
smokeless tobacco, tobacco in any of its forms, electronic cigarettes or alternative nicotine
products to any persons under twenty-one (21) years of age. (Amended, Ordinance Number
2019-68, July 1, 2019)
B. No persons under twenty-one (21) years of age shall possess, purchase or
attempt to purchase any cigar, cigarette, smokeless tobacco, tobacco in any of its forms,
electronic cigarettes or alternative nicotine products. (Amended, Ordinance Number 2019-68,
July 1, 2019)
C. For purposes of this Section, “smokeless tobacco” means any tobacco products that
are suitable for dipping or chewing.
31. RETAIL THEFT.
A. For purposes of this Section, the following definitions shall apply:
(1) Conceal. To conceal merchandise means that, although there may be
some notice of its presence, that merchandise is not visible through ordinary
observation.
(2) Full retail value means the merchant’s stated or advertised price of the
merchandise.
(3) Merchandise means any item of tangible personal property.
(4) Merchant means an owner or operator of any retail mercantile
establishment or any agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer, director,
franchisee or independent contractor of such owner or operator.
(5) Minor means a person who is less than nineteen (19) years of age, is
unemancipated and resides with his/her parents or legal guardian.
(6) Person means any natural person or individual.
(7) Peace Officer means that as defined in 720 ILCS 5/2-13.
(8) Premises of a retail mercantile establishment includes, but is not limited
to, the retail mercantile establishment; and common use areas in shopping
centers and all parking areas set aside by a merchant or on behalf of a
merchant for the parking of vehicles for the convenience of the patrons of
such retail mercantile establishment.
(9) Retail Mercantile Establishment means any place where merchandise is
displayed, held, stored or offered for sale to the public.
(10) Shopping cart means those push carts of the type or types which are
commonly provided by grocery stores, drug stores or other retail mercantile
establishments for the use of the public in transporting commodities in
stores and markets and, incidentally, from the stores to a place outside the
store.
(11) Theft detection shielding device means any laminated or coated bag or
device designed and intended to shield merchandise from detection by an
electronic or magnetic theft alarm sensor.
(12) Theft detection device remover means any tool or device specifically
designed and intended to be used to remove any theft detection device from
any merchandise.
(13) Under-ring means to cause the cash register or other sales recording
device to reflect less than the full retail value of the merchandise.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly:
(1) Take possession of, carry away, transfer or cause to be carried away or
transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a
retail mercantile establishment with the intention of retaining such
merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of
the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without paying the full
retail value of such merchandise; or
(2) Alter, transfer or remove any label, price tag, marking, indicia of value
or other markings which aid in determining value affixed to any
merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail mercantile
establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise personally or in
consort with another at less than full retail value with the intention of
depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise; or
(3) Transfer any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in
a retail merchandise establishment from the container or place in or on
which such merchandise is displayed to any other container or place with
the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such
merchandise; or
(4) Under-ring with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail
value of the merchandise; or
(5) remove a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile
establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such
removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the
possession, use or benefit of such cart; or
(6) Represent to a merchant that he or another is the lawful owner of
property, knowing that such representation is false, and convey or attempt
to convey the property to a merchant who is the owner of the property in
exchange for money, merchandise credit or other property of the merchant;
or
(7) Use or possess any theft detection shielding device or theft detection
device remover with the intention of using such device to deprive the
merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of any merchandise
displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile
establishment without paying the full retail value of such merchandise; or
(8) Obtain or exert unauthorized control over property of the owner and
thereby intend to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the
property when, as the lessee of the personal property of another, fails to
return it to the owner, or fails to pay the full retail value of such property to
the lessor in satisfaction of a contractual provision requiring such, within
thirty (30) days after written demand from the owner for its return. A notice
in writing, given after the expiration of the leasing agreement, by registered
mail, to the lessee at the address given by the lessee and shown in the
leasing agreement shall constitute property demand; or
(9) Remove or attempt to remove any theft detection device with the
intention of depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or
benefit of any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a
retail mercantile establishment without paying the full retail value of such
merchandise.
C. A person is presumed to have possessed, carried away or transferred merchandise
with the intention of retaining it or with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently of
the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise if such person:
(1) Conceals upon his/her person or among his/her belongings, unpurchased
merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail mercantile
establishment; and
(2) Removes that merchandise beyond the last known station for receiving
payments for merchandise in that retail mercantile establishment without
paying the full retail value of such merchandise.
D. Any merchant who has reasonable grounds to believe that a person has committed
retail theft may detain such person, on or off the premises of a retail mercantile establishment, in
a reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time for all or any of the following purposes:
(1) to request identification;
(2) to verify such identification;
(3) to make reasonable inquiry as to whether such person has in his/her
possession unpurchased merchandise and, to make reasonable investigation
of the ownership of such merchandise;
(4) to inform a peace officer of the detention of the person and surrender
that person to the custody of a peace officer;
(5) in the case of a minor, to inform a peace officer, the parents, guardian
or other private person interested in the welfare of that minor of this
detention and to surrender custody of such minor to such person.
E. A detention as permitted in this Section does not constitute an arrest or an unlawful
restraint, as defined in 720 ILCS 5/10-3, nor shall it render the merchant liable to the person so
detained.
32. THEFT.
A. It shall be unlawful for a person to obtain control over lost or mislaid property when:
(1) such person knows or learns the identity of the owner or knows, or is
aware of, or learns of a reasonable method of identifying the owner; and,
(2) fails to take reasonable measures to restore the property to the owner;
and,
(3) intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of the
property.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his/her possession any burglar’s nippers,
pick lock, skeleton key, bit jimmy or any other burglar’s instrument or tool unless such
possession is innocent or for a lawful purpose to make or alter or attempt to make or alter any
key or other instrument that will open the lock of a building unless requested to do so by some
person having the right and authority to make such request.
C. It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly:
(1) Obtain or exert unauthorized control over property of the owner; or,
(2) Obtain by deception control over property of the owner; or,
(3) Obtain by threat control over property of the owner; or,
(4) Obtain control over stolen property knowing the property to have been
stolen by another or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce
the person to believe that the property was stolen, and:
(a) fails to promptly notify the owner or Decatur Police Department
of such possession; or,
(b) intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of
the property; or,
(c) knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such
manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit;
or,
(d) uses, conceals or abandons the property knowing such use,
concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner
permanently of such use or benefit.
(5) Obtain the permanent or temporary use of property, labor or services of
another which are available only for hire by means of threat or deception or
knowing that such use is without the consent of the person providing the
property, labor or services.
33. MOB ACTION. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in mob action which
consists of any of the following:
(1) The use of force or violence disturbing the public peace by two (2) or
more persons acting together and without authority of law; or,
(2) The assembly of two (2) or more persons to do an unlawful act; or,
(3) The assembly of two (2) of more persons, without authority of law, for
the purpose of doing violence to the person or property of anyone supposed
to have been guilty of a violation of the law, or for the purpose of exercising
correctional powers or regulative powers over any person by violence.
34. ASSAULT. It shall be unlawful for a person, without lawful authority, to engage
in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery.
35. BATTERY. It shall be unlawful for a person to intentionally or knowingly
without legal justification and by any means to:
(1) Cause bodily harm to an individual, or,
(2) Make physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an
individual.
36. RECKLESS CONDUCT. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause bodily harm
or to endanger the bodily safety of an individual by any means if such person performs the acts
which cause the harm or endangers safety recklessly, whether the acts are otherwise lawful or
unlawful.
37. TRUANCY. A. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18),
enrolled in a public, private or parochial school, to absent himself or herself from attendance at
school and to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the
City of Decatur during the hours when the school is in session with student attendance required.
B. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or custodian of a person under the age of
eighteen (18) and enrolled in a public, private or parochial school, to permit or by insufficient
control, to allow the minor to absent himself or herself from attendance at school and to be
present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City of Decatur
during the hours when the school is in session with student attendance required.
C. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or any employee of an establishment to
allow a person under the age of eighteen (18) and enrolled in a public, private or parochial school
to be present or to remain upon the premises of the establishment in violation of Section A or
Section B above during the hours that the Schools are in session with student attendance
required.
D. It shall be a defense to Section A, B or C that the minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor’s parent, guardian, custodian, or responsible
adult; without any detour or stop;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent, guardian, custodian,
or responsible adult; without any detour or stop;
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel with the consent or
authorization of a parent, guardian, or custodian;
(4) Engaged in, going to or returning home from an employment activity
pursuant to a cooperative school vocation program without any detour or
stop;
(5) Involved in an emergency or going to or returning from a medical
appointment without any detour or stop;
(6) Engaged in, going to or returning from an official school or religious
activity or otherwise engaged in an activity which would constitute an
excused absence from the school from which the minor would normally
attend, including, but not limited to lunch periods;
(7) Possessing valid proof that the minor is a student with permission to
leave the school campus;
(8) Engaged in a bona fide alternative education or home schooling
program.
E. In addition to the defenses set forth in Subsection D above, it shall be a defense under
Subsection C if the owner, operator, or employee of the establishment immediately upon
discovery of a person reasonably believed to be in violation of this Section notified the Regional
Office of Education, asked the person to leave their establishment and the minor refused to leave
the establishment after being advised to do so by the owner, operator or employee.
F. In lieu of or in addition to any monetary penalties imposed after conviction, those
charged with violation of this Section may be referred to the Macon County Truancy Court,
Macon County Teen Court or other similar program.
38. PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined a minimum of Two Hundred Fifty Dollars
($250.00) but not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each day on
which a violation occurs or continues shall be considered a separate offense.
39. OTHER REMEDIES. The fine provided for in Section 39 of this Chapter shall not
be deemed to be the exclusive remedy for any act or thing constituting a nuisance under the
provisions hereof, or under the common law, or to bar or prohibit the exercise of remedies, other
than fine, applicable thereto.
CHAPTER 73.1
CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS
(amended, Ordinance No. 2012-06)
1. DEFINITIONS. As used in this Chapter, unless context otherwise requires, the
following words or phrases shall mean:
"Curfew Hours":
(A) 11:00 P.M. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 6:00
A.M. on the following day; and;
(B) 12:01 A.M. until 6:00 A.M. on any Saturday or Sunday.
"Emergency": An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that
calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or
automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury
or loss of life.
"Establishment": Any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which
the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.
"Guardian":
(A) A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or,
(B) A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
"Minor": Any person under 17 years of age.
Revised 2/12
Chapter 73.1
"Operator": Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating,
managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an
association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.
"Parent": A person who is: (A) a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of
another person; or,
(B) at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and
custody of a minor.
"Public Place": Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has
access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools,
hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
"Remain": To:
(A) linger or stay; or,
(B) fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner,
operator, or other person in control of the premises.
"Serious Bodily Injury": Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that
causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function
of any bodily member or organ.
2. OFFENSES:
(A) A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of
any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
(B) A parent or guardian of a minor, or other person in custody or control of a minor,
commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to
remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew
Chapter 73.1
hours. In the event that a minor is charged with a violation of this Chapter within forty-five (45)
days of the giving of the notice as required in paragraph 6 of this Chapter, there shall exist a
rebuttable presumption that the minor's parent or guardian knowingly permitted or by
insufficient control allowed the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any
establishment during curfew hours.
(C) The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he
knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
3. DEFENSES.
(A) It is a defense to prosecution under Section 2 that the minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any
detour or stop;
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(4) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an
employment activity, without any detour or stop;
(5) Involved in an emergency;
(6) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a
next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's
presence;
(7) Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by the City of Decatur, a civic organization, or another
similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without
any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults
Chapter 73.1
and sponsored by the City of Decatur, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
(8) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly;
or,
(9) Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in
accordance with 750 ILCS 30/1 et seq.
B. It is a defense to prosecution under Section 2 (C) that the owner, operator, or
employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present
on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
4. ENFORCEMENT. Before taking any enforcement action under this chapter, a
police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The
officer shall not issue a Violation Notice and Complaint or make an arrest under this chapter
unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any
response and other circumstances, no defense in paragraph 3 is present.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-77, October 31, 2011)
5. VIOLATION NOTICE AND COMPLAINT.
(A) Whenever a police officer witnesses or has knowledge, based on reasonable grounds,
of a violation by any person of any section of this Chapter, said police officer may issue such
person a Violation Notice and Complaint as set forth in Chapter 29 of this Code.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-77, October 31, 2011)
(B) A person cited for a violation of any section of this Chapter as herein provided may
terminate any further proceedings by the City due to said violation by making payment to the
Chapter 73.1
City at the office of the City Treasurer. Payment will be considered as being made only when
the City Treasurer is in receipt of the full amount. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-77)
6. NOTICE. In each instance where a Violation Notice and Complaint is issued to a
Minor for violation of this Chapter, the minor's parent or guardian shall be issued a "Notice of
Violation", notifying said parent or guardian of the charge made against the minor.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-77, October 31, 2011)
7. PENALTIES:
(A) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not
less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00)
for each offense, and each day on which a violation is committed, occurs or continues shall be
considered a separate offense. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-77)
(B) In addition to any other penalty or punishment, for every second and subsequent
offense committed by a minor, the minor's parent or guardian shall reimburse the City of Decatur
for the reasonable cost of supervising a minor taken into custody pursuant to the provisions of
this Chapter.
8. SEVERABILITY. If any provision of this Chapter, including any exception, part,
phrase, or term, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the Chapter which can be given
effect without the invalid provision or application, and in this end the provisions of this Chapter
are declared severable.
CHAPTER 74
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
(Amended, Ordinance 2013-08)
1. PROVISIONS GOVERN. The provisions of this Chapter shall regulate, govern and
control the installation, construction, repair or modification of sewer services in the City of
Decatur, Illinois (City) and the connection and use thereof to sewers in the City, other than that
done by the City through the City of Decatur employees or contractors thereof, and may be
construed with, but take precedence over any other provision of Code or ordinance of the City
except the provisions of City Chapters 37 and 38 to which the provisions hereof shall be subject.
2. CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED. The owner of any structure
used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or that otherwise contains plumbing
systems for conveying water borne waste, situated within the City and abutting on any street,
road, easement or right-of-way in which there is now located or planned to be located a public
sanitary sewer, excluding force mains, is hereby required to connect, at the owner’(s) expense,
any said plumbing facilities directly with the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of
this Chapter within 90 days after date of official notice by the Public Works Director, provided
that such public sewer is available. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
A public sewer shall be deemed available when a public sanitary sewer is in place within
any street, alley, right-of-way, or easement that adjoins or abuts a property on which the structure
or the building setback line is within 300 feet of the public sewer and connection to the sewer is
permitted by the controlling agency for the sewer.
Revised 12/2016
The building owner may request in writing to the Public Works Director, deferral of this
connection requirement on the basis of undue hardship if the structure is separated from the
public sewer by physical constraints that represent economic hardships and has an existing
properly operating private wastewater disposal system, in which case the owner shall
demonstrate the nature and degree of hardship. The need for the owner to pump to the public
sewer shall not alone be considered a hardship. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39)
3. PERMIT REQUIRED. No pipe, conduit, out-fall, sewer or drain shall be connected
or reconnected with any existing sewer of the City, or any sewer under the jurisdiction, control or
equitable ownership of the City, whether by maintenance contract, purchase agreement or
otherwise, nor shall any such connection be repaired or modified unless and until a permit has
been issued for the same by the City Public Works Department upon application furnishing such
information in such form as may be required by the Public Works Director to enable the City to
conveniently locate, inspect and make a record of such connection; to determine the mechanical
sufficiency of said connection and the service proposed to be accomplished thereby; and, to
otherwise carry out the work and duties of the various concerned departments of the City and
serve the purposes and provisions of the ordinances, rules and regulations thereof.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
4. APPLICATION FOR PERMIT. Application for such permits shall be made upon
forms furnished by the City and shall be accompanied by payment, or proof of payment, of any
applicable connection charges established by said provisions, the payment of the established
inspection fee for each such permit and applicable Sanitary District of Decatur annexation fees.
5. ANNEXATION TO THE SANITARY DISTRICT OF DECATUR REQUIRED.
No person shall construct for connection, or connect any sewer, directly or indirectly, to a sewer
unless the property has been incorporated into the service area of the Sanitary District of
Decatur. No permit for a connection, direct or indirect, will be issued by the Public Works
Department until evidence in such form as required by the Public Works Director is provided
verifying that the property applying for a connection is incorporated into the Sanitary District of
Decatur service area and paid all charges and fees as maybe required by the Sanitary District of
Decatur. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
6. CHARGE REQUIRED. No such connection shall be made until all applicable fees
or charges elsewhere provided by ordinance, along with a connection charge in an amount
determined as provided in this Chapter, are paid.
7. COMPUTATION OF CHARGE. The amount of the connection charge shall be
determined by the Public Works Department upon the following basis:
(a) If the sewer to which connection is to be made was constructed as part of a
project of a special assessment district, and all the premises to be served by the connection were
specially assessed for the construction of said project in the same manner and to the same extent
as the remainder of said district, no additional connection charge will be required;
(b) If the sewer to which connection is to be made was constructed as part of a
project of a special assessment district, and the premises to be served by the connection were
either not assessed or were assessed to an extent less than other premises in the district which
were fully assessed, the connection charge shall be the difference between the amount the
premises were assessed, if any, and the amount the premises would have been assessed as a part
of said district for a benefit equal to that provided by the connection to be made;
(c) If the sewer to which connection is to be made was not constructed as part of
a project of a special assessment district, and evidence is submitted to show either that it was
agreed for adequate consideration by those who paid the cost of construction that no connection
charge or contribution toward such cost would be required with regard to the premises to be
served by such connection, or that contribution toward the cost of construction was made with
regard to the premises to be served by such connection, no additional charge shall be required;
(d) If the sewer to which connection is to be made is not within the provisions of
subsections (a), (b) or (c) of this section, the amount of the connection charge shall be
determined by applying customarily accepted engineering concepts and practices to the facts
concerning said connection which may include consideration of any or all of the following: the
size, original cost, replacement cost or current value of the existing sewer; the type, quantity and
quality of service or benefit provided by the existing sewer; the size of the sewer to be
connected; the type, quantity and quality of the service or benefit to be provided by the sewer to
be connected; the number, area, type and intensity of use of the premises served by the existing
sewer and those to be served by the sewer to be connected; the availability and comparative cost
of alternate means of providing service; and, such other and further considerations within
customarily accepted practice as the Public Works Director shall reasonably deem pertinent.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
8. INSTALLMENTS. Any person who has a sewer available to his property or any
person whose property is included in a sewer assessment district established after the effective
date of the ordinance codified in this section, may, in either case, enter into a written installment
contract with the City on a form approved by the Corporation Counsel and signed for by the City
Public Works Director or his designate. Such contract shall include or incorporate the legal
description of the property, be signed by the owner of the property and provide for the property
owner to pay his connection charge as specified in the contract over a term not to exceed fifteen
(15) years in annual installments or as may be provided in the contract. Such contract shall
provide for interest to be paid at a rate of the “Wall Street Journal Prime” on the date the contract
is signed, plus one percent. Such interest shall be computed and compounded annually on the
unpaid balance. The interest shall be the only compensation to the City for its administrative
costs. Such contract shall be filed with the City Finance Director. Installments shall be paid as
follows:
(a) No initial payment is required to accompany the application for connection.
(b) Equal, annual payments over the term of the contract together with interest on the
unpaid balance computed and compounded annually with the first of the annual payments due
one year from the date the contract is signed and each successive payment due one year from the
previous payment until the full amount of the installment payment contract is paid in full. The
interest rate shall be that established using the method described in this section.
(c) Upon the failure of any installment to be timely paid, the entire deferred balance plus
interest shall become immediately due and payable. The connection fee shall be considered a
debt of the owner of such lot, building or premises to the City of Decatur, and the City may file
suit to collect the same in addition to the imposition of any fine or service shut off provided for
elsewhere herein. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-07, February 7, 2011)
(d) The property owner may at any time pay off such contract without penalty and that
upon any sale or transfer of ownership of the property the property owner may pay off such
contract in full or transfer the contract to the new property owner; and,
(e) Upon full payment of the contract the Finance Director shall have cause to have
mailed to such property owner notice that the contract is paid in full.
The provisions of this section are only to provide an alternative for eligible property
owners and they may choose to pay such charge in full at the time of application.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
9. SEWER USER CHARGE. A sewer user charge is hereby established for the use of
the sewerage system by each lot, building or premises having connection thereto, whether direct
or by means of laterals or mains owned or controlled by others, to be paid by the owner of said
lot, building, or premises at the rate and in the manner set out in this Chapter. For the purposes
of this Chapter, “sewerage system” shall mean and include those collecting, intercepting and
outlet sewers, lateral sewers, and drains, including combined storm water and sanitary drains,
force mains, conduits, pumping stations, ejector stations and all other appurtenances, extensions
and improvements used for the collection and disposal of sewage and industrial waste which are
owned by, or are under the jurisdiction and control of, the City of Decatur. The sewer user
charge shall be considered a debt of the owner of such lot, building or premises to the City of
Decatur, and the City may file suit to collect the same in addition to the imposition of any fine or
service shut off provided for elsewhere herein. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-07, February 7)
10. RATE. (A) The sewer user charge shall be set at the rate in Table 1 below per one
hundred cubic feet of water used, except as expressly provided elsewhere in this section. Water
use shall be determined as per the provisions of Chapter 64 of this City Code for those lots,
buildings and premises which are furnished water by the City pursuant thereto, and as adjusted
by Section 11.
Table 1
Billing Date Sewer User Charge Rate
May 1, 2016 to April 30, 2017 $0.94
May 1, 2017 to April 30, 2018 $1.09
May 1, 2018 to April 30, 2019 $1.24
May 1, 2019 to April 30, 2020 $1.33
May 1, 2020 to April 30, 2021 $1.42
May 1, 2021 to April 30, 2022 $1.51
After May 1, 2022 Rates as provided in Section 10 (B).
(B) Effective May 1, 2022, and continuing annually on May 1 thereafter, Sewer User
Charge Rates contained in this Chapter will increase by 2.5 percent or by the annual percentage
change of the U.S. Department of Labor Midwest Urban Consumer Price Index for each
corresponding January 1 to December 31 of the preceding year, whichever is greater.
(C) Water users with water provided by the City of Decatur and which suffer significant
loss or evaporation of such water during the use thereof, upon a showing of same satisfactory to
the Department of Public Works, may be billed for sanitary sewer user charge at a lesser total
usage than that determined for purposes of said Chapter 64 and which lesser total reflects water
lost to such use or evaporation. Any such reduction as provided for herein must be agreed to
between the City and the user.
(D) The rate of the sewer user charge for those lots, buildings and premises which are
not furnished water by the City of Decatur or any other Public Water Supply shall be at the rate
set in Table 2 per month.
Table 2
Billing Date Sewer User Charge Rate
May 1, 2016 to April 30, 2017 $6.36
May 1, 2017 to April 30, 2018 $7.37
May 1, 2018, to April 30, 2019 $8.39
May 1, 2019 to April 30, 2020 $9.00
May 1, 2020 to April 30, 2021 $9.61
May 1, 2021 to April 30, 2022 $10.22
After May 1, 2022 Rates as provided in Section 10 (B)
(E) Water users with water provided by any Public Water Supply other than the city of
Decatur shall be billed at the rate set forth in Table 1 with water usage acquired from the local
Public Water Supply.
(F) At the opinion of the owner of any lot, building or premises, with the approval of the
City, the sewer user charge shall be set at the rate in Section 10 (A) per one hundred cubic feet of
sanitary sewage or industrial waste entering the sewerage system. Said owner must install, at his
or its own expense, a sewer meter approved by the City which accurately measures the sanitary
sewage or industrial waste entering the sewerage system.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2016-91, December 5, 2016)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-07, February 7, 2011)
11. PAYMENT. (A) The sewer user charge shall be added to the municipal utilities bill
sent by the City to the owner of each lot, building and premises in accordance with said Chapter
64, and said sewer user charge shall be separately denoted thereon, except as provided in
subsection 12 (B) and 12 (C). Payment of the sewer user charge shall be due and payable at the
same time as payment of the municipal utilities bill on which said sewer user charge appears, as
required by said chapter 64, and penalties and late charges for delinquent payments listed therein
shall be fully applicable to delinquent payments of the sewer user charge.
(B) Owners of lots, buildings or premises not furnished water by the City {Section 10
(D)}, and those using sewage meters pursuant to Section 10 (F) will be billed separately for the
sewer user charge. Timelines and late charges for payment as set out in said Chapter 64, and
referred to in subparagraph (12A) shall be fully applicable thereto.
(C) Owners of lots, buildings or premises receiving water from another Public Water
Supply {Section 10 (E)} will be billed separately for the sewer user charge or billed on the local
Public Water Supply’s Utility Bill. Timelines and late charges for payment as set out in said
Chapter 64, and referred to in subparagraph (12A) shall be fully applicable thereto at the option
of the other Public Water Supplier. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-14, March 7, 2011)
12. SEPARATE FUND. All receipts from the sewer user charge shall be placed in a
separate fund and may be expended only for sanitary sewer construction, repair, maintenance,
improvements and related items associated therewith, including but not limited to capital debt
retirement, including interest, and engineering and legal costs, and other appropriate
administrative charges. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-07, February 7, 2011)
13. LIEN; SERVICE SHUT OFF. Should any connection charge, or part thereof, not
be timely paid as provided herein, in addition to any other remedy provided for in this Code,
collection thereof may be had in any appropriate action in law or in equity, and said unpaid
amount shall be a lien upon the premises served by said connection, and in addition thereto, upon
such notice and in such time and manner as is provided elsewhere in this Code regarding charges
for water service, or water main connection charges, shall be cause for the termination of sewer
service, or water service, or both, to said premises. All costs to restore a sewer and/or water
service that has been terminated shall be at the expense of the owner.
14. DISTRIBUTION OF CONNECTION CHARGES. Upon recommendation of the
Public Works Director, the Council may from time to time contract with others with regard to the
extension of the sewer system, and may provide for the distribution, among those contributing to
the cost of construction of a particular extension, of connection charges collected for connections
to such extension upon such basis and in such proportions or amounts as the Council may direct.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
15. METHOD OF CONNECTION. A separate and independent building sewer shall
be provided for every building; except as may be approved by the Public Works Director.
Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are
determined by the Public Works Department to meet all current requirements of this Chapter and
all applicable current laws and regulations. Existing building sewers shall, if requested by the
Public Works Director, be inspected, tested and/or uncovered in order to determine whether or
not the existing sewer meets all current standards. All costs for said work shall be at the expense
of the owner of the sewer.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the “Y” or
“T” branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is twelve inches
in diameter or less, and no properly located “Y” or “T” branch is available a “Y” branch shall be
installed at the location specified by the Public Works Director. Where the public sewer is
greater than twelve inches in diameter, and no properly located “Y” or “T” branch is available, a
neat hole may be cut into the public sewer and a saddle type “Y” connection or an “Insert-a-tee”
type fitting installed. Other special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved
by the Public Works Director.
The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection to the public sewer shall be at
a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer at the point of connection. The building
sewer connection to the public sewer shall be watertight.
All costs for connecting to the public sewer shall be at the expense of the owner of the
connection. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
16. BUILDING SEWER. The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to
the approval of the Public Works Director, but in no event shall the diameter be less than 4
inches and installed at a slope to insure adequate velocity to be self cleaning. The building sewer
shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction
shall be made only with properly curved pipe fittings, each fitting not to exceed a 45 degree
bend. Cleanouts shall be installed at each change of direction which exceeds 45 degrees and at
intervals of not more than 100 feet. Manholes may be used in lieu of cleanouts.
The building sewer shall be push-on or gasketed joint cast iron, ductile iron, or PVC pipe
installed per the manufacturer’s recommendation. PVC pipe shall be solid wall pipe with a
minimum Standard Dimension Ratio (SDR) of 28. All joints shall be watertight.
Whenever possible, the depth of the building sewer shall be sufficient to afford protection
from frost, when not possible, it shall be the owner’s responsibility to protect the pipe from
freezing.
In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public
sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted and discharged into the
building sewer by means subject to the review and approval by the Public Works Director. All
required lifting devices shall be installed, owned and maintained by the owner of the property
being served by said lifting devices.
All costs to install a building sewer shall be at the expense of the building sewer owner.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
17. BUILDING SEWER INSPECTIONS AND TESTING REQUIRED. No
building sewer shall be buried or covered until the same has been inspected, tested and approved
by the City and should any work be buried or covered without so being inspected, tested and
approved, in addition to any cost or penalty provided herein, the cost of uncovering the same
shall be borne by the owner of such service or the person or entity found to so have done, or
both.
18. BUILDING SEWER OWNERSHIP, MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR. The
ownership of the building sewer from the building’s interior plumbing system to its point of
connection to a public sewer is that of the property owner. The connection includes the tee, wye
or other City approved connection to the public sewer. The property owner is responsible for the
maintenance and repair of the building sewer. All costs and expenses incident to the installation,
connection, repair and maintenance of the building sewer shall be the responsibility of the
property owner.
The owner of any structure wherein the building sewer or a drainage system is damaged,
decayed or in a state of disrepair to such an extent as to create a threat to the health, safety and
welfare of the public may be ordered to repair the sewer or drain, as the case may be, within a
reasonable time frame determined by the Public Works Director after due notice is served upon
the owner or occupant of the premises, in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested. If
the threat persists and the owner has not repaired the defect at the expiration of time frame set by
the Public Works Director, the Public Works Director is hereby authorized to repair the sewer or
drain, as the case may be, forthwith, at the expense of the City and recoverable against the
owner, his successors and assigns.
Repairs made pursuant to this section, upon filing a notice of lien with the recorder of the
deeds of the county, shall constitute a lien in favor of the City against the premises on which the
repairs were made.
Any such installation, maintenance and repair performed on the service connection in the
public right-of-way shall be in conformance with provisions of City Chapter 37, Construction
and Excavation in Streets. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
19. EMERGENCY REPAIRS. The owner of any structure wherein the sewer or
drainage system is damaged, decayed or in a state of disrepair to such an extent as to create a
clear and present danger to the health, safety and welfare of the public may be ordered to repair
the sewer or drain, as the case may be, within 24 hours after due notice is served upon the owner
or occupant of the premises, in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the danger
persists and the owner has not repaired the defect at the expiration of 24 hours the Public Works
Director is hereby authorized to repair the sewer or drain, as the case may be, forthwith, at the
expense of the City and recoverable against the owner. Repairs made pursuant to this section
shall constitute a lien in favor of the City against the premises on which the repairs were made.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
20. REINSPECTION OF BUILDING SEWERS. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this Chapter, the Public Works Director may direct that building sewers or building
drains, or both, be inspected and tested by the City Building Inspection Division or by the Public
Works Department, or both, and the authority to either enforce the requirements of this Chapter
and require compliance therewith shall be the same as if each were specifically mentioned where
appropriate therein as to said sewers or drains.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
21. PROHIBITIONS AND LIMITATIONS ON USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS.
(a) Generally. No person(s) shall:
(1) Willfully or negligently obstruct access to, break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewer
system.
(2) Make a connection to a sanitary sewer which will permit surface or storm
water drainage into said sewer.
(3) Make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, area way
drains, or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer, building drain or
other pipe which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public separate or combined
sanitary sewer.
(4) Make a connection to a surface or storm water drain or sewer which will
permit sanitary sewage to be admitted into such surface or storm water drain or sewer.
(5) Make a connection to an existing combined sewer unless evidence
satisfactory in the judgment of the Public Works Director is submitted to him to clearly show
that the existing use thereof along with the additional use as a result of the proposed connection
are less than sixty percent of the capacity of the existing sewer under all reasonable conditions,
and that there is no reasonably feasible alternative to provide service other than by the
connection proposed.
(b) Prohibitions on wastewater discharges. No person shall discharge or deposit or cause
or allow to be discharged or deposited into the sewer system:
(1) Any wastewater which may contain oil and grease concentrations or amounts
from users violating Federal, State or Sanitary District of Decatur pretreatment standards or
wastewater from users containing floatable oil, wax, fats or grease concentration of mineral
origin of more than one hundred (100) milligrams per liter whether emulsified or not, or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two
(32) degrees and one hundred fifty (150) degrees at the point of discharge into the system.
(2) Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or
may be sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion
or be injurious in any other way to the wastewater system or to the operation of the system.
Prohibited materials include but are not limited to: gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene,
xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides,
hydrides, and sulfides.
(3) Any solid or viscous wastes which will or may cause or contribute to
obstruction in the flow of wastewater in a sewer, or otherwise interfere with the proper operation
of the wastewater system. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to: grease,
uncomminuted garbage, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings,
entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, mud,
glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood,
plastics, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil,
seafood processing by-products, and similar substances.
(4) Any wastewater which will cause corrosion, deterioration of the wastewater
system, or constitute a hazard to equipment or humans. All wastes discharged to the wastewater
system shall have a pH value of not less than 6.0 standard units. Prohibited materials include,
but are not limited to: acids, sulfides, concentrated chloride and fluoride compounds, and
substances which will react with water to form acidic products.
(5) Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with
any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
(6) Any waters or wastes containing chromium, copper, zinc, and similar
objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such
degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works
exceeds the limits established by the Sanitary District of Decatur.
(7) Any noxious or malodorous solids, liquids, or gases, which, either singly or
by interaction with other wastes, are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are
or may be sufficient to prevent entry into the wastewater system for its operation, maintenance
and repair.
(8) Any wastewater containing radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by Federal or State regulations and which will or
may cause damage or hazards to the wastewater system or personnel operating the system.
(9) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids including, but not limited
to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues or of dissolved solids including, but not limited
to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate.
(10) Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment
process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
(11) Any waste containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances,
which may cause excessive foaming in the sewer or sewage treatment plant.
(12) Any wastewater containing Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD), total solids,
or suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required
to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant unless permitted by the Sanitary District
of Decatur.
(13) Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing
substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the Sanitary
District of Decatur as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage to meet Federal and
State requirements for such discharge to the receiving waters.
(14) Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment
or reduction by the sewage treatment process employed, or are amenable to treatment only to
such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent violates its National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination (NPDES) permit or the receiving water standards established by the Illinois
Pollution Control Board (IPCB).
(15) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting a "slug"
which is any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given
constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes,
more than 5 times the average 24 hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
(16) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by
the Sanitary District of Decatur.
(17) Any other substances prohibited by the Sanitary District of Decatur to its
sewer system and sewage treatment plant.
(c) Septic tank and other holding tank wastewater discharges.
(1) No person owning vacuum or “septic tank” pump trucks or other liquid
wastewater transport trucks shall discharge directly or indirectly such wastewater into a City of
Decatur sewer system.
(2) No person shall discharge any other holding tank wastewater into a City of
Decatur sewer system.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
22. GREASE, OIL AND SAND TRAPS. All establishments involved in the
preparation of food for commercial purposes shall provide grease interceptors or traps.
(a) Grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be provided at the cost of the
owner when required by the City for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in
excessive amounts, sand and other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors or traps will
not be required for dwelling units.
(b) All interceptors or traps shall be of a type and capacity approved by the City
Building Inspection Division and the Illinois Department of Public Health, all such devices shall
be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. They shall be
constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperatures and shall be of substantial construction, gas tight, watertight, and equipped with
easily removable covers.
(c) All grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be serviced and emptied at
the cost of the owner on a continuous basis to maintain their minimum design capacity and the
continuous efficient operation at all times. No waste removed from the interceptors or traps shall
be reintroduced into the sanitary sewer or back into the interceptor or trap, which will cause the
interceptor’s or trap’s discharge to exceed sewer use ordinance limits. The owner shall be
responsible for the sanitary disposal of such waste.
(d) The owner shall maintain written records of interceptor or trap maintenance
and emptying interceptors and traps for the prior three years, or less, if the device is less than
three years old. Said records shall be made available upon request by the Public Works Director
or Building Inspection Manager.
(e) Approval of proposed facilities or equipment by the City Building Inspection
Division, does not, in any way, guarantee that these facilities or equipment will function in the
manner described by their constructor or manufacturer; nor shall it relieve a person, firm or
corporation of the responsibility of enlarging or otherwise modifying such facilities to
accomplish the intended purpose.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-03, February 1, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
23. CONTROL OF PROHIBITED WASTES.
(a) If any waters or wastes are discharged or proposed to be discharged to the
public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in
Section 22 of this Chapter, and/or, which are in violation of the standards for Pretreatment
provided in Federal Rules and Regulations contained in 40 CFR Part 403, and any amendments
thereto, and which in the judgment of the Public Works Director, may have a deleterious effect
upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a
hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Public Works Director shall insure that such
discharges which may be subject to the rules and regulations of the Sanitary District of Decatur
for pretreatment are directed to the District for the District’s regulatory control and compliance
program.
(b) For any waters or wastes to be discharged or proposed to be discharged to the
public sewers, which are not subject to the District’s regulatory control, the Public Works
Director may:
(1) Prohibit the discharge of such wastewater.
(2) Require a discharger to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Public Works
Director that in-plant modifications will reduce or eliminate the discharge of such substances in
conformity with this Chapter.
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or;
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes
not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of this ordinance. If the
Public Works Director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and
installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Public
Works Director, and subject to the requirements of all application codes, ordinances, laws and
the municipal discharge permit. Further, such pretreatment installations must be consistent with
the requirements of any state pretreatment permit issued to the industry.
(5) Require pretreatment, including storage, facilities, or flow equalization
necessary to reduce or eliminate the objectionable characteristics or substances so that the
discharge will not violate this Chapter. In instances where it is agreed that any waste will be
accepted into the City facilities after receiving preliminary treatment, drawings and
specifications showing all pertinent detail of the methods and construction proposed to
accomplish the preliminary treatment shall be submitted to the Public Works Director for
approval. Where preliminary treatment facilities are utilized prior to discharge to City facilities,
they shall be subject to periodic inspection by the Public Works Director and shall be maintained
in good operating condition. Access shall be provided for flow measurements and sampling
wastes before they reach the City’s sewer. Provision should be made to control the rate of
discharge and also to completely shut off the discharge from pretreatment facilities if required.
(6) Require the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes to install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters, and
other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement
of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Public Works Director. The manhole shall
be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and
accessible at all times. All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such
monitoring of their discharges as the Public Works Director may reasonably require, including
installation, use, and maintenance of monitoring equipment, keeping records and reporting the
results of such monitoring to the Public Works Director. Records of any such monitoring will be
supplied by the Public Works Director to the District or the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency on request.
(7) Take such other remedial action as may be deemed to be desirable or
necessary to achieve the purpose of this ordinance.
(8) All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this Chapter shall be determined in accordance with the
latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by
the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole
provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special
manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of
constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and
property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24 hour composite of all
outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.)
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour
composites of all outfalls whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples.
(9) Reporting of accidental discharge. If, for any reason, a user accidentally
discharges prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this Section, the user responsible for
such discharge shall immediately notify the Public Works Director so that corrective action may
be taken to protect the sewer system. In addition, a written report, addressed to the Public Works
Director, detailing the date, time and cause of the accidental discharge, the quantity and
characteristics of the discharge, and corrective action taken to prevent future discharges, shall be
filed by the responsible facility within five (5) days of the occurrence of the violating discharge.
(10) Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the City and any user of the sewer system whereby
wastewater of unusual strength or character, but not detrimental to the function of the sewer
system, is accepted into the system and specially treated subject to any payments or user charges
as may be applicable.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-07, February 22, 2011)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
24. PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS. Where a public sewer is not
accessible, all human wastes and domestic sewage shall be discharged in compliance with the
Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act of the State of Illinois and designed, constructed,
operated and maintained in accordance with the Private Sewage Disposal Code promulgated by
the Illinois Department of Public Health.
25. PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEMS. Private sewer systems are allowed only under
unusual circumstances subject to the approval of the City Manager upon recommendation from
the Public Works Director. A private sanitary sewer is a sewer that is owned by one or more
individuals as opposed to a sewer owned and operated by the City or the Sanitary District of
Decatur. Building sewers that serve more than one building and building sewers that serve only
one building but traverse one or more lots other than the lot on which exists the building served
shall be considered private sewers. Building sewers that serve only one building and do not
traverse one or more lots other than the lot on which exists the building served shall not be
considered private sanitary sewers. In cases where a private sewer system is appropriate, the
owner or developer shall provide to the Public Works Director the following:
(a) Copies of all applicable permits issued by agencies regulating the construction,
operation and maintenance of the private sewer system.
(b) Design plan and profile drawings of the proposed sewer system showing: pipe
sizes, locations, slopes, inverts, and materials; ground elevations along the proposed sewer
system; pump type and size specifications where applicable; alarm system specifications where
applicable. Such plans shall be prepared and certified by a professional engineer licensed by the
State of Illinois.
(c) Private maintenance agreement for the private sewer system to be recorded as
a deed restriction for each property to be served by the private sewer system.
(d) Record plats of any private easements along which the private sewer system
will run.
(e) Any other information required by the City in order to determine the necessity
for, desirability of and adequacy of a proposed private sewer system.
(f) In reviewing the material submitted, the Public Works Director shall determine
the following:
(1) That the design of the system is adequate and meets all code requirements.
(2) That the maintenance agreement clearly holds the City free from any
maintenance responsibility for the private system and establishes clear responsibility for
maintenance among the property owners involved.
(3) That the proposed system will not, in any way, impede the City’s ability to
provide sanitary sewer throughout the City.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
26. PROHIBITED USE OF COMBINED SEWERS. In those areas of the City served
with combined sewers furnishing both sanitary and surface water drainage after a separate
surface water drainage system has been provided therein to relieve such combined sewers from
surcharge by surface water drainage, further induction and admission of surface water into such
combined sewers shall cease and terminate. No downspout, roof or area drain which would
induce or admit surface water therein shall be connected with any combined sewer in any area of
the City wherein a separate surface water drainage system has been provided and made available.
27. TERMINATION OF COMBINED SEWER CONNECTIONS. Upon reasonable
notice issued to the owner of record, or the person or entity in possession or control of premises,
situated as set out in Section 27 hereof, of the provision and availability of surface drains, all
connections, such as downspouts, roof or area drains, including or admitting surface water into a
combined sewer shall be terminated at the expense of the owner. Such notice may be served
personally, or by certified mail return receipt requested delivery restricted to addressee only, or
by posting the same upon the premises whereat such a connection exists.
28. NUISANCE. Any connection as set out in Section 22 hereof remaining
unterminated is a public nuisance which may be abated by suit otherwise.
29. RULES AND REGULATIONS. The Public Works Director shall be responsible
for enforcing the provisions in this Chapter. He is also hereby authorized to promulgate such
rules and regulations as may be necessary to supplement this Chapter for effective enforcement,
provided that such rules and regulations shall not be valid until they have been filed in the office
of the City Clerk for not less than ten (10) days before their respective effective dates.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-39, May 18, 2009)
30. ADMISSION TO PROPERTY. Whenever it shall be necessary for the purposes of
this Chapter, upon the presentation of credentials, the Public Works Director, or designee, may
enter upon the property or premises at reasonable hours or at any hour in the case of an
emergency for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and inspecting
and monitoring equipment or method, or any pretreatment facilities, or testing of any discharge
of wastewater to the wastewater system. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-07, February 22, 2011)
31. PENALTY. It shall be unlawful to install, construct, repair or modify a sewer
service, or connect the same to the City sewer system other than in conformity and compliance
with the provisions hereof. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor
more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each day on which a violation
occurs or continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-75; Ordinance No. 2011-07)
32. OTHER REMEDIES. The provisions or imposition of the penalty aforesaid shall
not preclude the institution of appropriate action to prevent, abate or stop acts, activities, work or
maintenance of services or connections not in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter,
including the disconnection of non-complying services from the City sewer system and the
denial of access thereto until such compliance is attained. In addition to any other remedy that
may be provided otherwise, the provisions of this Chapter may be enforced in any appropriate
action, by injunction or otherwise, and any connection made or maintained in violation of the
provisions of this Chapter or any other applicable ordinance, rule or regulation of the City may
be corrected, abated or terminated and the cost thereof may be recovered from the person or
persons who caused such connection so to be made or maintained, or from the owner of record of
the premises where the same occurred and shall be a lien upon said premises which lien may be
foreclosed in the same manner as provided for mortgages.
CHAPTER 75
WATER SERVICES AND CONNECTIONS
1. PROVISIONS GOVERN. The provisions of this Chapter shall regulate, govern and
control the installation, construction, repair or modification of water services in the City of
Decatur, Illinois (City) and the connection thereof to water mains in the City, other than that
done by the City through the City of Decatur employees or contractors thereof, and may be
construed with, but take precedence over any other provision of Code or ordinance of the City
except the provisions of City Chapters 37, 38, 64, and 65 to which the provisions hereof shall be
subject.
2. WATER MAIN CONNECTIONS. All connections of water service pipe with water
mains of the City shall be made in the side of the body of the main and in no case within 15
inches of the bell end of the pipe or within 6 inches of the plain end of the pipe. Three-fourth
and one inch service connections shall be made by inserting a corporation stop into the main
under pressure by a tapping machine in proper working condition. Service connections larger
than one inch shall be as described in Section 3 of this Chapter. All components of corporation
stops shall be manufactured of low-zinc bronze cast in conformance to AWWA Standard C800,
Section 1, paragraph 1.2 (ASTM B62). Inlet threads shall be in accordance with AWWA C800,
Figure 1, Table 1 (Standard Corporation Stop Thread). Outlet threads shall be as described in
Section 6 of this Chapter. Corporation stop key and body seating surfaces shall be accurately
machined and individually fitted to a taper of 1-3/4 inches per foot. The key, washer and nut
Revised 02/2017
components shall be so designed to be capable of being turned as a single unit with no loosening
or tightening effect, and so designed that failure from overtightening of the nut results in threads
stripping rather than stem fracture. There shall be no evidence of staking or chisel marks on the
nut after assembly. Each corporation stop shall be tested by the manufacturer with not less than
85 psi. air pressure with the stop submerged in water in both the open and closed positions. No
top, bottom, or port leaks are permitted.
3. WATER TAPS. Water main taps shall be not less than 3/4 inch and any tap larger
than one inch normal size shall be made by means of attaching to the main a bronze service
saddle provided with an integral service outlet accurately machined and pre-tapped by the
manufacturer to receive a full-sized corporation stop of equal size to the service line. The
service saddle shall be of the double strap type with body and nuts cast of ASTM B62 bronze;
straps shall be silicon bronze with rolled threads, shall be accurately curved to conform to the
main, and shall be flattened to provide large bearing surfaces. The outlet portion of the body
shall be encircled with an O-ring type pressure seal cemented and confined in a corresponding
groove on the inside of the body. The pressure tap for services larger than one inch shall be
made by drilling through the corporation stop in the fully open position, using the proper type
drilling machine and attachments and using the maximum possible drill size for the corporation
stop.
4. WATER SERVICE - CORPORATION STOPS. The corporation stop shall be
protected by a box construction with clean whole brick placed on a solid bottom extending not
less than two feet six inches from the main with brick joints overlapping and with a brick cover
providing at least four inches of clearance above the stop so that there shall be no weight thereon
in case of settling.
5. WATER SERVICE PIPE. Water service pipe from the corporation stop to the
building other than for services larger than two inches in diameter shall be cold drawn, soft
annealed, seamless copper suitable for underground service with proper bending temper with
quality and properties equal to A.S.T.M. Class K specifications. For services of two inches in
diameter or less, from the outlet side of the curb stop to the meter only, polyethylene pipe with
copper tracing wire may also be used that meets all specifications for, and is installed per the
Illinois Plumbing Code and AWWA standards for polyethylene pipe. For services larger than
two inches in diameter materials as are approved in the City of Decatur specifications for water
main installations may be used with the approval of the Public Works Director. Between water
main tap and curb stop there shall be a continuous unspliced run of pipe. (Amended, Ordinance
No. 2017-08, February 6, 2017) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2006-85, September 5, 2006)
6. WATER JOINTS AND FITTINGS. All joints and fittings for service lines between
main and meter shall be manufactured of ASTM B62 bronze. They shall be provided with
generous wrench surfaces to permit the joints to be easily and firmly made. The spud end of 3/4
and one inch corporation stops, curb stops, and couplings shall fully conform to AWWA C800,
Figures 2 and 3, Tables 2 and 3 (Flared Copper Service Connections); or they shall be
compression connections as described below for service lines larger than one inch. Corporation
stops, curb stops, and couplings for service lines larger than one inch shall be provided only with
compression connections specifically designed for use with copper service pipe for direct burial,
flared copper service connections, or silver soldered joints. No other types of solder joints are
permitted. Spuds and nuts of said compression connections shall be cast of ASTM B62 bronze
with all threads and bearing surfaces accurately machined and so designed that the joint is
properly made when the nut is tightened to the point where it contacts a machined shoulder on
the spud, thereby providing for a final visual inspection without need for torque wrenches or
guesswork. Compression connection sealing gaskets shall be totally confined to prevent cold
flow or creep and shall contain an integral hardened stainless steel gripper band that is
compressed by the gasket to provide high resistance to pull out forces caused by line pressure,
back-filling, ground settlement, or accidental disturbance from digging equipment. Compression
connections shall be capable of withstanding tension loads without failure as outlined in the
following table:
Size of connection Required Tension Load (Lbs.)
3/4 in. -------------------------------------- 2100 lbs.
1 in. ---------------------------------------- 3400 lbs.
1 1/4 in. ------------------------------------ 3950 lbs.
1 1/2 in. ------------------------------------ 4500 lbs.
2 in. ----------------------------------------- 5000 lbs.
7. BURIAL OF WATER SERVICE PIPES. All service pipes shall in all cases be
buried not less than three feet six inches under the surface of the ground laid with due regard for
danger from freezing, and if on unimproved streets, shall be laid on a level with the bottom of the
main from the main to within one foot of the curb stop, as the case may be, and in no case less
than three feet six inches below the surface of the ground. Service pipes shall not be placed
where either pipe or curb stop will be in a driveway.
8. SEPARATE WATER SERVICES. Each lot shall have a separate main tap and
corporation stop and a separate curb stop and box which curb stop and box shall be placed at
grade within one foot of the sidewalk line or if the main tapped is in an alley, at grade within six
inches of the lot line and if there are two or more houses or buildings on a single lot, separate
taps and separate curb stops shall be placed as above for each building served.
9. WATER SERVICE CURB STOPS. Curb stops for 3/4 and one inch services shall
be of the inverted key design with body, key, base cap, combined cap and tee head components
cast with ASTM B62 bronze and shall be precision machined, individually fitted and tested in
the same manner as described for corporation stops (Section 2 of this Chapter); or, they shall be
of the bronze, quarter turn, cylindrical plug type as described below for water service lines larger
than one inch. Three-fourths and one inch curb stops shall be provided with threads at or near
the top of the body so as to receive a Minneapolis Pattern base, extension type service box. Said
threads shall be provided with a vertical channel for water drainage. Curb stops larger than one
inch shall be installed with arch pattern base, extension type service boxes. Curb stops larger
than one inch shall be of the cylindrical plug, closed bottom, quarter turn design with body and
plug (key) cast of ASTM B62 bronze. Pressure sealing shall be accomplished by means of
resilient pressure actuated seals and shall not depend on metal to metal fits whether lubricated or
not for sealing properties. Pressure seals shall be of the O-ring type seated in accurately
machined grooves in the plug (key) part, bearing against a smoothly machined body bore.
Quarter turn operation shall be controlled by internal check lugs that are cast as integral parts of
the body and plug (key). Each curb stop larger than one inch shall be individually tested by the
manufacturer at both 10 psi. and 175 psi. air pressure with the valve submerged in water in both
the open and closed positions. No top or port leaks are permitted in either test.
10. WATER CURB STOP BOXES. Curb stop boxes for water services shall be of the
Minneapolis Pattern base, extension type, consisting of two telescoping sections, the lower of
which shall be cast of ASTM A126 Grade B gray iron and shall be provided with accurately
machined inside threads of corresponding size and type to those of the outside threads at the top
of the curb stop body. The upper section (stand pipe) shall be made from schedule 40 steel pipe
with a 1 1/4 inch minimum diameter and shall be provided with a lid made of ASTM A126 gray
iron with the word "WATER" clearly cast on its top surface. Said lid shall have a cast gray iron
pentagon nut and plug. The lid shall have an integrally cast bronze bushing to facilitate easy
removal of the pentagon plug with the proper wrench. Upper and lower sections of curb stop
boxes shall be coated inside and out with a tar base enamel and shall be provided with not less
than 12 inch telescopic adjustment for grade variations. They shall be sized for bury depths in
accordance with Section 7 of this Chapter.
11. OPENING OR SHUTTING SERVICE LINES. No person shall have in his
possession any key, instrument or device designed or intended to be used for manipulating a stop
connected with the water service supplying any premises or building or shall any person open or
shut any such stop other than a duly authorized employee of the City of Decatur or a duly
authorized plumber. Whenever a plumber makes necessary repairs or tests work done after
completing such work he shall leave any such stop as he found the same.
If water service has been shut off for non-payment of bill or fee, no person shall open a
stop other than an authorized City of Decatur employee.
12. REPLACEMENT OF WATER SERVICE. Whenever a water service or any part
thereof is repaired or altered, all provisions of this Chapter shall be complied with and any
replacement of pipe in such service shall be done with seamless, unspliced copper pipe
complying with the standards set out elsewhere herein and a new curb stop so complying shall
also be installed.
13. RULES AND REGULATIONS. The City Manager is hereby authorized to cause to
be established, promulgated, published and enforced such reasonable rules, regulations,
standards, specifications or procedures, not in conflict with the provisions hereof, as may to said
officer appear to be necessary or convenient to administer the same and to carry out the intent
and purpose hereof.
14. PERMIT REQUIRED. No service shall be connected or reconnected to a water
main nor shall any such connection be repaired or modified unless and until a permit from the
City has been issued for the same.
15. APPLICATION FOR PERMIT. Application for such permits shall be made upon
forms furnished by the City requiring such information as may be necessary or desirable to
facilitate the administration and enforcement of the provisions of law, code or ordinance
applicable to such connections, services and utilities, which application shall be accompanied by
payment, or proof of payment, of any applicable connection charges established by said
provisions in Chapter 65 and the payment of an inspection fee established by said provisions in
Chapter 37 for each such permit.
16. INSPECTION. No such work shall be buried or covered until the same has been
inspected and approved by the City and should any work be buried or covered without so being
inspected and approved, in addition to any other cost or penalty provided herein, the cost of
uncovering the same shall be borne by the owner of such service or the person or entity found to
so have done, or both.
17. PENALTY. It shall be unlawful to install, construct, repair or modify a water
service, or connect the same to the City water distribution system other than in conformity and
compliance with the provisions hereof, and any person or entity, other than those excluded in
Section 1 hereof, shall be fined in an amount not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00)
nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each day on which a
violation occurs or continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-75, October 31, 2011)
18. OTHER REMEDIES. The provisions or imposition of the penalty aforesaid shall
not preclude the institution of appropriate action to prevent, abate or stop acts, activities, work or
maintenance of services or connections not in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter,
including the disconnection of non-complying services from either of said systems of the City
and the denial of access thereto until such compliance is attained.
CHAPTER 76
ADOPTION
1. PUBLICATION. It is hereby ordered and directed by the Council that this Ordinance
be published in book form.
2. EFFECTIVE DATE. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in full force ON AND
AFTER AUGUST 15, 1988.
PRESENTED, PASSED, APPROVED and RECORDED this 1st day of August, 1988.
s/Gary K. Anderson
Mayor
ATTEST:
s/Phyllis E. Sands
City Clerk
CERTIFICATE OF PUBLICATION
I, Phyllis E. Sands, City Clerk in and for the City of Decatur, HEREBY CERTIFY that this
Ordinance was, by authority of the City Council of the City of Decatur, Illinois, published in book
form on the 2nd day of August, 1988.
Dated this 2nd day of August, 1988.
s/Phyllis E. Sands
City Clerk

TABLE OF CONTENTS
CITY OF DECATUR ZONING ORDINANCE
SECTION I. TITLE........................................................ 1-1
SECTION II. DEFINITIONS............................................. 11-1
SECTION III. DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES THEREOF...... 111-1
A. DISTRICTS; PURPOSE AND INTENT......................... III-1
B. MAPS .................................................................. lli-2
C. DISTRICT BOUNDARIES ......................................... III-2
D. SCHEDULE OF LAND USE CLASSIFICATIONS............ III-3
SECTION IV. COMPLIANCE WITH THE REGULATIONS...... IV-I
A. COMPLIANCE WITH LAND DEVELOPMENT
REGULATIONS ................................................. IV-1
B. INTERPRETATION ................................................. IV-2
SECTION V. R-1 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.... V-1
A. PERMITTED USES................................................. V-1
B. CONDITIONAL USES............................................. V-1
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS......................... V-2
SECTION VI. R-2 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.... VI-1
A. PERMITTED USES................................................. VI-1
B. CONDITIONAL USES............................................. VI-1
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS......................... VI-2
SECTION VII. R-3 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT...... VII-1
A. PERMITTED USES ................................................. VII-1
B. CONDITIONAL USES............................................. VII-1
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS ............................ VII-2
SECTION VIII. R-5 TWO FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT........ VIII-1
A. PERMITTED USES................................................. VIII-1
B. CONDITIONAL USES............................................. VIII-1
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS ......................... VIII-2
SECTION IX. R-6 MULTIPLE DWELLING DISTRICT............ IX-1
A. PERMITTED USES................................................ IX-1
B. CONDITIONAL USES............................................ IX-2
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS....................... IX-2
SECTION X. 0-1 OFFICE DISTRICT.................................. X-1
A. PERMITTED USES................................................ X-1
B. CONDITIONAL USES............................................ X-2
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS....................... X-3
Revised September 2018
SECTION XI. B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING DISTRICT...... XI-1
A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS................................... XI-I
B. PERMITTED USES................................................ XI-1
C. CONDITIONAL USES............................................ XI-3
D. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS....................... XI-3
SECTION XII. B-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT........................ XII-1
A. PERMITTED USES............................................... XII-1
B. CONDITIONAL USES........................................... XII-3
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS...................... XII-4
SECTION XIII. B-3 PLANNED SHOPPING CENTER DISTRICT.... XIII-1
A. GENERALLY...................................................... XIII-1
B. PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES.................. XIII-1
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS...................... XIII-1
D. PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS............ XIII-2
E. APPLICATION.................................................... XIII-2
f<. RE\TIE\\I' AND APPRO\T AL.................................... XIII-3
G. CONSTRUCTION................................................ XIII-4
H. SIGNAGE......................................................... .. XIII-4
I. DELAY IN CONSTRUCTION.................................. XIII-4
J. AMENDMENTS TO COMPLETED PROJECTS............ XIII-4
SECTION XIV. B-4 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT................. XIV-1
A. PERMITTED USES................................................ XI\T-1
B. CONDITIONAL USES............................................ XI\T-3
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS........................ XI\T-3
SECTION XV. PMR-1 PARK MOBILE HOME RESIDENCE
DISTRICT.................................. XV-1
A. USE REGULA TIO NS............................................ X\T-1
B. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS...................... X\T-1
C. PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS............... X\T-1
SECTION XVI. M-1 INTENSE COMMERCIAL - LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICT......................................... XVI-1
A. PERMITTED USES.................................................. X\TI-1
B. CONDITIONAL USES............................................. X\TI-3
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULA TIO NS........................ X\TI-4
D. PERF'ORMANCE STANDARDS................................. X\TI-4
SECTION XVII. M-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT............ XVII-1
A. PERMITTED USES................................................ X\TII-1
B. CONDITIONAL USES............................................ X\TII-2
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS...................... X\TII-2
D. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS............................... XVII-3
SECTION XVIII. M-3 LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT........ XVIII-1
A. GENERALLY...................................................... XVIII-1
B. PERMITTED USES.............................................. XVIII-1
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS...................... XVIII-2
D. PROCEDURE...................................................... XVIII-2
E. REVIEW AND APPROVAL.................................... XVIII-2
F. CONSTRUCTION................................................ XVIII-3
G. DELAY IN CONSTRUCTION................................. XVIII-4
H. AMENDMENTS TO COMPLETED PROJECTS............ XVIII-4
SECTION XIX. PD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT..... XIX-1
A. GENERALLY..................................................... XIX-1
B. PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES.................. XIX-1
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS...................... XIX-1
D. PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS............ XIX-2
E. SIGNAGE...................................................... . . . XIX-2
F. PROCEDURE; CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.......... XIX-2
G. REVIEW AND APPROVAL................................... XIX-3
H. CONSTRUCTION................................................ XIX-5
I. DELAY IN CONSTRUCTION................................. XIX-5
J. AMENDMENTS TO COMPLETED PROJECTS............. XIX-5
SECTION XX. SPECIAL DISTRICTS................................. XX-1
A. OVERLAY DISTRICTS........................................ XX-1
B. PROCESS.......................................................... XX-1
C. I-OL INSTITUTIONAL OVERLAY DISTRICT............ XX-1
D. A-OL, AIRPORT OVERLAY DISTRICT.................... XX-5
E. WM-OL, WEST MAIN STREET OVERLAY DISTRICT. XX-9
F. LF-OL, LAKEFRONT OVERLAY DISTRICT XX-16
SECTION XXI. EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT AND AREA
REQUIREMENTS...................................... XXI-1
A. TABLE OF HEIGHT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS...... XXI-1
B. EXCEPTIONS TO MAXIMUM HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS. XXI-1
C. EXCEPTIONS TO YARD SETBACKS-GENERAL......... XXI-3
D. EXCEPTIONS TO FRONT YARD SETBACK REQ......... XXI-4
E. EXCEPTIONS TO SIDE YARD SETBACK REQ............ XXI-5
F. EXCEPTIONS TO REAR YARD SETBACK REQ........ .. XXI-6
G. EXCEPTIONS TO MINIMUM LOT AREA REQ............ XXI-6
SECTION XXII. CONDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS............ XXII-1
A. CONDITIONAL USES, GENERALLY........................ XXII-1
B. APPLICATION...................................................... XXII-1
C. HISTORIC NEIGHBORHOOD USE REGULATIONS....... XXII-2
D. NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION USE REGS............ XXII-2
SECTION XXIII. NON-CONFORMING USES......................... XXIII-1
A. GENERALLY..................................................... XXIII-1
B. NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES....................... XXIII-1
C. NON-CONFORMING USES.................................. XXIII-2
D. NON-CONFORMING USE PERMIT........................ XXIII-3
SECTION XXIV. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
REQUIREMENTS..................................... XXIV-1
A. OFF-STREET PARKING MANDATED....................... XXIV-1
B. COMPUTATION OF REQUIRED SPACES.................. XXIV-1
C. REQUIRED NUMBER OF SPACES BY USE................ XXIV-2
D. DESIGN OF PARKING SPACES AND LOTS................ XXIV-7
E. ACCESS DRIVES - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
APPLY ............................................................ XXIV-10
F. RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAYS.................................... XXIV-10
G. USE OF REQUIRED YARDS ..................................... XXIV-10
H. MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS ......................... XXIV-11
I. LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS.......................... XXIV-11
SECTION XXV. SIGNAGE ................................................... XXV-1
A. PERMIT REQUIRED.............................................. XXV-1
B. GENERALLY....................................................... XXV-1
C. SIGNS IN SINGLE-AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENCE
DISTRICTS..................................................... XXV-6
D. SIGNS IN THE MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENCE
DISTRICT ...................................................... .
E. SIGNS IN THE OFFICE DISTRICT .......................... .
F. SIGNS IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS ... .
SECTION XXVI. (RESERVED) .................................... ..
XXV-7
XXV-8
XXV-9
XXVI-1
SECTION XXVII. WIRELESS FACILITIES.............................. XXVII-1
A. PURPOSE AND INTENT....................................... XXVII-1
B. JURISDICTION................................................... XXVII-1
C. WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY
APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND APPROVAL
PROCESS...................................................... XXVII-2
D. GENERAL WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS............................ XXVII-4
E. TOWER AND ANTENNA DESIGN REQUIREMENTS..... XXVII-4
F. TOWER HEIGHT ................................................... XXVII-5
G. ACCESSORY UTILITY BUILDINGS........................... XXVII-5
H. TOWER LIGHTING................................................ XXVII-5
I. ANTENNAS MOUNTED ON STRUCTURES, ROOFS,
WALLS, AND EXISTING TOWERS....................... XXVII-5
J. TEMPORARY WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
FACILITIES ...................................................... XXVII-6
K. INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC SAFETY
TELECOMMUNICATIONS.................................. XXVII-6
L. ABANDONED OR UNUSED TOWERS OR PORTIONS
OF TOWERS.................................................... XXVII-6
M. SIGNS AND ADVERTISING..................................... XXVII-7
N. FALL ZONE REQUIRED .......................................... XXVII-7
0. CONCEALED SITING............................................. XXVII-7
P. LANDMARKS AND HISTORIC DISTRICTS................. XXVII-7
Q. ZONING SPECIFIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
FACILITY PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.............. XXVII-7
R. NON-COMMERCIAL WIRELESS FACILITY (AMATUER
RADIO ANTENNA) STANDARDS........................ XXVll-8
SECTION XXVIII. LANDSCAPING AND EXTERIOR LIGHTING ...... XXVIII-1
A. INTENT.............................................................. XXVIII-1
B. LANDSCAPE AND EXTERIOR LIGHTING PLANS:
WHEN REQUIRED .......................................... ..
C. LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS, GENERALLY ..... .
D. LANDSCAPING CLASSIFICATIONS ....................... .
E. DETERMINATION OF REQUIREMENTS ................. .
F. ALTERNATIVE COMPLIANCE PROVISIONS ........... .
G. RECOMMENDED AND PROHIBITED PLANTING
XXVlll-1
XXVIII-1
XXVIII-4
XXVIII-4
XXVIII-8
MATERIALS.................................................. XXVIII-9
H. PRESERVATION OF EXISTING LANDSCAPING........ XXVIIl-11
I. INCENTIVE FOR LANDSCAPE AESTHETIC
INITIATIVE................................................... XXVIII-11
J. EXERIOR LIGHTING........................................... XXVIII-12
SECTION XXIX. PLAN COMMISSION; AMENDMENTS......... XXIX-1
A. PLAN COMMISSION ESTABLISHED........................ XXIX-1
B. OFFICERS AND BY-LAWS..................................... XXIX-1
C. STAFF TO THE COMMISSION............................... XXIX-1
D. COMPREHENSIVEPLAN....................................... XXIX-1
E. RECORDS............................................................ XXIX-1
F. AUTHENTICATION OF RECORDS......................... XXIX-1
G. AMENDMENTS TO ZONING CODE AND ZONING
MAP ........................................................... .
H. POSTING OF SIGN ............................................. .
I. PETITION FOR AMENDMENTS ............................. .
J. FEES ............................................................... .
K. RE-APPLICATION ............................................. .
XXIX-1
XXIX-2
XXIX-2
XXIX-2
XXIX-3
SECTION XXX. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS ................... .. XXX-1
A. ORGANIZATION ............................................... .
13. J>O\ll/ER AND DlJT113,S ......................................... .
C. J>ROCEDlJRE ..................................................... .
XXX-1
XXX-1
XXX-3
SECTION XXXI. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.................. XXXI-1
A. \lllfIEN REQlJIRED.............................................. XXXI-1
13. FOR BlJILDING............ ......... ....... ........ ... . .. . . . . . .. XXXI-1
C. AJ>J>LICATIONS................................................. XXXI-1
D. NON-CONFORMING USES.................................. XXXI-1
SECTION XXXII. SITE AND BUILDING PLANS ................... .
A. J>lJRJ>OSE AND INTENT ....................................... .
13. SITE J>LANS REQlJIRED ....................................... .
C. SlJRVEY BY REGISTERED SURVEYOR ................... .
XXXII-1
XXXII-1
XXXII-1
XXXII-1
SECTION XXXIII. INTERPRETATION, PURPOSE AND CONFLICT. XXXIII-1
A. J>URJ>OSE AND INTENT........................................ XXXIII-1
13. CONFLICTS........................................................ XXXIII-1
SECTION XXXIV. FENCES ............................................. .
A. J>ERMIT REQlJIRED ........................................... .
13. GENERALLY .................................................... .
C. FENCES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS .................. .
D. FENCES IN OFFICE AND COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
E. FENCES IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS .................... .
XXXIV-1
XXXIV-1
XXXIV-1
XXXIV-2
XXXIV-2
XXXIV-3
SECTION XXXV. WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS........................... XXXV-1
A. GENERALLY...................................................... XXXV-1
B. SITE REQUIREMENTS........................................... XXXV-1
C. AJ>J>LICATION....... ... . . . . . . . . ... .... ............. ........ ....... XXXV-4
D. REV113,\lll AND AJ>J>ROVAL..................................... XXXV-5
E. CONSTRUCTION................................................. XXXV-6
F. DELAY IN CONSTRlJCTION.................................. XXXV-6
G. AMENDMENTS TO COMJ>LETED J>ROJECTS............. XXXV-6
H. VIOLATIONS...................................................... XXXV-6
SECTION XXXVI. ENFORCEMENT, LEGAL PROCEDURE,
AND PENALITES....................................... XXXVI-1
A. AUTHORITY OF !>LANNING AND BlJILDING
SERVICES DIRECTOR .................................... .
B. VIOLATIONS, J>ENALITES ................................... .
C. UNLA \ll/FUL CONSTRlJCTION, ETC ....................... .
SECTION XXXVII. VALIDITY ............................................ .
XXXVI-1
XXXVI-1
XXXVI-1
XXXVII-1
SECTION XXXVIII. WHEN EFFECTIVE ............................. . XXXVIII-1
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE
SECTION I. TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Land Development Code or Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Decatur.
Revised 09/25/2018
1-1
SECTION II. DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain terms and words are herewith defined as listed
herein.
Terms used in this Ordinance shall have their customary meanings except that terms of art
in the legal, engineering, land surveying, and planning professions shall be used in the
professional sense.
Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include
the plural, and words in the plural number include the singular; the word "building"
includes the word "structure"; the word "shall" is mandatory and not permissive.
Masculine pronouns refer equally to persons of either gender unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
ACCESS DRIVE: Any driveway that provides for the movement of vehicles to or from
the public roadway system.
ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE: A building or use which (a) Is
subordinate to, and serves a principal building or principal use, and is located on the
same lot as said principal building or use; and (b) Is subordinate in height, extent, and
purpose to the principal building or principal use served; ( c) The aggregate ground floor
area of all accessory structures does not exceed the ground floor area of the main
building, except that a minimum gross area of 750 square feet for such accessory
building or aggregate areas of two or more buildings shall be permitted; and (d) Is
naturally and normally incidental to that of the dominant use of the main building or
land. A distance of eight (8) feet shall separate an accessory structure and the main
structure or other accessory structure. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2016-69, October 3,
2016) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ACTIVITY: An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its business the sale, rental, display, exhibition, or viewing of
books, magazines, films, photographs, sexual paraphernalia or other materials
distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas as defined herein.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET: A nightclub, theater, or other establishment
that features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers,
exotic dancers, strippers or similar entertainers where such performances are
distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on sexual conduct of specified
anatomical areas as defined herein.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USE: Sex-related or oriented establishments providing
adult services, products or entertainment including but not limited to adult
entertainment activity, adult entertainment cabaret, model studios, adult picture arcades
or adult motion picture theaters, and similar establishments.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An establishment, other than an adult picture
arcade, in an enclosed building wherein slides or movies are presented for observation
by patrons for a substantial or significant portion of its presentations because the same
II-1
contain material distinguished or characterized by emphasis on matters depicting,
describing or relating to sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas as defined herein.
ADULT PICTURE ARCADE: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited where
coin- or token-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still
or motion picture machines, projectors, video cassette recorders or players or other
image producing devices are maintained to show images so displaying that are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or
relating to sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein.
ALL-WEATHER SURFACE: A dust-free, durable surface other than soil, typically
utilized for parking or storage areas, composed of materials that withstand seasonal
degradation and have sufficient capacity to carry vehicle load without rutting or
sinking.
ALLEY: A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to provide access to utilities
and to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal
frontage is on a public some other street.
ANIMAL CLINIC OR HOSPITAL: A place where small animals, including household
pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such
treatment. Kennel use shall be limited to short-time boarding, incidental to hospital
use and such kennels shall be located within the building (unless expressly permitted
outdoors). Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-27, April 19, 2004
ANIMAL KENNEL: An establishment where more than four ( 4) dogs or cats (except litters
of animals not more than six (6) months of age) are kept, raised, cared for, or boarded
for a fee.
APARTMENT HOUSE: See Dwelling, Multiple.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY: Residences for the elderly that provide rooms, meals,
personal care and supervision of self-administered medication. Residents do not
require 24 hour nursing care. These facilities may provide other services, such as
residential activities, financial counseling, and transportation.
AUTOMATIC TELLER MACHINE (ATM): An automated device that provides banking
and similar financial functions at a location that is remote from the controlling financial
institution. An ATM that is located outdoors on the same site as a financial institution
is subject to the same setback requirements as the main building.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR AND SERVICE: An establishment dedicated to the repair of
motor vehicles that does not include the sale of automotive fuel. This definition
includes the following categories:
Minor: This category includes automotive repair and service activities which, under
ordinary circumstances, generate minimal noise, odor, or traffic. Examples of these
uses include automotive interior and upholstery shops; brake shops; diagnostic centers,
including oil change and lubrication shops; general automotive repair and maintenance;
radiator shops; tire shops; and transmission shops.
Major: This category includes automotive repair and service activities which, under
ordinary circumstances, generate relatively high levels of noise, odor, or traffic.:
II-2
Examples of these uses include auto body and paint shops; front-end repair shops;
engine rebuilding shops for gasoline or diesel engines; frame shops which install
springs, shock absorbers, or struts; axle-straightening establishments; muffler/exhaust
system shops; and rust proofing and undercoating establishments
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Any building or structure used for the retail sale
of any automobile fuels and lubricants from no more than six (6) pumps located on no
more than three (3) bays and any combination of one or more of the following uses:
( 1) retail sale of new automobile parts, accessories, and supplies when ancillary to the
repair and maintenance of motor vehicles; (2) all uses listed under the definition of
Automobile Repair and service-Minor; and (3) minor repair and maintenance of
automobiles and trucks not exceeding a 2-ton capacity, excluding there from all uses
defined as Automobile Repair and Service-Major. Convenience items, such as snack
foods and beverages, may be sold through vending machines and over-the-counter
sales, provided they do not occupy more than 100 square feet of the indoor floor space
of the establishment. (See Convenience Food and Beverage Store, Convenience Food
and Beverage Store, Extended Hours, Gasoline Station, and Licensed Truck Stop
Establishment). (Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-47, September 17, 2018)
AUTOMOTIVE & EQUIPMENT DEALERS: Establishments primarily involved in the
retail sale or storage of inventory items of an automotive nature. Outdoor storage and
display of merchandise is a common practice. Ancillary activities include storage,
rental, service, repair work, and sale of replacement parts and accessories. This
definition includes the following uses: Auto/Truck Dealer; Motorcycle Dealer;
Lawnmower and Lawn Equipment Dealer; Boat Dealer; Recreational Vehicle/Bus
Dealer; Construction Equipment Dealer; Used Car Dealer.
AUTOMOTIVE SALVAGE OPERATION: Automotive business operations engaged in
the purchase, collection, accumulation, or storage of inoperable automotive equipment
including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, buses, motorcycles, and other minor
vehicles or parts thereof primarily for the purpose of reselling the material so
accumulated or parts thereof.
AUTOMOTIVE STORAGE YARD: A tract ofland used for the collection, accumulation
or storage of damaged, towed, abandoned, or repossessed automotive equipment
including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, buses, motorcycles and other motor
vehicles or parts thereof, but excluding businesses such as public garages, service
stations, or dealerships which temporarily store automotive equipment in the course of
the repair or sale of the same and for which such storage is secondary or incidental to
the primary purposes of such businesses.
BACKGROUND: The display representing the animation or graphics which lie behind
the text and are less prominent in nature. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-48, August
4, 2008)
BAR OR COCKTAIL LOUNGE: Premises used primarily for the sale or dispensing of
liquor by the drink for on-site consumption and where food may be made available for
on-premises consumption as accessory to the principal use. The term Tavern is
included in this definition.
11-3
BASEMENT: A story completely or partly underground. A basement shall be counted as
a story if subdivided and used for dwelling or business purposes, other than for the
quarters of a watchman or janitor. For purposes of this Ordinance, the term Cellar is
synonymous with that of Basement.
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT: An owner-occupied residence that
provides sleeping accommodations and breakfasts on a short-term basis for paying
customers and that conforms to 50 ILCS 820 Illinois Compiled Statutes. A bed and
breakfast establishment may have no more than five (5) sleeping rooms for guests, and
only breakfast may be served.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combinations of streets and public
parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways, or boundary lines
of municipalities.
BOARDING OR LODGING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel where, for individual
compensation and by arrangement for rooms designed for sleeping, lodging or lodging
and meals are provided for three (3) or more persons. This includes multi-room
structures where individuals pay for a bedroom and common living areas. (Amended,
Ordinance 2014-72, December 15, 2014)
BUFFER YARD: An open, landscaped area, not located on public right-of-way, providing
a transition and screening between high intensity/high density uses or districts and low
intensity/low density uses or districts, on which there are no structures or parking areas
other than fences or landscape features.
BUILDING: Any structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by walls and
a roof, including manufactured housing and prefabricated housing units, designed or
built for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, chattels or
property of any kind. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-35, June 6, 2011)
BUILDING ENVELOPE: The area in which a building may be erected on a lot, said area
formed by the lines of required front, rear and side setbacks.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the surrounding grade to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean
height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING MATERIALS SALES: Establishments engaged primarily in the sale of
lumber and associated products to the public. They may sell rough or dressed lumber
and plywood, flooring, doors, molding, doors, sashes, frames, and similar goods.
BUILDING LINE: A line delineated on a plat which designates the minimum setback area
between the front of the main building and the lot line abutting the public right-of-way.
Where a building line on a plat conflicts with the setback regulations required herein,
the more restrictive shall apply, subject to the exceptions enumerated in Section XXI
BUILDING, MAIN: A building in which is conducted the principal or main use of the lot
on which it is located. Wherever the words main and principal are used in this
Ordinance to describe a building, they shall have the same meaning.
BUSINESS SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS: Businesses that provide services to other
businesses or the general public that, by nature, require business to be carried on off-
II-4
site or require patrons to visit the establishment. For the purpose of this Ordinance,
there are two categories of business service establishments:
On-Site: Business service establishments that customarily occupy standard office
space that generally require patrons to visit the establishment to receive services, and
do not require the outdoor storage of supplies or use of vehicles other than automobiles
or small vans. Examples of these establishments include, but are not limited to, bail
bonding establishments, blueprinting and photocopying services, caterers (not
including in-shop dining or carry-out), collection services, detective agencies and
protective services (not including armored car or guard dog services), messenger
services, packaging services, talent agencies, and ticket brokers.
Off-Site: Business services which are generally carried on off-site, and due to
equipment and vehicle storage or to processes used, typically require facilities in
addition to standard office space. Examples of these establishments include, but are
not limited to, armored car services, automobile claim adjustment, cleaning and
maintenance services (excluding repair) pest control businesses, swimming pool
cleaning and maintenance services, and water softening services.
CAR WASH, AUTOMATIC: A building or structure wherein conveyors, blowers, steam
cleaners, and other mechanical equipment are employed for the purpose of washing
motor vehicles in a production line manner.
CAR WASH, COIN-OPERATED SELF-SERVICE: A building or structure wherein
mechanical equipment for washing motor vehicles is provided for a fee while the
vehicle owner furnishes the labor.
CELLULAR SERVICE: A telecommunications service that permits customers to use
wireless, mobile telephones to connect, via low-power radio transmission cell sites,
either to the public switched network or to other mobile cellular phones.
CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS: A commercial Low Power Mobile Radio
Service licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to providers in a
specific geographical area in which the radio frequency spectrum is divided into
discrete channels which are assigned in groups to geographic cells within a service area
and which are capable of being reused in different cells within the service area.
CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: A facility consisting of the
equipment and structures involved in receiving telecommunication or radio signals
from mobile radio communications sources and transmitting those signals to a central
switching computer which connects the mobile unit with the land-based telephones
lines.
CITY COUNCIL: The elected governing body of the City of Decatur, Illinois, composed
of the Mayor and Council members.
CITY MANAGER: The chief administrative officer of the City of Decatur, chosen by the
City Council.
CLUBS: Club, Fraternal: A group of people associated or formally organized for a
common purpose, interest, or pleasure. This definition includes the usual
understanding of the terms "lodge" and "fraternal organization," and it includes
11-5
fraternities and sororities when they do not offer overnight accommodations. Fraternal
club facilities may be rented to non-members for receptions, meetings, and similar
events. For purposes of this ordinance, this definition does not include bottle clubs.
Club, Membership Organization: An organization with pre-established formal
requirements for affiliation, which promotes the interest of its affiliates. This definition
includes trades associations, professional organizations, labor unions, and similar
organizations with a political, civic, or religious purpose.
Club, Private: A social organization customarily open to members and their invited
guests. These organizations may offer a variety of services and facilities to their
members, including overnight accommodations, dining rooms, and social activities.
Private club facilities may be rented to non-members for receptions, meetings, and
similar events. For purposes of this ordinance, this definition does not include bottle
clubs.
CO-LOCATION: Locating wireless communications equipment from more than one
provider on a single site.
COMMON CARRIER: An entity licensed by the FCC or a state agency to supply local or
long distance telecommunications services to the general public at established and
stated prices.
COMMUNICATION TOWER: a guyed, monopole, or self-supporting tower, constructed
as a free standing structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure
or equipment, containing one or more antennas intended for transmitting or receiving
television, AM/FM radio, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, or similar forms of
electronic communications.
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: A land use facility supporting antennas and
microwave dishes that sends or receives radio frequency signals. These facilities
include structures or towers and accessory buildings.
COMMUNICATIONS TRANSMISSION SYSTEM OR COMMUNICATIONS
SYSTEM: A wired system or open video system regulated by this ordinance.
COMMUNITY CENTER: A building used for recreation, social, educational, and cultural
activities, open to the public or to residents of a neighborhood or group of
neighborhoods, usually owned and operated by a public or nonprofit group or agency.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: An official document, accompanied with tables and maps,
adopted by City Council to guide long-range land development and capital projects
decision-making in the City of Decatur.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL: The acceptance of an application as approved provided
the applicant meets a specific provision or provisions.
CONDITIONAL USE: A use permitted in a particular zoning district upon showing that
such use will comply with all the conditions and standards for the location or operation
of the use as specified in this Ordinance and authorized by the City Council.
CONGREGATE ELDERLY HOUSING: Residential facilities for the elderly where
partial living services such as meals, transportation and recreation may be provided.
II-6
These facilities may include assisted living facilities, retirement communities and
single-room occupancy (SRO) establishments but do not include convalescent care
facilities, nursing homes or institutions.
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS: The engineering design standards and specifications
for the construction of roads and streets, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains,
traffic signals, sidewalks and other miscellaneous improvements as adopted by the City
Council, or promulgated by an agency having jurisdiction (e.g. the Illinois Department
of Transportation), or by a City agency in a manner prescribed in this Ordinance.
CONSUMER CREDIT SERVICES: Include Consumer Installment Lenders 205 ILCS
670/1 et seq. as amended, Payday Loan Lenders 815 ILCS 122/1-1 et.seq. as amended
and Title Secured Lenders 205 ILCS 670/1 et.seq as amended as defined and regulated
by the State of Illinois. (Amended, Ordinance 2013-12; March 4, 2013)
CONTRACTORS AND BUILDERS: Businesses relating to the building trades including:
General contractor; Highway and street construction; Heavy construction; Plumbing,
heating, air conditioning; Painting, paperhanging and decorating; Electrical; Masonry
and other stonework; Carpentering and flooring; Roofing and sheet metal; Concrete
work; Water well drilling; and similar.
CONVENIENCE FOOD AND BEVERAGE STORE: A retail establishment of 6000
square feet or less of enclosed area, typically offering groceries, carryout beer and wine,
soft drinks, and snack foods. This definition includes those establishments which are
open for business no earlier than 5:00 AM and no later than 11:00 PM. [See
Convenience Food and Beverage Store, Extended Hours]. This definition does not
include sales of automotive fuels or services (See Automobile Service Station; Gasoline
Station; and Licensed Truck Stop Establishment). (Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-47,
September 17, 2018)
CONVENIENCE FOOD AND BEVERAGE STORE, EXTENDED HOURS: A
convenience food and beverage store as herein defined which is open for business any
time during the period from 11 :00 PM to 5:00 AM, including those businesses open for
24 hours. (See Gasoline Station and Licensed Truck Stop Establishment). (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2018-47, September 17, 2018)
CORE AREA: Area bounded by Pershing Road/Illinois Route 121, 22nd Street, Lake Shore
Drive, South Side Drive, and Oakland Avenue/Illinois Route 48. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2008-48, August 4, 2008)
COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Decatur.
COUNTRY CLUB: A large area, including buildings, containing recreational facilities,
clubhouse and accessory uses, frequently including a golf course, and open only to
members and their guests for a membership fee. Occasionally these facilities may be
leased to nonmembers outsiders for banquets, weddings, or other social engagements.
CREMATORY or CREMATORIUM: An establishment containing a furnace for the
reduction by burning of human remains.
CULTURAL FACILITIES, PRIVATE: Facilities in public or private ownership for the
maintenance, of historic, educational, or artistic interest, including animal or reptile
II-7
exhibits, arboreta, art galleiies, aquariums, botanical or zoological gardens, histoiical
sites, landmarks, or shrines; libraries, museums, opera and drama houses, playhouses
and community theaters, planetariums, and zoos. This category does not include
motion picture theaters or establishments that specialize in entertainment with an adult
theme.
CULTN ATION CENTER: A facility operated by an organization or business that is
registered by the Department of Agriculture to perform necessary activities to provide
only registered medical cannabis dispensing organizations with usable medical
cannabis as defined, amended and regulated by the State of Illinois, 410 ILCS 130/10
et. seq. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2014-27, June 16, 2014)
CUTOFF ANGLE - The angle formed by a line drawn from the direction of the light rays
at a light source and a line perpendicular to the ground from the light source, beyond
which no light is emitted.
DAY CARE HOME:
Day Care Home, Small: A piivate residence wherein the owners residing thereon
provide care for less than 24 hours per day for no more than three additional minor
children other than the owner's dependent children.
Day Care Home, Large: A business licensed by the State of Illinois conducted wholly
within a piivate residence, wherein the owners residing thereon, along with any
additional caregivers allowed by the State license, provide care for minor children for
less than 24 hours per day, and where the number of children cared for exceeds the
maximums for Day Care Home, Small. The maximum number of children cared for
shall not exceed the maximum allowed by the State of Illinois.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
DAY CARE CENTER: A business licensed by the State of Illinois and not conducted
within a private residence where three or more minor children are cared for less than
24 hours per day.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
DANCING OR MUSIC ACADEMY: An establishment that offers vocal, instrumental, or
dancing lessons or instructions. Social dancing may also be offered for no more than
forty (40) persons at any time.
DECK: An open structure, which may or may not have a roof but is otherwise open to the
elements, that is designed for outdoor enjoyment and is a minimum of six (6) inches
above grade. Any deck attached to the main building is subject to the area and setback
requirements of the main building. Any deck that is detached is subject to the area and
setback requirements for accessory structures.
DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change to real estate, exclusive of maintenance of
existing buildings and facilities; resurfacing roads; or gardening, plowing, and similar
practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY: Technology that converts voice and data messages into digits
that represent sound intensities at specific points of time and data content.
II-8
DIRECTIONAL ANTENNA: An antenna or array of antennas designed to concentrate a
radio signal in a particular area.
DISH ANTENNA: An antenna with a concave surface used to link communications sites
together by wireless transmission or voice or data. Also called microwave antenna or
microwave dish antenna.
DISTRICT: Any section of the City of Decatur for which the zoning regulations governing
the use of buildings and premises, the height of buildings, the size of yards, and the
intensity of use are uniform.
DORMITORY, FRATERNITY HOUSE OR SORORITY HOUSE. A building in which
sleeping rooms are provided for occupancy by, and maintained as, a place of residence
exclusively for, students affiliated with an accredited college or university, which may
offer meals, when authorized and regulated by such institution. Separate living
quarters with cooking facilities may be designed for the resident manager only.
DRIVE-UP OR DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY: A building or portion thereof which is
designed to provide, either wholly or in part, service to customers in vehicles that are
parked or stacked in a service lane. This definition includes, but is not limited to,
facilities at drive-in restaurants, drive-in banks, drive-up windows at drug stores, and
similar uses.
DUPLEX: See Dwelling Unit, Two Family
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A single, freestanding conventional building containing three
(3) or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY: A single, freestanding conventional building containing
a single dwelling unit and designed for or occupied exclusively by one (1) family only.
DWELLING UNIT: A room or rooms connected together which constitute a separate,
independent housekeeping establishment for one (1) family, for owner occupancy, or
for rental or lease, and physically separated from other rooms or suites which may be
located in the same structure, containing at a minimum one (1) sleeping room, one (1)
bathroom, and one (1) kitchen. This definition does not include rooms in hotels,
motels, or institutional facilities.
DWELLING, TWO FAMILY: A single, freestanding conventional building containing
two (2) dwelling units.
DRIVEWAY: A private roadway providing access to a street or highway.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance (by a
public or private utility company for the purpose of furnishing adequate service by said
company for the public health, safety, or general welfare) of electrical and
communication cables, poles and wires, and water and sewer collection, transmission
and distribution mains, drains, and pipes, including fire hydrants. This definition does
not include wireless telecommunications facilities as regulated by this Ordinance.
EXTRACTION USES: Uses that require the alteration of the surface of the earth,
including the excavation, removal, stripping, surface mining, or quarrying of top soil,
soil, earth, sand, rock, gravel, clay, coal, minerals, ores, or similar substances; or the
II-9
surface location of shafts, mine heads, and similar facilities for the subsurface removal
of such substances; or the drilling for or production of, oil, gas, or other liquid gaseous
substances.
FABRICATION, COMMERCIAL: The production, compounding, processing,
packaging, or treatment of goods, materials, or products which are dependent upon a
downtown or similar commercial site. These products include candy, cosmetics,
confections, toiletries, and food products, except fish, poultry, and meat products,
sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast, and the rendering of fats or oils. Products may be crafted
from previously prepared materials including bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork,
feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, precious- or semiprecious
metals or stone, shells, wax, wire, yams, and the like. Musical instruments,
toys, greeting cards, novelties, rubber or metal stamps, or other small molded rubber
products are included in this definition.
FALL ZONE: A radius equal to or greater than one-half the height of the
telecommunications tower, within which falling snow or ice may cause a hazard.
FAMILY: Either: (a) Two or more persons, all of whom are related to each other by blood,
marriage, or adoption, together with usual domestic servants and not more than one
boarder or lodger, all living together as a single housekeeping unit and using common
kitchen facilities; or (b) Eight or fewer persons, any or all of whom are not related to
each of the others by blood, marriage, or adoption, all living together as a single
housekeeping unit and using common kitchen facilities. For purposes of this Zoning
Ordinance, however, an unrelated family shall not include persons living together in a
Residential Care facility, Intermediate or Long Term Care facility, Foster Home,
Congregate Elderly Housing; or in a boarding or lodging house, club, convent,
dormitory, fraternity, monastery, or sorority. (Amended, Ordinance 2014-72,
December 15, 2014)
FAMILY RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY: A residence designed and operated to
accommodate overnight and short-term stays, comfort and relief for physical and
emotional needs of no more than six (6) families who have other family members who
are patients at nearby hospitals and similar medical facilities ..
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS AND SERVICES: Establishments that trade cash,
securities, and other negotiable instruments. Examples of these institutions include
commercial, savings, and investment banks; credit unions and savings and loan
establishments; securities dealers and brokers; commodity dealers and traders; holding
companies and trust companies; and foreign currency exchanges. For purposes of this
Ordinance, this definition does not include Pawn brokers/Pawn shops or check cashing
facilities.
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION: See Clubs: Club, Fraternal.
FREQUENCY: The number of cycles completed each second by a sound wave, measured
in hertz (Hz).
FLOOR AREA, NET: The total of all floor areas of a building, excluding common areas,
stairwells and elevator shafts, equipment rooms, interior vehicular parking or loading;
II-10
and all floors below the first or ground floor, except when not used or not intended to
be used for human habitation or business use.
FOOD STORES: Retail stores primarily engaged in selling edible products for home
preparation and consumption, not including supermarkets, superstores or warehouse
markets. This definition shall not be interpreted to include establishments primarily
engaged in selling prepared foods or beverages for consumption on premises or liquor
stores. For the purposes of this Ordinance, food stores are categorized as follows:
Neighborhood: Grocery store (less than 30,000 square feet of gross leasable area);
Delicatessen; Fish (seafood) market (enclosed); Meat or poultry market (no
slaughtering on premises); Fruit or vegetable market (enclosed).
Specialty: Confectionery store including candy, nuts, popcorn, sweetmeats, and other
edible products; Dairy products (not including ice cream or frozen custard stands);
Retail bakeries, featuring products prepared on the premises for sale on the premises;
Specialty food stores including, but not limited to, such items as health foods, coffee,
tea, spices, herbs, vitamins, dietetic foods, local specialties, jams and jellies, hot sauces,
and mineral water.
FOOTCANDLE (FC) - A quantitative unit of measurement referring to illumination
incident at a single point. One footcandle is equal to one lumen uniformly distributed
over an area of one square foot. For purposes of this ordinance, footcandles shall be
measured at a horizontal point at grade.
FOREGROUND: A part of the message which is nearest the front of the display and is
prominent in nature. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-48, August 4, 2008)
FOSTER HOME: A home licensed or regulated, or both, by the State of Illinois, or some
department, division or bureau thereof, where juveniles are placed by court order; or
by the State of Illinois Department of Corrections or Department of Children and
Family Services.
FREEZER AND LOCKER MEAT PROVIDERS: establishments that offer meat products
on a bulk basis for freezer storage, primarily at retail sale.
FRONTAGE: That portion of a lot extending along a street line, or in the case of lots
facing cul-de-sacs, the portion of the lot extending along the building setback line.
FUNERAL HOME: A building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the
display of the deceased and rituals connected therewith before burial or cremation. A
funeral home may include a mortuary and/or a crematory within the primary structure
as an ancillary use. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
GARAGE, PRIVATE: Any accessory building or portion thereof designed or used for the
storage of privately owned motor-driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of
the building to which it is accessory, and not storing more than one truck or commercial
vehicle or any vehicle which exceeds a two-ton capacity.
GARAGE, STORAGE OR PARKING: A building or portion thereof other than a private
garage designed or used exclusively for term storage by pre-arrangement of motordriven
vehicles, or for daily storage furnished to transients, and within which motor
II-11
fuels and oils may be sold, but no motor-driven vehicles are equipped, repaired, hired
or sold.
GARDENING, COOPERATIVE: The cultivation of plants, including flowers, vegetables,
trees, and shrubs for non-commercial purposes on the same site by persons or families
not residing on the site.
GASOLINE STATION: A business engaged primarily in retail sales of automotive fuels,
which may or may not include automobile repair and service as an ancillary service.
This definition also permits the sale of convenience food or beverage and similar items
in addition to gasoline sales. (See Automobile Service Station; Convenience Food and
Beverage Store; Convenience Food and Beverage Store, Extended Hours; and Licensed
Truck Stop Establishment). (Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-47, September 17, 2018)
GLARE - The effect produced by the intensity and direction of any artificial illumination
sufficient to cause annoyance, discomfort, or temporary loss or impairment of vision.
GOVERNMENT BUILDING: A facility for the purpose of housing any department,
commission, independent agency or instrumentality of the United States, of a state,
county, incorporated or unincorporated municipality, township, authority, district or
other governmental unit.
GOVERNMENT USE: Any land, building, structure, or activity, regardless of actual
ownership, operated by the city, county, state, or federal government or legally
empowered special district that is necessary to the conduct of government or the
furnishing of public infrastructure or services over which such government exercises
direct and complete control.
GRADE: For the purposes of Section XXVII, Wireless facilities, the lowest point of
elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area
between the structure and the property line or, when the property line is more than 5
feet from the structure, between the structure and a line 5 feet from the structure. For
all other parts of this Ordinance, a reference plane representing the mean of the finished
ground level adjoining a building at all exterior walls. When the finished ground level
slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the
lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line; or, when the lot line
is no more than six (6) feet from the building, between the building and a point six (6)
feet from the building.
GROSS LEASABLE AREA (GLA): The total floor area for which the tenant pays rent
and that is designated for the tenants' occupancy and exclusive use. See also Floor
area-net.
GUYED TOWER: A communication tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by guy
wires and ground anchors.
HISTORIC NEIGHBORHOOD USE: A use of land in any locally designated Historic
District or any National Register Historic District, or an identified Historic and
Architectural Landmark as established by Ordinance 78-159 that, with appropriate
controls and under specific conditions, is consistent with and preserves the essential
character and nature of the surrounding neighborhood, but which is not otherwise listed
11-12
herein as a permitted use in the particular zoning district applicable to the property in
question.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation or activity entirely incidental to residential use,
when (l) carried on in the Main Building and is not used primarily or exclusively for
the home occupation; (2) is carried on by a member of the immediate family, residing
on the premises, (3) there is no commodity displayed or sold upon the premises; (4) no
person is employed other than a member of the immediate family residing on the
premises; and (5) no mechanical equipment is used except of a type that is similar in
character to that normally used for purely domestic or household purposes. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
Home occupation shall also include: private tutoring limited to three pupils at any one
time; nursery schools limited to three pupils; musical instruction limited to a single
pupil at a time and a maximum of four hours of instruction per day; day care home,
small; architects, professional engineers, surveyors, and other professional persons,
provided that no person is employed other than a member of the immediate family
residing on the premises. However, a home occupation shall not be interpreted to
include barber shops and beauty parlors, palm reading/tarot card reading or similar
business in which spiritual advice or fortune telling is conducted for a fee; commercial
stables, kennels, or any kind of automotive service and repair except cars that are
registered to the subject address or incidental to the use of the property. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
Home occupation may include the use of premises by a physician, surgeon or dentist
for an office, consultation, or emergency treatment, but not as a clinic, hospital, or other
medical practice. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
HOSPICE: A facility that provides comfort and relief for the emotional, physical, and
spiritual needs of terminally ill persons and their families.
HOTEL: A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public and
providing additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment and
recreational facilities. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the terms "motel," "motor
lodge," and "motor court" are synonymous and are included in this definition.
ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES (ILCS.): The codified laws enacted by the Illinois
Legislature.
IMPROVED SURFACE: A paved surface designed for the use of motor vehicles and
constructed of concrete, asphalt or similar materials. A rock bed does not constitute an
improved surface.
INSTITUTION: A building occupied by a non-profit corporation or a non-profit
establishment for public use.
INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITY (ICF): A facility that provides, on a continuing
basis, personal care, including dressing and eating and health-related care and services,
to individuals who require such assistance but who do not require the degree of care
and treatment provided by a hospital, long term care facility or similar skilled nursing
facility.
II-13
INTERMODAL STORAGE CONTAINERS: A standardized steel shipping container
designed and built for intermodal freight transport across different modes of transport
such as from ship to rail to truck. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2016-36, June 20, 2016)
INTERMODAL TRANSIT FACILITY: A complex designed for the transfer of human
passengers and their cargo with various forms of transportation, including bus, rail, taxi
or shuttle.
INTERMODAL TRANSPORTATION FACILITY: A complex of buildings and
transportation systems designed to facilitate the movement of goods from one mode of
transport to another. Typical facilities include rail-to-truck or truck-to-air operations.
Warehousing and distribution operations are typically conducted in such a complex
ISOLUX: Contours of horizontal footcandles as shown on a photometric plan.
KENNEL: Any establishment in which animals are housed, groomed, bred, boarded,
trained or sold, generally for a fee or compensation.
KITCHEN: A portion of a residence or business with running water dedicated to the
preparation and storage of food.
LABORATORY, MEDICAL: A building or portion of a building occupied by dental, xray
(both for treatment and diagnosis) and optical laboratories, where services
(including preparation and compounding) are provided solely on medical prescription.
LABORATORY, RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT: a facility for the activities of
investigation of the fields of the natural, physical and social sciences with the intention
of improving societal conditions. Research and development activities often require
special services including water, gas, ventilation, chemicals, heating, electrical and/or
electrical equipment.
LATTICE TOWER: A guyed or self-supporting three or four sided, open, steel frame
structure used to support telecommunications equipment.
LICENSE: For the purposes of Section XXVII, Wireless facilities, the rights and
obligations extended by the City to an operator to own, construct, maintain, and operate
its system within the boundaries of the City for the sole purpose of providing services
to persons or areas outside the municipality.
LICENSED TRUCK STOP ESTABLISHMENT: A facility (i) that is at least a 3-acre
facility with a convenience store, (ii) with separate diesel islands for fueling
commercial motor vehicles, (iii) that sells at retail more than 10,000 gallons of diesel
or biodiesel fuel per month, (iv) that in its entirety locates within one-half mile (or
2,640 feet) of the rights-of-way of existing interchanges along Interstate 72, or the
interchange of U.S. Business Highway 51 and U.S. Highway 51, within Decatur City
Limits and (v) with parking spaces for commercial motor vehicles. "Commercial motor
vehicles" has the same meaning as defined in Section 18b-101 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code. The requirement of item (iii) of this paragraph may be met by showing that
estimated future sales or past sales average at least I 0,000 gallons per month.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-47, September 17, 2018)
LIGHT STANDARD: The pole, mast, or structure to which outdoor lighting is attached.
II-14
LOADING SPACE: A space within the main building or on the same lot therewith,
providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks.
LODGE: See Clubs: Club, fraternal.
LODGING HOUSE: See Boarding or lodging house.
LONG-TERM CARE FACILITY: An institution, or a distinct part of an institution, that
is licensed or approved to provide health care under medical supervision for twentyfour
(24) or more consecutive hours to patients who are not related to the governing
authority or its members by blood, marriage, or adoption.
LOT: A tract, plot, or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership, or possession,
or for building development.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting upon two or more intersecting streets.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot having frontage on two non-intersecting streets as
distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT LINES: The lines bounding a lot as defined below:
Front Lot Line: In the case of an interior lot, the line separating such lot from the street
right-of-way. In the case of a corner lot, the front lot line shall be the lot frontage of
the least dimension. In the case of a double frontage lot, the line abutting the street on
which the main building is addressed shall be the front lot line.
Rear Lot Line: The line most opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot that is
pointed at the rear, the rear lot shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line,
not less than ten feet long, lying furthest from the front lot line and wholly within the
lot.
Side Lot Line: Any lot line other that the front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating
a lot from another lot is an interior lot line. On a corner lot, the line abutting a street
which is not the front lot line is the corner side lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot that is part of a subdivision or government lot, the plat of which
has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Macon County; or, a parcel
of land, the deed to which was recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Macon
County.
LOT WIDTH: The width of the lot at the building line.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A factory-built structure that is transportable in one or more
sections, which is eight feet (8') or more in width or forty feet (40') or more in length,
is built on a permanent metal chassis, is designed to be used as a dwelling unit when
connected to the required plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems
and complies with the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards Act (42 USC Sec. 5401), commonly known as the HUD (US Department of
Housing and Urban Development) code, or its successor statute as enacted by
Congress. The term "MANUFACTURED HOME and MOBILE HOME" are
synonymous. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-35, June 6, 2011)
II-15
MANUFACTURING, HEAVY: The conversion ofraw, extracted or partially processed
materials into a product used for further processing or distribution or the storage or
manufacturing processes which have the potential to create offensive environmental
conditions. Examples of heavy manufacturing include lumber and paper mills, stone,
clay, and glass product manufacturing, asphalt and concrete batch plants, poultry
dressing, fat rendering plants, stockyards, slaughterhouses, tanneries, acid
manufacture, distillation of bones, fertilizer manufacture, petroleum refineries, glue
manufacture and similar operations. These uses may be conducted partially or wholly
outdoors and may create noxious by-products such as dust, fumes, offensive odors,
hazardous waste products, noise, vibration and glare.
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT: The assembling, altering, processing, converting or
finishing of pre-processed materials for food or consumer products. This use may
include the assembly from prefabricated parts of household appliances, electronic
products or the processing or assembling of parts for production of finished equipment
or buildings and generates limited by-products.
MASSAGE PARLOR: A personal service establishment, or place of business in which
treatments are administered with mechanical or electrical apparatus for the purpose of
body slenderizing, body reducing, or body contouring, or all or any one or more of the
following subjects and methods of treatment: viz. oil rubs, salt glows, hot or cold packs,
all kinds of baths including steam rooms, cabinet baths, sitz baths; irrigations, body
massage, either by hand or mechanical or electrical device. These practices shall be
licensed by the State of Illinois.
MEDICAL CANNABIS DEISPENSING ORGANIZATION, DISPENSING
ORGANIZATION, OR DISPENSARY ORGANIZATION: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is registered by the Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a registered cultivation
center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis, paraphernalia, or related supplies and
educational materials to registered qualifying patients as defined, amended and
regulated by the State of Illinois, 410 ILCS 130/10 et. seq. (Amended, Ordinance No.
2014-27, June 16, 2014)
MEDICAL OFFICE AND MEDICAL CLINIC: A premises where patients, who are not
lodged overnight, except for observation or emergency treatment, are treated by one
(1) person or group of persons practicing any form of healing or health building
services to individuals, whether the practitioners are physicians (i.e. medical doctors),
chiropractors, osteopaths, chiropodists, podiatrists, naturopaths, dentists, psychologists
and counselors of all types, psychiatrists, nurse practitioners, optometrists, or any such
profession, the practice of which is regulated by Illinois law. Ancillary uses, such as
pharmacies, eye-wear centers, and the like may be located on the premises.
MESSAGE: The complete configuration of text, numerals, graphics, or animation
displayed in the background and foreground within electronic message unit signs and
off-premise electronic message unit signs. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-48, August
4, 2008)
II-16
MICRO-CELL: A low power mobile radio service telecommunications facility used to
provide increased capacity in high call-demand areas or to improve coverage in areas
of weak coverage.
MICROWAVE: Electromagnetic radiation with frequencies higher than 1,000 MHZ;
highly directional signal used to transmit radio frequencies from point-to-point at a
relatively low power level.
MICROWAVE ANTENNA: A dish-like antenna manufactured in many sizes and shapes
used to link communication sites together by wireless transmission or voice or data.
MOBILE HOME: See "MANUFACTURED HOME". (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-
35, June 6, 2011)
MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel or tract of land which has been approved and developed
for the placement of one or more mobile homes, either free of charge or for revenue
purposes, including all accessory buildings, structures, utilities, facilities, or uses.
MODEL HOME: A residential structure with required parking used only for
demonstration, display, and sales of the approved model, not occupied as a dwelling
unit, and open to the public for inspection. A model home may include a portion thereof
dedicated to a sales office.
MODEL STUDIO: Any establishment where for any form of consideration or gratuity,
models who display specified anatomical areas to be observed, sketched, drawn,
painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by persons paying such
consideration or gratuity, except that this provision shall not apply to any activity
sponsored by an educational institution recognized by the State of Illinois in the course
of its educational activities.
MODULAR HOME: A factory assembled structure designed and intended as a singlefamily
housing unit suitable for year round occupancy which is at least 24 feet in width,
having a pitched roof, built on wooden frames, equipped with the necessary service
connections and made to be transported on flatbed trailers, and capable of meeting all
required building, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical codes when placed on a
permanent perimeter foundation that extends to below the frost line. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2011-35, June 6, 2011)
MONOPOLE TOWER: A communication tower consisting of a single pole, constructed
without guy wires and ground anchors.
MORTUARY: A place for the storage of human bodies prior to their burial or cremation,
also known as a morgue.
MUSEUM, PUBLIC: An institution or building in public or semi-public ownership and
operation which offers visual exhibits on an artistic, natural, historical, scientific,
technological, historical or cultural theme for the education, enrichment, or
entertainment of the public.
MUSIC ACADEMY: See Dancing and Music Academy.
NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION USE: A use of land in a Neighborhood
Preservation District as established by ordinance of the Decatur City Council that, with
11-17
appropriate controls under specific conditions, is consistent with and preserves the
essential character and nature of the surrounding neighborhood, but which is not
otherwise listed herein as a permitted use in the particular zoning district applicable to
the property in question.
NEWSSTAND: An establishment which specializes in the high volume sale of
newspapers and periodicals. Other products, such as candy, tobacco, lottery tickets,
comic books, and sports collectibles are typically sold.
NON-CONFORMING BUILDING, STRUCTURE, LOCATION, OR USE: The use of
land or a building, or portion thereof, which does not conform with the use or bulk
regulations of the district in which it is situated.
NON-STORE RETAILERS: Establishments which market and sell products and services
in venues different from conventional retail stores, such as mail order houses,
wholesaling, vending machine operators, direct and door-to-door sales, telemarketing,
and similar uses.
NURSING HOME: See Long-term care facility and Intermediate care facility.
OMNIDIRECTIONAL ANTENNA: An antenna that is equally effective in all directions
and whose size varies with the frequency and gain for which it was designed.
OUTDOOR DISPLAY AREA: The area measured around the footprint of products on
display including any space between products and circulation areas. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
ON HOLD: The status of an application that has been rescheduled to a subsequent meeting
of a body (such as the Technical Review Committee), subject to the satisfaction of
modifications prescribed by that body.
OWNER: For the purposes of Section XXVII, Wireless facilities, the possessor of the title
to real property or the contract purchaser of real property of record, as shown on the
latest records in the office of the Recorder of Macon County, Illinois. This definition
also includes a deedholder or contract purchaser whose name does not appear in the
latest records, but who presents to the City a copy of a deed or contract for sale, showing
date, book, and page of recording.
PARKING SPACE: A surfaced area, enclosed in the main building or in an accessory
building, or unenclosed, having an area of not less than 180 square feet exclusive of
driveways, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one automobile and
connected with a street or alley by a driveway which affords satisfactory ingress and
egress for automobiles without need of moving any other vehicle(s); however, in one
and two family residential districts only, stacking or blocking of parking spaces is
permitted.
PAWNBROKER: As defined and regulated by the State of Illinois, 205 ILCS 510.
(Amended, Ordinance 2013-12; March 4, 2013)
PEDESTRIAN WAY : A dedicated right of way across or within a block designated for
pedestrian use.
11-18
PERSONAL COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES (PCS): Digital wireless telephone
technology such as portable phones, pagers, faxes, and computers. Such mobile
technology promises to allow each consumer the same telephone number wherever he
or she goes. Also known as Personal Communication Network (PCN).
PERSONAL SERVICES: Establishments that are p1imarily engaged in providing services
involving the care of persons or their apparel, such as: Barber and beauty shops;
Clothing alteration and repair, including dressmakers, seamstresses, and tailors;
Laundry and dry cleaning establishments; Photo drop-off agents (not including
processing); Shoe shining or shoe repair establishments; Beauty spas; Massage parlors
(see definition); Health clubs or spas; Palm readers, fortune tellers, or card readers;
Taxidermist; and similar personal service uses. Tattoo parlors or body piercing parlors
are not covered by this definition.
PET SERVICES: An establishment primarily engaged in providing grooming, obedience
training, or other activities not requiring the knowledge or skill of a veterinarian and
not including animal clinic and kennels.
PHARMACY, PRESCRIPTION: A building or portion thereof, used only for the
dispensing of drugs, medicines and medical supplies on medical prescription.
PHOTOMETRIC PLAN: A point by point plan depicting the intensity and location of
lighting on the property.
PLACE: An open unoccupied space or a public or private thoroughfare other than a street
or alley permanently reserved as the principal means of access to abutting property.
PLACE OF WORSHIP: An establishment (such as a church, synagogue, mosque, or
temple) in which religious observances are conducted.
PLAN COMMISSION: The body designated by City Council to advise the City Council
on matters of planning and zoning.
PLAT: A map, drawing, or chart which portrays a plan for the division or subdivision of
a parcel of land.
PLAT, FINAL: A drawing to engineering accuracy and containing those items specified
by this ordinance indicating the layout of lots, blocks, easements, and public ways in a
subdivision, together with the legal documents required herein for recording in the
Macon County Recorder's Office.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: The preliminary drawing or drawings described in these
regulations, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted
to the Plan Commission, or to the Zoning Administrator of the Department of Planning
and Building Services and the Public Works Director in a manner prescribed by the
Subdivision Regulations of the City of Decatur, for approval. (Amended, Ordinance
No. 2010-34, May 17, 2010)
POLICY REVIEW COMMITTEE: An informal advisory body to the City Manager,
consisting of City management personnel that advises the City Manager on policy
matters relating to applications for subdivision of land, annexations, planned unit
developments, and other land use changes.
11-19
PRE-EXISTING TOWERS AND ANTENNA: Any tower or antenna for which a permit
has been issued prior to the effective date of these regulations and is exempt from the
requirements of these regulations so long as the tower or antennas are not modified or
changed.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE USE: Establishment primarily engaged in providing business
services to other businesses and individuals, not including health care services.
Professional office uses are generally categorized into professional business
establishments that customarily occupy standard office space and do not require
outdoor storage of supplies or use of vehicles other than automobiles and small vans.
Examples of these business establishments include the offices of accountants, auditors,
bookkeepers, appraisers, architects, attorneys, commercial artists and photographers,
consultants, draftspersons, engineers, real estate brokers and agents, clerical aild
stenographic services, travel agencies, and cable television and utility business offices.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian
way, tree, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or other facility for which the local
government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation,
or which may affect the improvement for which City responsibility is established.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any real property, easement, air-space, or other interest in real
estate, including a street, owned by, or subject, to the jurisdiction of the City or any
other governmental unit.
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES: Buildings or above-ground structures required to
provide public utility services including electricity, telephone, cable TV, natural gas,
water, sewerage, solid waste, and resource recovery. For purposes of this ordinance,
there are three categories of public utility facilities, as follows:
Regional: Natural gas or water regulation station; Pumping station; Telephone and
electrical distribution system; Transmission or metering station; Electric substation;
Water treatment facility; Solid waste lift station.
System: Sewage disposal or treatment facility; Electric power generation plant;
Sanitary landfill; Resource recovery facility such as incinerators for the generation of
energy from waste materials.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
RADIO AND TELEVISION STATION: A building, structure, or premises primarily
engaged in the staging, production, and recording of radio or television programs. This
definition does not include radio or television transmission or microwave towers.
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL: A recreational facility operated as a business and open
to the public for a fee. Swim clubs are not included in this definition .. This definition
covers the following:
Indoor facilities: Amusement arcades or establishments that primarily provide coinor
token-operated devices (popularly called pinball machines and video games);
bowling alleys; dance halls, dance clubs, and ballrooms; racquetball, handball, and
squash clubs; skating rinks; indoor soccer fields and hockey rinks; water slides;
waterparks; lazy rivers; rock climbing walls and similar facilities. (Amended,
Ordinance 2012-17; April 16, 2012)
II-20
Outdoor facilities: Miniature golf; golf driving ranges; water slides; waterparks; lazy
rivers; commercial boat tours; batting cages; tennis clubs; volleyball clubs; go-kart or
bump car establishments; rock climbing walls and similar facilities.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002) (Amended, Ordinance 2012-17;
April 16, 2012)
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle that is designed for recreational occupancy or
use and is not included in the definition of a mobile home as set forth in this Ordinance.
Recreational vehicles shall include but not be limited to the following: boats and boat
trailers, camping trailers, travel trailers, motor homes, mini-motor homes, truck
campers, van campers and tent campers.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE STORAGE: The seasonal or year-round outdoor storage of
a recreational vehicle on residential property for a period that exceeds 72 hours.
Temporary parking of a vehicle for loading, visiting, etc. shall not be considered
vehicle storage under this definition.
RECYCLING CENTER: A facility designed to be a collection point for recyclable
materials by donation, redemption or purchase from the public. The principal function
is to collect, separate/sort, flatten, crush, bale/bundle or temporarily store recyclable
materials such as newspapers, magazines, books, and other paper products, glassware,
and metal cans prior to shipment to a permanent disposal site, to others for reuse, and/or
processing into new products or other end-use markets. The facility receives and
processes only residential and commercial recyclables such as food and beverage
containers and paper. This facility can be a permanent structure, temporary structure,
mobile structure and/or a reverse vending machine. Recycling centers do not include
the processing of recyclable materials nor does this include retail salvage operations or
automobile salvage operations. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-54)
RELIGIOUS FACILITY: Activities and uses which may or may not be located on the
same site as a place of worship, but which serve a religious purpose, such as convents,
monasteries, retreats, and church/synagogue ministries offering classes for children and
adults.
RENTAL ESTABLISHMENTS: Businesses primarily engaged in renting or leasing
machinery, tools, recreational equipment, household items, costumes and other apparel,
videos and similar home entertainment, party and banquet supplies, and other
equipment or supplies to individuals or businesses for use off premises. This definition
does not include businesses that rent items in conjunction with an on-premises activity,
such as golf carts, bowling shoes, etc. This definition does not include passenger
automobile, passenger truck and passenger van rentals or truck and trailer rentals.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2016-36, June 20, 2016)
RENTAL, PASSENGER AUTOMOBILES, PASSENGER TRUCKS AND
PASSENGER VANS: Businesses primarily engaged in the renting or leasing of
passenger automobiles, passenger light duty trucks and passenger vans that are
designed for the purpose of transporting passengers. This definition also includes the
renting or leasing of motorcycles and motorized scooters. (Amended, Ordinance No.
2016-36, June 20, 2016)
11-21
RENTAL, TRUCKS AND TRAILERS: Businesses primaiily engaged in the renting or
leasing of heavy duty trucks, vans, trailers and storage containers (for temporary use)
for the purpose of moving and storing property such as household goods, cargo or
freight. This definition does not include intermodal storage containers. (Amended,
Ordinance no. 2016-36, June 20, 2016)
REP AIR SHOP: An establishment primarily engaged in fixing, refinishing, or overhauling
used or pre-owned products.
RESIDENTIAL CARE HOME: Any living quarters wherein individuals are provided
residential care, including both transitional and long-term residential care. A
residential care home does not include an intermediate or long term care facility (as
herein defined), hospital, or adult day care center or living quarters that serve persons
as an alternative to incarceration for a criminal offense. For the purposes of this
ordinance, there are two categories:
Small Residential Care Home: Any residential care home, as herein defined, where no
more than eight persons are receiving care at any one time.
Large Residential Care Home: Any residential care home, as herein defined, that is
designed to provide residential care to more than eight persons at any one time.
RESTAURANT: An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of prepared food
and drink. For the purposes of this ordinance, there are five categories:
Carry-out: Establishments that do not typically provide indoor seating. Examples of
these establishments include ice cream, frozen custard, hot dog, and taco stands.
Convenience restaurants: Establishments that tend to rely upon pedestrian traffic and
are typically located in business or commercial districts or recreational areas, and are
distinguishable from Carry-out because they typically offer counter or table service in
addition to can-y out. Examples of these establishments include automats, cafes,
delicatessens (not located in a supermarket), diners, grills, ice cream parlors, lunch
counters, sandwich shops, soda fountains, and tea rooms.
Fast Food: An establishment that is characterized by the rapid, high volume production
and delivery of food and beverages to the customer. These establishments may have
some self-service such as a salad bar, and may offer drive up or drive-through service
Sit-down restaurants: Establishments wherein customers usually arrive via automobile
and are seated within the premises. These include both self-service and table service
establishments, although they may offer can-y-out foods and beverages. Examples of
these establishments include traditional restaurants and cafes, buffets, smorgasbords,
cafeterias, and pizzerias.
Temporary facilities: Establishments within a movable, temporary building or a mobile
trailer or similar vehicle, erected for seasonal sales of food or confections. Temporary
facilities erected for an event of four days duration or less are not subject to these
requirements. Temporai·y facilities established for a period longer than four days shall
be subject to the following:
1. Temporary facilities shall be allowed to operate only between March 15 and
November 30;
II-22
2. Signs for temporary facilities are allowed only on the temporary facility itself. A
single freestanding temporary sign may be established for the temporary facility
use, subject to the requirements of Section XXV. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-
22, March 15, 2004)
RETIREMENT HOUSING FACILITY: A residential building or development designed
for retired residents that may or may not also include on-site food service, recreational
and social programs and facilities, and medical care for residents. Ancillary facilities
that are not strictly for the use of the residents (i.e., golf courses, restaurants, etc.) shall
meet all parking requirements as noted in this Ordinance.
ROOF OR BUILDING MOUNT FACILITY: A low power mobile radio service
telecommunications facility in which antennas are mounted to an existing structure on
the roof (including rooftop appurtenances) or building face.
SALVAGE OPERATIONS, RETAIL : Business operations engaged primarily in the
purchase, collection, accumulation or storage of used, discarded or second-hand
merchandise consisting of, or substantially resembling, the following: waste paper,
rags, scrap metal, discarded materials, used building materials (i.e., lumber and
fixtures) inoperable mechanical equipment for the purpose of accumulating or reselling
the material so accumulated or parts thereof.
SCENIC VIEW: A view that may be framed, wide angle, or panoramic and may include
natural or manmade structures and activities. A scenic view may be from a stationary
viewpoint or be seen as one travels along a roadway, waterway, or path. The view may
be to a far away or a nearby object.
SCHOOLS, COMMERCIAL: Establishments which offer instruction, usually for a fee.
This definition includes two classes:
Para-professional: Barber and beauty schools, business colleges, computer
training, dance instruction, driving schools (automobile and motorcycle only),
gymnastics academies, martial arts academies, real estate schools, and similar
establishments. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-02, January 20, 2004)
Trade and technical: Training and technical programs such as welding, fabricating,
carpentry, journeyman/apprentice training programs, appliance and equipment repair,
automotive maintenance and repair, commercial driving schools, and similar
establishments. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-02, January 20, 2004)
SCRAP PROCESSING, COMMODITY: Business operations engaged in the purchase,
collection or accumulation of sorted scrap material consisting of or substantially
resembling the following: newsprint, paper, glass and tin or aluminum cans for the
purpose of binding, crushing, bundling, packaging, transporting or commercial resale
of the sorted scrap material so accumulated.
SCRAP PROCESSING, INDUSTRIAL: Business operations engaged in the purchase,
collection or accumulation of sorted scrap materials consisting of or substantially
resembling the following: scrap material, cuttings or trimmings, industrial scrap or by
products, machine or equipment parts, paper or rags for the principal purpose of
binding, baling, compacting, cutting, packing, shipping, transporting or commercial
resale of the sorted scrap material so accumulated.
II-23
SELF SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY: Any building designed or used to provide
separate storage rooms to individuals or businesses for a fee or rental, said rooms being
intended solely as dead storage depositories for personal property, inventory, and
equipment, and not for any other commercial or industrial use. Also commonly called
mini-warehouses. See also Warehouse, Private.
SETBACK, FRONT YARD: The minimum required horizontal distance between the
building and the right-of-way line. Front yard setback may also be referred to as the
"required front yard."
SETBACK LINE: A line within a lot or other parcel of land which denotes the area
between such line and the adjacent lot line where structures are prohibited, except
utility transformer vaults and those structures permitted under the provisions of this
Ordinance.
SETBACK, SIDE YARD: The minimum required horizontal distance between the
building and the side lot line(s). Side yard setback may also be referred to as the
"required side yard."
SETBACK, REAR YARD: The minimum required horizontal distance between the
building and the rear lot line. Rear yard setback may also be referred to as the "required
rear yard."
SIGN: Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or
indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, direct or attract attention to a person,
institution, business, product, service, cause, event, or location by any visual means.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL: Any sign whose message is primarily for the purpose of guiding
the circulation of motorists or pedestrians on the site.
SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE UNIT: Shall mean a sign displaying text, numerals,
graphics, or animation indicating the names of persons associated with events
conducted upon or products or services offered upon the premise where the sign is
maintained; is illuminated internally by means of electric bulbs, LCD or other similar
methods; and is controlled electronically with the ability to be programmed to change.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-48, August 4, 2008)
SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE UNIT MONUMENT STYLE: A monument style sign
structure in which the electronic message unit is framed by a stone and/or masonry
material. No electronic message unit shall sit on top of the stone and/or masonry
material without the stone and/or masonry covering the entire unit. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2008-48, August 4, 2008)
SIGN, EXTENDED TEMPORARY: A sign displayed for more than 90 days and a
maximum of 365 days in the 365 day period commencing from the date the sign is
erected. An extended temporary sign shall be constructed of a one-inch ( 1 ") angle steel
rigid frame made of a minimum of one-eighth inch (1/8") thick steel, the sign face shall
be completely enclosed within the rigid steel frame, the sign face shall be constructed
of a minimum twenty-four (24) gauge steel, or minimum five one-hundredths inch
(0.05") thick aluminum or minimum fifteen one-hundredths inch (0.15") thick plastic
or similar wind and water resistant material approved by the Building Inspector. An
extended temporary sign frame shall be so designed to be placed in the ground and to
II-24
resist rot, decay, or deterioration by the elements during the period in which it is
erected. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
SIGN, FREESTANDING: A sign that is attached to, erected on, or supported by some
structure (such as a pole, mast, frame or other structure) that is attached to the ground
and is not itself an integral part of or attached to a building or other structure. For the
purposes of this Ordinance, this definition does not include Sign, Off-Premise.
SIGN, MULTI-TENANT: A sign which identifies a development of three or more
businesses located in the same commercial or industrial center/park. The businesses
may be located on the same parcel or a group of neighboring parcels. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2010-71, September 20, 2010)
SIGN, OFF-PREMISE: A sign structure, either freestanding or attached to a building,
advertising an establishment, merchandise, service, or entertainment, which is not sold,
produced, manufactured, or furnished at the property on which said sign is located.
This definition encompasses billboards and outdoor advertising signs.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISE ELECTRONIC MESSAGE UNIT: Shall mean a sign displaying
text, numerals, graphics, or animation located in certain non-residentially-zoned
districts that advertise goods, products, services or facilities, or direct persons to a
location different from where the sign is erected. These signs are illuminated internally
by means of electric bulbs, LCD or other similar methods, and are controlled
electronically with the ability to be programmed to change. (Amended, Ordinance No.
2008-48, August 4, 2008)
SIGN, ON-PREMISE: A sign that pertains to the use of the premises on which it is located.
SIGN, PORTABLE: A sign constructed of rigid or semi-rigid materials designed to be
moved easily and not permanently affixed to the ground or to a structure or building.
Portable signs shall include, but are not limited to, signs mounted upon a trailer, bench,
wheeled carrier, or other non-motorized mobile structure with or without wheels.
SIGN, PROJECTING YARD: A sign attached to the side of a building that projects into
the yard adjacent to the wall on which the sign is attached. Projecting yard signs are
generally designed so that (as distinguished from a wall sign) the advertising faces of
the sign are perpendicular to the wall on which the sign is attached.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: A sign or banner displayed for more than 24 hours and a maximum
of 90 days in the 365 day period commencing from the date the sign is erected or affixed
to the main building. Temporary signs are generally constructed of non-rigid or semirigid
materials and are designed so as to not be permanently mounted to the ground or
to a structure. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
SIGN, WALL: A sign fastened to or painted on the vertical exterior surface of a building.
This definition encompasses facade signs.
SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY (SRO): A residential unit consisting of one room,
occupied by one person, with lockable exterior doors that are accessible from outside
the unit. Kitchen and bathroom facilities may or may not be communal.
SITE BREAK: A physical barrier designed to screen buildings or uses from adjacent
properties, such as a fence or landscaping.
11-25
SKETCH PLAN: An informal visual depiction of a proposed development preparatory to
the formal application for approval.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than 6 cubic
feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna
and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of no more
than 6 cubic feet; and (ii) all other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility
pole associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in
volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in
the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the
connection of power and other services. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-40,
September 4, 2018)
SOCIAL SERVICES: Establishments and agencies that provide assistance, counseling,
and rehabilitation to individuals and families, including counseling services, training
and rehabilitation services, self-help organizations, and establishments that provide
emergency or temporary living facilities.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Less than completely and opaquely covered
human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; or, human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even
if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECTRUM: Relating to any transmissions or reception of electromagnetic waves.
STEALTH FACILITY: Any communications facility which is designed to blend into the
surrounding environment. Examples of these facilities include architecturally screened
roof - mounted antennas, building mounted antennas painted to match the existing
structure, antennas painted to match to existing structure, antennas integrated into
architectural elements, and antenna structures designed to resemble light poles. (See
also Alternative Tower Structure).
STORAGE: The collection or display for more than three (3) consecutive days, or any part
of a day for more than three (3) consecutive days, of any product, material, equipment,
appliances, vehicles not in service, or personal property of any kind on an unenclosed
uncovered area. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
STORAGE, ENCLOSED: The keeping of any goods or products within a fully enclosed
structure, so as not to be seen from any other property or establishment.
STORAGE YARD: An outdoor area, enclosed by a fence or other protective barrier, for
the safekeeping of goods.
STORY: That portion of a building, other than a basement (except one used for business
or residence), included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor
next above it or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the
ceiling next above it.
II-26
STORY, HALF: A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of
which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than four feet above the floor
of such story, except that any partial story used for residence purposes, other than for a
janitor or caretaker or his family, or by a family occupying the floor immediately below
it, shall be deemed a full story.
STREET: The pavement structure, curbing and guttering, together with those related
items normally and customarily constructed as a part of a roadway improvement
designed and intended for vehicular traffic to move upon.
STREET, MINOR ARTERIAL: A street or highway linking cities and larger towns in
rural areas by distributing trips to small geographic zones in urban areas, not
penetrating identifiable neighborhoods.
STREET, PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL: A major street or highway, typically of multi-lane or
freeway design, which serves high-volume traffic corridor movements that connect
major generators of travel.
STREET, COLLECTOR: In urban areas, a street providing direct access to neighborhoods
as well as direct access to arterial streets.
STREET, CUL DE SAC: A local street having but one permanent outlet.
STREET, DEAD END: A street having but one outlet but which is intended to be extended
- a stub street.
STREET, HALF: A local street having a right of way width of thirty (30) feet or less and
a pavement width of twenty-two (22) feet or less.
STREET LINE: A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous
street.
STREET, LOCAL: A street whose primary purpose is feeding higher order systems,
providing direct access with little or no through traffic.
STREET, PRIVATE: A local street, not dedicated to a governmental unit for public use,
which has been accepted by the local governmental unit having jurisdiction over the
tract of land.
STREET, PUBLIC: A street dedicated for public use and which has been accepted by the
governmental unit having jurisdiction.
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY: The land permanently reserved and intended to be used for
the placement of a street together with sidewalk, water mains, sewers and other public
utilities and facilities both above and below the grade and which will also afford the
primary means of access to and from abutting property when improved.
STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any changes other than normal maintenance which
would tend to prolong the life of a supporting member of a structure such as a bearing
wall, column, beam, girder, or any substantial change in the roof or exterior walls.
STUDIO: An establishment where an artist, photographer, musician, or craftsperson
practices his or her art, craft, or vocation (not including Model Studio as herein
II-27
defined). The artist's products may be offered for exhibit or sale, for which admission
may be charged, and he/she may offer lessons in exchange for a fee. Lessons or
instructions may be offered to no more than five (5) persons at one time.
SUBDIVIDE: To divide, either by survey or description, any parcel or tract of land into
two or more parts, whether for the purpose of conveyance of title or possession, or to
improve any parcel or tract of land with streets, sewers, water mains or other
improvements similar in kind or size to public improvements as is done in connection
with developments commonly known as planned unit developments, residence
development plans or mobile home parks, but excluding such divisions for the purpose
of creating rights of way for streets or utilities or the division of farm land to continue
to be used only for agriculture. This definition does not include Lot line adjustment as
defined in the Subdivision Regulations.
SUBDIVIDER: Any owner or his authorized representative who undertakes to cause a
parcel or tract of land to be subdivided.
SUBDIVISION: A tract of land which has been subdivided.
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS: The basic land planning and development
principles established herein.
SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT: Any changes to land or the addition of utilities deemed
necessary to prepare it for building sites or other development including, but not limited
to: grading, streets, curb, gutter, sidewalks, monuments, lot pins, drainage ways,
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, fire hydrants, water mains, and other public facilities
and appurtenances.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR: A subdivision of six (6) lots or greater.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR: A subdivision of five (5) lots or fewer.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any repair or alteration of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either (a) before
the commencement or repair is started; or (b) if the structure has been damaged, and is
being restored, before the damage occurred. This term does not include either: (1) any
project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or (2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the Illinois Register of Historical Places. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-
35, June 6, 2011)
SUPERMARKET: A retail store with a floor area of 30,000 square feet or greater,
primarily engaged in selling edible products for home preparation and consumption.
SUPERSTORE: A retail store with a floor area of 50,000 square feet or greater that is
primarily engaged in selling general products at retail in combination with groceries
and similar supermarket items.
SWIM CLUB: A club, in private or cooperative ownership, which offers swimming,
wading, or diving pools and other aquatic recreational activities for members and their
guests in exchange for a membership fee. Ancillary uses include snack bars and locker
rentals. Occasionally such facilities may be leased to non-members for private parties.
II-28
SYSTEM: The communications transmission facilities and network operated by a service
provider in the city.
TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE (TRC): A body composed of City staff appointed
by the City Manager, and staff members of other agencies appointed by the City
Manager, for the purpose of conducting a formal review of site plans, subdivision plats,
planned unit developments (PUDs), and other land development instruments.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: The transmission, between or among points specified by the
user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of
the information as sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER: A mast, pole, monopole, guyed tower, lattice
tower, freestanding tower, or other structure designed and primarily used to support
antennas. A ground- or building-mounted mast greater than ten (I 0) feet tall and six
(6) inches in diameter supporting one or more antennae, dishes, arrays, etc. shall be
considered a telecommunications tower for the purposes of this ordinance.
TEMPORARY WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: Any tower, pole,
antenna, etc., designed for use while a permanent wireless facility is under construction,
or for a special event or conference where a majority of people attending are wireless
users.
TERMINAL, FREIGHT: Distribution facilities with the capability of handling a large
variety of goods involving various forms of transportation. Although these facilities
may have accessory warehousing uses, their primary function is the multi-modal
transportation of goods.
THAL WEG: The line of fastest descent from any point on land, especially one connecting
the deepest points along a river channel, or the lowest points along a valley floor.
TOWER: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of
supporting one or more antennas, including structures designed or used to transmit or
relay radio or television signals, microwaves, or cellular communications.
TOWER, SELF-SUPPORTING: A communication tower that is constructed without guy
wires and ground anchors.
URBAN CORRIDORS: The public streets consisting of U.S. Route 51, U.S. Route 36,
Illinois Route 48, Illinois Route 105, and Illinois Route 121 located within the City
Limits of Decatur. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-38, May 18, 2009)
USE: Any purpose for which a building or other structure or a tract of land may be
designed, arranged, intended, occupied, maintained, or modified; or any activity,
occupation, business, or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a building
or other structure or on a tract of land.
VARIANCE: A departure from the terms of this Ordinance pertaining to height, width,
depth, and area of structures and size of yards and open space, and parking space and
sign requirements, where such departure will not be contrary to the public interest; and
where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property due to its size, shape, and
topography, and not as a result of the actions of the applicant, the literal enforcement
of this ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
II-29
VARIETY STORE: A retail store offering a broad mix of generally non-durable goods,
notions and sundries, typically at a low or moderate price. Durable goods (furniture,
large appliances, and the like) are seldom offered.
VIDEO GAMING PARLOR: An establishment or business whose primary purpose is to
operate video gaming terminals as defined under the Illinois Video Gaming Act and in
which the sale of foods or snacks and alcoholic beverages is only incidental to the
operation of the video gaming terminals. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2015-40, August
17, 2015)
VIEW CORRIDOR: A three dimensional area extending out from a viewpoint. The width
of the corridor depends on the focus of the view. The focus may be a single object,
which would result in a narrow corridor, or a group of objects, which would require a
wide corridor.
VISION CLEARANCE TRIANGLE: A triangular shaped area located at the intersection
of any combination of rights-of-way, private streets, alleys, or driveways. The height
of the vision clearance area is from three and one half feet (3Y2) above grade to nine (9)
feet above grade of the vehicular driving surface. The sides of the triangle shall be
determined in one of the following manners as the specific case may apply:
1. Twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of street right-of-way line or private
roadway easements.
2. Twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of a street right-of-way line and
property line corresponding with a public alley or private street.
3. Twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection of a street right-of-way line or private
roadway easement and the edge of the vehicle travel area on a driveway.
In all cases, the vision clearance triangle shall apply to any combination of public
streets, alleys, private streets and driveways on all tracts of land and adjoining tracts
thereto.
WAREHOUSE, PRIVATE: Indoor terminal facilities operated primarily for a specific
commercial establishment or group of establishments in a particular industrial or
economic field, such as moving companies, transfer companies, freight delivery,
specific retail store storage, or beverage distribution, but generally not open to the
public.
WHOLESALE DISTRIBUTING ESTABLISHMENT: A business engaged in selling
goods primarily to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional
business users; to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying
merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM (WES):
An aggregation of parts including the base, tower, generator, rotor, blades, supports,
guy wires and accessory equipment such as utility interconnect and battery banks, etc.,
in such configuration as necessary to convert the power of wind into mechanical or
electrical energy, e.g., wind charger, windmill or wind turbine. The wind energy
system is incidental and subordinate to a permitted use on the same lot. WES are
permitted only for electrical power to be used exclusively onsite, except when a lot
11-30
on which the system is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a utility
company, excess electrical power generated and not presently needed for onsite use
may be used by the utility company in accordance with all applicable regulations.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-82, November 16, 2009)
WIND ENGERGY SYSTEM, EXTENDED HEIGHT:
A distance equal to the height of the tower, plus the length of one ( 1) blade. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2009-82, November 16, 2009)
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY: Any tower, pole, antenna or other
structure, including small wireless facility, intended for use in connection with
transmission or receipt of radio or television signals, or any other spectrum-based
transmissions/receptions. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-40, September 4, 2018)
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
(i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii) radio transceivers,
antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and
comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. Wireless facility
includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does not include: (i) the structure or
improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline
backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is between wireless support
structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber-optic cable that is otherwise not
immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna. (Amended, Ordinance
No. 2018-40, September 4, 2018)
WHIP ANTENNA: An antenna that transmits signals in 360 degrees. Whip antennas are
typically cylindrical in shape and are less than 6 inches in diameter and measure up to
18 inches in height. These are also called omni directional, stick or pipe antennas.
YARD: An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied
and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as
otherwise provided herein. In measuring the yard for the purpose of determining the
width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard, or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum
horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines, and
being the entire horizontal distance between the street or place line and the nearest
portion of the main building or any projections thereof other than the projections of the
usual uncovered steps, uncovered balconies, or uncovered porch (excluding decks). A
corner lot shall have two front yards for the purposes of determining building setbacks.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the rear of a lot and being the entire horizontal
distance between the rear lot line and the nearest portion of the rear of the main building
or any projections thereof other than the projections of uncovered steps, uncovered
balconies or uncovered porches (excluding decks). On all lots the rear yard shall be in
the rear of the front yard.
YARD, SIDE: A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot, and extending
from the required front yard to the required rear yard, and being the entire horizontal
II-31
distance between a side lot line and the nearest portion of the side of the main building
or any projections thereto.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The City Manager or his I her designee who is responsible
for the administration and enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance. (Amended, Ordinance
No. 2011-35 June 6; Ordinance No. 2010-34, May 17)
II-32
SECTION Ill. DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES THEREOF
A. DISTRICTS; PURPOSE AND INTENT
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the City of Decatur is hereby divided into districts as
follows, with the purpose and intent of each district listed herein:
R-1 Single Family Residence District: The purpose of this district, and of districts
R-2 and R-3 is to encourage and protect single-family neighborhoods and the
land uses which are compatible with them.
R-2 Single Family Residence District
R-3 Single Family Residence District
R-5 Two-Family Residence District: The purpose of this district is to permit
duplex-style residential development in addition to single-family residential
development.
R-6 Multiple Dwelling District: This district is designed to permit multi-family
residential development.
0-1 Office District: This district is designed to permit and encourage the
compatible development of professional, office, and institutional uses in areas
which are suitable for such activities.
B-1 Neighborhood Shopping District: This district is designed to encourage and
facilitate commercial activities generally serving the neighborhoods in which
they are located.
B-2 Commercial District: This district is designed to serve the shopping needs of
regional geographic areas larger than the B-1 district, and allowing a greater
intensity of uses.
B-3 Planned Shopping District. The purpose of this district is to allow a greater
flexibility of uses than is available in other commercial districts if the entire
district is planned and developed as a unit.
B-4 Central Business District: The purpose of this district is to address the broad
variety of land use needs that are unique to Downtown Decatur.
PMR-1 Park Mobile Home Residence District: The purpose of this district is to
assure that mobile home development is a safe and affordable housing option
for Decatur residents.
M-1 Intensive CommerciaVLight Industrial District: The purpose of this district
is to allow the development of light industrial uses, along with commercial and
service uses designed to serve the employees and clients of the light
manufacturing facilities.
M-2 Heavy Industrial District: The purpose of this district is to assure that
sufficient land is set aside, with sufficient infrastructure and access to
transportation modes and corridors, for heavy and intensive manufacturing,
IIl-1
agricultural processing, and other uses that are vital to the community's
economic development
M-3 Limited Industrial District: The purpose of this district is to allow for limited
industrial uses that are free from offense in a modem, planned and orderly
environment, and to provide opportunities for work closer to residential areas
in order to decrease commuting time.
PD Planned Development District: The purpose of this district is to permit
multiple land uses on the same site, or to insure development that conforms to
the Comprehensive Land Use Plan or meets other City goals, and which are
designed and built to higher aesthetic standards. Development in the PD zone
will be subject to intensive review and will be subject to the terms of a
development order approved by City Council. Use of the PD District mainly
for the purpose of avoiding the standards required by other zoning districts is
prohibited.
B. MAPS
The boundaries of these districts are hereby established on the map accompanying and
made a part of this Ordinance which is designated as the "Zoning District Map". The
Zoning District Map and all the notations, references and other information shown thereon
are a part of this Ordinance and shall have the same force and effect as if such map and all
of the notations, references and other information shown thereon were all fully set forth or
described herein. The Zoning District Map shall be properly attested and shall be kept on
file with the City Clerk of the City of Decatur.
C. DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
1. District boundaries-generally.
The district boundary lines on said map are intended to follow either: center lines of
streets or alleys, or lot lines, and where the districts designated on the map are bounded
approximately by such street or alley centerline or lot lines, the street or alley centerline
or lot line shall be construed to be the boundary of the district unless such boundary is
otherwise indicated on the map. In the case of unsubdivided property, the district
boundary lines shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the Zoning
District Map or by dimensions.
2. Railroad lines as boundaries
Where the boundary of a district follows an active or abandoned railroad line, such
boundary shall be deemed to be located midway between the main tracks of said
railroad line.
3. Properties annexed into the City.
All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the City of Decatur shall be
automatically classified in the R-1, Single Family District, until otherwise changed by
ordinance, after public hearing.
4. Vacation of streets, alleys, and public rights of way
III-2
Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated by official action of the City
Council, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall
be automatically extended to the ownership limits of such vacation, and all area
included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all appropriate
regulations of the extended districts.
5. Submerged lands
All areas within the corporate limits of the City of Decatur, which are under water and
not shown as included within any district, shall be subject to all of the regulations of
the district that immediately adjoins the water area. Where said water area adjoins two
or more districts, the boundaries of each district shall be construed to extend to the
center of the water area.
6. Determining boundaries in absence of railroad lines, streets, etc
Where a zoning district boundary does not clearly follow any of the features mentioned
above, its exact location on the ground shall be determined by measurement according
to map scale.
7. Authority of the Zoning Administrator
In any case in which the exact location of a zoning district boundary is not clear, the
Zoning Administrator shall refuse the issuance of a building permit or certificate of
use. The applicant may then appeal in writing to the Zoning Board of Appeals for an
interpretation and decision, in accordance with Section XXX:. In such cases, the
applicant shall be exempted from the fee customarily charged by the Board for
reviewing appeals.
D. SCHEDULE OF LAND USE CLASSIFICATIONS
1. Prohibition of uses inconsistent with this Ordinance
Following the effective date of this ordinance, no structure or use shall be built, moved,
used, or occupied unless permitted by the zoning district in which the structure or land
is located.
2. Conditional uses
No use that is classified as a Conditional Use shall be established unless approval has
been granted by the City Council, pursuant to Section XXII of this ordinance.
3. Existing uses
a. Any use legally established as a "special use," "planned unit development" or
"residential development plan" under the provisions of the zoning regulations
in force prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall be considered to be
conforming for the purposes of this ordinance and shall continue to be subject
to any and all conditions placed upon it at the time of original adoption.
b. Any other legally-established use existing prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, which is allowed as a Conditional Use in a district under provisions
of this ordinance, shall be a non-conforming use, and shall not be replaced or
III-3
expanded in area or intensity without approval of a conditional use permit,
pursuant to Section XXII of this ordinance.
III-4
SECTION IV. COMPLIANCE WITH THE REGULATIONS
A. COMPLIANCE WITH LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS:
Except as hereinafter specifically provided:
1. Permitted uses
No land shall be used except for a purpose permitted in the district in which it is located.
Existing non-conforming uses may continue consistent with Section XXIII of this
Ordinance.
2. Alterations to existing buildings
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally
altered, nor shall any building be used, except for a use permitted in the district in which
such building is located.
3. Height limitations
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered
to exceed the height limit herein established for the district in which such building is
located.
4. Area regulations
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered
except in conformity with the area regulations of the district in which such building is
located.
5. Setbacks
The minimum yards, parking spaces, and open spaces, including lot area per family,
required by this Ordinance for each and every building existing at the time of passage
of this Ordinance or for any building hereafter erected, shall not be encroached upon
or considered as part of the yard or open space required for any other building, nor shall
any lot area be reduced below the requirements of this Ordinance for the district in
which such lot is located.
6. Off-street parking and loading regulations
a. No building shall be erected or structurally altered to the extent specifically
provided hereinafter except in conformity with the off-street parking and
loading regulations of the district in which such building is located.
b. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided for all uses in each zoning district,
in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in Section XXIV.
7. Only one main building per lot; exceptions
Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a lot as defined in this Ordinance
and in no case shall there be more than one main building on any lot in any District,
except industrial buildings being used for industrial purposes in the M-1 Light
Industrial District and M-2 Heavy Industrial District, and also except buildings, the
IV-1
location of which is approved in a Planned Unit Development existing at the time of
adoption of this Ordinance, in a B-3 Planned Shopping District, or in the PD District
as provided in this Ordinance.
8. Frontage and access to public streets
Each lot shall have frontage on, and direct access to, a public street or way that is
improved to City standards, unless the Council shall otherwise direct, by approval of a
subdivision plat so showing submitted, heard and considered in the manner provided
in the Subdivision Regulations for the City, or absent such subdivision plat, unless the
Council upon its own motion or upon petition submitted, heard and considered in the
manner as provided in this Ordinance shall expressly permit such access or approved
frontage on a private street, lane, place or way connected with a public street or way.
9. Recreational vehicles-residential use prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to occupy any recreational vehicle or to provide any recreational
vehicle with water, sewer, gas, electric, or other utility service while such recreational
vehicle is parked or stored in any district established hereunder.
10. Signage:
All signs in any zoning district shall confonn to the regulations in Section XXV.
11. Essential Services
Essential services, as defined herein, shall be a permitted use in all zoning districts.
12. Outdoor storage
Except in the M-1 and M-2 districts, or as expressly permitted herein, outdoor storage
of equipment and materials is prohibited. Vehicles may be stored outdoors unless
expressly prohibited herein. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
13. Uses not catalogued; Similar uses.
In the case of land uses not catalogued as permitted or conditional uses in nonresidential
districts (as enumerated in Sections X through XVIII inclusive), applicants
for land use changes may seek a determination from the Zoning Administrator, who
will base his/her opinion upon the nearest reasonable use. These determinations may
be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals as provided in Section XXX of this
Ordinance. In the case of such appeals, the City shall charge no filing fee to the
applicant. (Amend, Ordinance No. 2010-34, May 17, 2010)
B. INTERPRETATION
It shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Administrator, or his/her designee, to interpret
the provisions of this Ordinance. Decisions of the Zoning Administrator, or his/her
designee, may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals as provided for in Section XXX.
(Amend, Ordinance No. 2010-34, May 17, 2010)
IV-2
SECTION V. R-1 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
A. PERMITTED USES
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Single family dwelling
2. Accessory building, structure, or use: Accessory buildings or structures are only
permitted to be constructed and I or continued if there is a main building or structure
present. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
3. Foster home accommodating no more than three (3) juveniles.
4. Home or cooperative gardening
5. Home occupation
6. Modular home, when meeting State of Illinois specifications for "Certified
Modular" and erected on a permanent foundation that conforms to City of Decatur
codes.
7. Place of Worship. All structures shall be located at least forty (40) feet from any
side or rear lot line.
8. Public Uses, provided that all buildings shall be located at least forty (40) feet from
any side or rear lot line:
a. Community center
b. Library
c. Parks and playgrounds
d. Public art gallery
e. Public museum
9. Residential Care Home, Small, when located at least 1,000 feet from any other
Residential Care Home
10. School: public, parochial or private. All structures shall be located at least forty
(40) feet from any side or rear lot line.
B. CONDITIONAL USES
Consistent with the provisions of Section XXII of this Ordinance, the following uses may
be allowed with a conditional use permit:
1. Cemetery or cremation garden, provided that all above ground structures
(excluding monuments or grave markers) shall be located at least forty (40) feet
from any side or rear lot line.
2. Day care home, large
V-1
3. Golf course or country club
4. Government building or use
5. Historic Neighborhood Use
6. Neighborhood Preservation Use
7. Public utility facilities, regional
8. Swim club.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-02, January 20, 2004)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS
1. Minimum Lot Area (square feet): 20,000
2. Minimum Lot Width (feet): 80
3. Minimum Front Yard (feet): 30
4. Minimum Rear Yard (feet): 20
5. Minimum Side Yards (feet):
a. Aggregate: 20
b. Minimum Side: 10
6. Building Height:
a. No. of stories: 2 Y2
b. Maximum height (feet): 35
7. Minimum Distance Between Structures (feet): 8
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-02, January 20, 2004)
V-2
SECTION VI. R-2 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
A. PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses in the R-2 zone are as follows:
1. Single family dwelling
2. Accessory building, structure, or use: Accessory buildings or structures are only
permitted to be constructed and I or continued if there is a main building or structure
present. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
3. Foster home accommodating no more than three (3) juveniles.
4. Home or cooperative gardening
5. Home occupation
6. Modular home, when meeting State of Illinois specifications for "Certified
Modular" and erected on a permanent foundation that conforms to City of Decatur
codes.
7. Place of Worship. All structures shall be located at least forty (40) feet from any
side or rear lot line.
8. Public Uses. All buildings shall be located at least forty (40) feet from any side or
rear lot line.
a. Art gallery, public
b. Community Center
c. Library
d. Museum
e. Park
f. Playground
9. Residential Care Home, small, when located at least 1,000 feet from any other
Residential Care Home
10. School: public, parochial or private. All structures shall be located at least forty
( 40) feet from any side or rear lot line.
B. CONDITIONAL USES:
Consistent with the provisions of Section XXII of this Ordinance, the following uses may
be allowed with a conditional use permit:
1. Cemetery or cremation garden, provided that all above ground structures
(excluding monuments or grave markers) shall be located at least forty (40) feet
from any side or rear lot line.
VI-1
2. Day care home, large
3. Government building or use
4. Histmic Neighborhood Use
5. Neighborhood Preservation Use
6. Public utility facilities, regional
7. Swim club.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-02, January 20, 2004)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS:
1. Minimum Lot Area (square feet): 9,000
2. Minimum Lot Width (feet): 60
3. Minimum Front Yard (feet): 25
4. Minimum Rear Yard (feet): 16
5. Minimum Side Yards (feet):
a. Aggregate: 16
b. Minimum Side: 8
6. Building Height:
a. No. of stories: 2 Y2
b. Maximum height (feet): 35
7. Minimum Distance Between Structures (feet): 8
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
VI-2
SECTION VII. R-3 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
A. PERMITTED USES
Permitted uses in the R-3 zone are as follows:
1. Single family dwelling
2. Accessory building, structure, or use: Accessory buildings or structures are only
permitted to be constructed and I or continued if there is a main building or structure
present. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
3. Foster home accommodating no more than three (3) juveniles.
4. Home or cooperative gardening
5. Home occupation
6. Modular home, when meeting State of Illinois specifications for "Certified
Modular" and erected on a permanent foundation that conforms to City of Decatur
codes.
7. Place of Worship. All structures shall be located at least forty (40) feet from any
side or rear lot line.
8. Public Uses, provided that all buildings shall be located at least forty (40) feet from
any side or rear lot line:
a. Community center
b. Library
c. Parks and playgrounds
d. Public art gallery
e. Public museum
9. Residential Care Home, small, when located at least 1,000 feet from any other
Residential Care Home
10. School: public, parochial or private. All structures shall be located at least forty
( 40) feet from any side or rear lot line.
B. CONDITIONAL USES
Consistent with the provisions of Section XXII of this Ordinance, the following uses may
be allowed with a conditional use permit:
1. Cemetery or cremation garden, provided that all above ground structures
(excluding monuments or grave markers) shall be located at least forty (40) feet
from any side or rear lot line.
2. Day care home, large
VII-1
3. Government building or use
4. Historic neighborhood use
5. Neighborhood Preservation Use
6. Public utility facilities, regional
7. Swim club
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-02, January 20, 2004)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS
1. Minimum Lot Area (square feet): 6,000
2. Minimum Lot Width (feet): 50
3. Minimum Front Yard (feet): 25
4. Minimum Rear Yard (feet): 12
5. Minimum Side Yards (feet):
a. Aggregate: 12
b. Minimum Side: 5
6. Building Height:
a. No. of stories: 2 Y2
b. Maximum height (feet): 35
7. Minimum Distance Between Structures (feet): 8
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
VII-2
SECTION VIII. R-5 TWO FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
A. PERMITTED USES
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Single family dwelling
2. Two family dwelling
3. Accessory building, structure, or use: Accessory buildings or structures are only
permitted to be constructed and I or continued if there is a main building or structure
present. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
4. Foster home accommodating no more than three (3) juveniles.
5. Home or cooperative gardening
6. Home occupation
7. Modular home, when meeting State of Illinois specifications for "Certified
Modular" and erected on a permanent foundation that conforms to City of Decatur
codes.
8. Place of Worship. All structures shall be located at least forty ( 40) feet from any
side or rear lot line.
9. Public Uses, provided that all buildings shall be located at least forty (40) feet from
any side or rear lot line:
a. Community center
b. Library
c. Parks and playgrounds
d. Public art gallery
e. Public museum
10. Residential Care Home, small, when located at least 1,000 feet from any other
Residential Care Home
11. School: public, parochial or private. All structures shall be located at least forty
( 40) feet from any side or rear lot line.
B. CONDITIONAL USES
Consistent with the provisions of Section XXII of this Ordinance, the following uses may
be allowed with a conditional use permit:
1. Barber shop or beauty parlor, subject to the requirements for home occupations.
2. Bed and breakfast establishment
VIII-I
3. Cemetery or cremation garden, provided that all above ground structures
(excluding monuments or grave markers) shall be located at least forty (40) feet
from any side or rear lot line.
4. Day care home, large
5. Government building or use
6. Historic Neighborhood Use
7. Neighborhood Preservation Use
8. Public utility facilities, regional
9. Swim club.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-02, January 20, 2004)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS
1. Minimum Lot Area (square feet): 5,000
2. Minimum Lot Width (feet): 50
3. Minimum Front Yard (feet): 25
4. Minimum Rear Yard (feet): 12
5. Minimum Side Yards (feet):
a. Aggregate: 12
b. Minimum Side: 5
6. Building Height:
a. No. of stories: 2 Y2
b. Maximum height (feet): 35
7. Minimum Distance Between Structures (feet): 8
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
VIII-2
SECTION IX. R-6 MULTIPLE DWELLING DISTRICT
A. PERMITTED USES
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Multiple family dwelling
2. Two family dwelling
3. Single family dwelling
4. Accessory building, structure or use: Accessory buildings or structures are only
permitted to be constructed and I or continued if there is a main building or structure
present. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
5. Assisted living facility
6. Boarding or lodging house
7. Clubs: fraternal and private.
8. Congregate elderly housing.
9. Day care center: A fenced, outdoor play area shall accommodate 25 percent of the
licensed capacity at any one time. A minimum area of 75 square feet per child for
the total number of children using the area at any one time shall be provided or 800
square feet, whichever is greater. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-02)
10. Foster home accommodating no more than three (3) juveniles.
11. Government building or use
12. Health care uses: Family residential care facility; hospice; intermediate and long
term care facilities.
13. Home occupation
14. Home or cooperative gardening
15. Modular home, when meeting State of Illinois specifications for "Certified
Modular" and erected on a permanent foundation that conforms to City of Decatur
codes.
16. Place of Worship. All structures shall be located at least forty (40) feet from any
side or rear lot line.
17. Public Uses, provided that all buildings shall be located at least forty (40) feet from
any side or rear lot line:
a. Community center
b. Library
IX-1
c. Parks and playgrounds
d. Public art gallery
e. Public museum
18. Religious facility
19. Residential Care Home, large or small, when located at least 1,000 feet from any
other Residential Care Home
20. Retirement housing facilities
21. School: public, parochial or private. All structures shall be located at least forty
(40) feet from any side or rear lot line.
B. CONDITIONAL USES
Consistent with the provisions of Section XXII of this Ordinance, the following uses may
be allowed with a conditional use permit:
1. Barber or beauty parlor, subject to the requirements for home occupations
2. Bed and breakfast establishment
3. Cemetery or cremation garden, provided that all above ground structures
(excluding monuments or grave markers) shall be located at least forty (40) feet
from any side or rear lot line.
4. Dormitory, fraternity house, or sorority house
5. Historic Neighborhood Use
6. Neighborhood Preservation Use
7. Public utility facilities, regional
8. Swim club
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-02, January 20, 2004)
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS
1. Minimum Lot Area (square feet):
a. One Unit: 4,000
b. Two Units: 5,000
c. Multiple Units (3 or more), on a property where the entire property is within
900 feet of the B-4 District:
i. Minimum Lot Area: 5,000 square feet
ii. Per unit: 750 square feet
d. All other multiple units:
IX-2
1. Minimum Lot Area: 5,000 feet
ii. Per each efficiency unit: 750 square feet
iii. Per each I-bedroom unit: 900 square feet
iv. Per each 2-bedroom unit: 1,200 square feet
v. Per each unit with 3 or more bedrooms: 1,500 square feet
2. Minimum Lot Width (feet): 80
3. Minimum Front Yard (feet): 25
4. Minimum Rear Yard (feet): 20
5. Minimum Side Yards (feet):
a. Aggregate: 12
b. Minimum Side:
1. One- or two-story buildings: 5
11. Three or more stories: 8
6. Building Height (see Section XXI for exceptions to height regulations):
a. No. of stories: 3
b. Maximum height (feet): 35
7. Minimum Distance Between Structures (feet): 8
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-02, January 20, 2004)
IX-3
SECTION X. 0-1 OFFICE DISTRICT
A. PERMITTED USES
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Accessory building or use: Accessory buildings or structures are only permitted to
be constructed and I or continued if there is a main building or structure present.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
2. Animal Clinic or Hospital, without outdoor kennels (Amended, Ordinance No.
2004-27, April 19, 2004)
3. Assisted living facility
4. Automated teller machines
5. Dancing or music academy
6. Day care centers: A fenced, outdoor play area shall accommodate 25 percent of the
licensed capacity at any one time. A minimum area of 75 square feet per child for
the total number of children using the area at any one time shall be provided or 800
square feet, whichever is greater. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-02)
7. Financial institutions and services, with drive through facilities; however, all
amplified equipment shall be located at least 25 feet from any rear or side lot line
in a residential district. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2006-108, November 20, 2006)
8. Government building or use
9. Health care uses:
a. Family residential care facility
b. Hospice
c. Hospital or sanitarium (excepting there from a criminal, mental, or animal
hospital)
d. Intermediate and long term care facilities
e. Medical or dental offices, clinics or laboratories
f. Medical equipment sales and rental
g. Prescription pharmacy
10. Home occupation, in conjunction with an allowed residential use
11. Personal services:
a. Clothing alteration and repair
b. Hair stylist, beauty parlor, or barber shop
c. Laundry and dry cleaning
X-1
d. Shoe shining and repair
e. Tanning spa
12. Professional office uses.
13. Public Uses, provided that all buildings shall be located at least forty (40) feet from
any side or rear lot line:
a. Community center
b. Library
c. Parks and playgrounds
d. Public art gallery
e. Public museum
14. Studio
15. Similar uses: those uses that are determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
similar to the uses enumerated herein and are consistent with the purpose and intent
of the district. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34, May 17, 2010)
B. CONDITIONAL USES
Consistent with the provisions of Section XXII of this Ordinance, the following uses may
be allowed by conditional use permit:
1. Cemetery or cremation garden, provided that all above ground structures
(excluding monuments or grave markers) shall be located at least forty (40) feet
from any side or rear lot line.
2. Congregate elderly housing.
3. Day care home, large, in conjunction with an allowed residential use
4. Drive-up or drive-through facilities attached to an allowed use; however, all
amplified equipment shall be located at least 25 feet from any side or rear lot line
in a residential district.
5. Laboratory, research and development
6. Mixed use-residential and any combination of office and/or commercial in one
building
7. Multiple dwelling
8. Public utility facilities, regional
X-2
9. Retirement housing facilities
10. Schools, Commercial: Para-professional
11. Single family dwelling unit
12. Swim club
13. Two-family dwelling
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-02, January 20, 2004)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS
1. Minimum Lot Area (square feet):
a. Non-residential uses: 4,000
b. Residential uses, when permitted, shall follow the minimum lot area
requirements of the R-6 Multiple Family District
2. Minimum Lot Width (feet): none
3. Minimum Front Yard (feet): 25
4. Minimum Rear Yard (feet): 12
5. Minimum Side Yards (feet):
a. Aggregate: 12
b. Minimum Side:
i. One- or two-story buildings: 5
ii. Three story buildings: 8
6. Building Height (see Section XXI for exceptions to height regulations):
a. No. of stories: 3
b. Maximum height (feet): 45
7. Minimum Distance Between Structures (feet): 8
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
X-3
SECTION XI. 8-1 NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING DISTRICT
A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
A building or premises in aggregate shall not exceed six thousand (6,000) square feet of
gross floor area, unless approved as a Conditional Use.
B. PERMITTED USES
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Accessory buildings, structures and uses: Accessory buildings or structures are
only permitted to be constructed and I or continued if there is a main building or
structure present. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
2. Animal Clinic or Hospital, without outdoor kennels (Amended, Ordinance No.
2004-27, April 19, 2004)
3. Automated teller machines
4. Automobile repair and service, minor
5. Automotive service station, subject to the following:
a. There shall be no more than five persons employed in a single shift, excluding
there from the owner( s) of the establishment;
b. All repair activities shall be conducted within an enclosed structure;
c. The use shall be set back at least 50 feet from any side lot line in a residential
district;
d. Tires and other new products for sale may be displayed outdoors only during
business hours. Used or junk tires may not be stored outdoors.
e. The storage of gasoline and other motor fuels shall be underground, and no
propane or similar hydrocarbon products may be sold or stored upon the
premises.
6. Business service establishments, on-site
7. Convenience food and beverage store, not including extended hours.
8. Dancing or music academy
9. Day care center: A fenced, outdoor play area shall accommodate 25 percent of the
licensed capacity at any one time. A minimum area of 75 square feet per child for
the total number of children using the area at any one time shall be provided or 800
square feet, whichever is greater. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-02)
10. Financial institutions and services with drive through facilities; however, all
amplified equipment shall be located at least 25 feet from any rear or side lot line
in a residential district. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2006-108, November 20, 2006)
XI-1
11. Food stores, neighborhood and specialty, not including supermarkets.
12. Health care uses:
a. Medical or dental offices, clinics or laborat01ies
b. Medical equipment sales and rental
c. Prescription pharmacy
13. Personal services:
a. Clothing alteration and repair
b. Hair stylist, beauty parlor, or barber shop
c. Laundry and dry cleaning
d. Shoe shining and repair
e. Tanning spa
14. Pet services
15. Professional office uses.
16. Public Uses, provided that all buildings shall be located at least forty (40) feet from
any side or rear lot line:
a. Community center
b. Library
c. Parks and playgrounds
d. Public art gallery
e. Public museum
17. Public utility facilities, regional
18. Rental establishments, excluding auto and truck rental
19. Repair shops
20. Restaurants: carry-out; convenience; fast food; sit down.
21. Retail uses:
a. Automotive parts store
b. Clothing store
c. Drug store
d. Florist
e. Specialty retail shops
f. Hardware store
XI-2
g. Hobby, toy, and game shops
h. Newsstand
i. Pet shop
J. Variety store
k. Used merchandise stores.
22. Studio
23. Similar uses: those uses that are determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
similar to the uses enumerated herein and are consistent with the purpose and intent
of the district.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34, May 17, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-02, January 20, 2004)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
C. CONDITIONAL USES
Consistent with the provisions of Section XXII of this Ordinance, the following uses may
be allowed with a conditional use permit:
1. Any of the uses in Paragraph B of this section (Permitted Uses) that exceed 6000
square feet of gross leasable area.
2. Cemetery or cremation garden, provided that all above ground structures
(excluding monuments or grave markers) shall be located at least forty (40) feet
from any side or rear lot line.
3. Convenience food and beverage store, extended hours.
4. Drive-up or drive-through facilities attached to an allowed use; however, all
amplified equipment shall be located at least 25 feet from any side or rear lot line
in a residential district.
5. Mixed use-residential and any combination of office and/or commercial in one
building
6. Schools, Commercial: Para-professional.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-02, January 20, 2004)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
D. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS
1. Minimum Lot Area (square feet): 6,500
2. Minimum Lot Width (feet): no requirement
3. Minimum Front Yard (feet): 25
XI-3
4. Minimum Rear Yard (feet):
a. Adjacent to property in a residential district: 25
b. All others: no requirement
5. Minimum Side Yards (feet):
a. Adjacent to property in a residential district: 5
b. All others: no requirement
6. Building Height (see Section XXI for exceptions to height regulations):
a. No. of stories: 2
b. Maximum height (feet): 35
7. Minimum Distance Between Structures (feet): 8
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
XI-4
SECTION XII. B-2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
A. PERMITTED USES
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Accessory buildings, structures and uses: Accessory buildings or structures are
only permitted to be constructed and I or continued if there is a main building or
structure present. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
2. Animal Clinic or Hospital, without outdoor kennels (Amended, Ordinance No.
2004-27, April 19, 2004)
3. Animal kennel (indoor only)
4. Automated teller machines
5. Automobile repair and service, major or minor; excepting there from service to
buses, trailers and semi-trucks; also excepting body and fender repair and painting
6. Automobile service station
7. Automobile and equipment dealers, including rental, passenger automobiles,
passenger trucks and passenger vans. (Amended, Ordinance 2016-36, June 20,
2016)
8. Bar or cocktail lounge, when located not less than 100 feet from a side lot line of
any property within a residential district.
9. Building materials sales Outdoor storage is permitted only when enclosed within
a site-break fenced area.
10. Business service establishments, on-site and off-site
11. Check cashing services.
12. Clubs: fraternal, membership organization, and private.
13. Consumer Credit Services, when located at least 1500 feet from any other
Consumer Credit Service. Measurements shall be made from the nearest point on
the lot lines of each property containing the proposed and existing Consumer Credit
Service. (Amended, Ordinance 2013-12; March 4, 2013)
14. Contractors and builders: Outdoor storage is permitted only if fully within an
enclosed site-break fenced area. Heavy construction equipment is prohibited.
15. Convenience food and beverage store, including extended hours.
16. Cultural facilities, private
17. Dancing or music academy
XII-1
18. Day care center A fenced, outdoor play area shall accommodate 25 percent of the
licensed capacity at any one time. A minimum area of 75 square feet per child for
the total number of children using the area at any one time shall be provided or 800
square feet, whichever is greater. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-02)
19. Drive-through or drive-up facilities attached to an allowed use; however, all
amplified equipment shall be located at least 25 feet from any side or rear lot line
in a residential district.
20. Fabrication, Commercial
21. Financial institutions and services
22. Food stores, neighborhood and specialty.
23. Freezer and locker meat providers
24. Funeral home
25. Gasoline station
26. Government building or use
27. Health care uses:
a. Medical or dental offices, clinics or laboratories
b. Medical equipment sales and rental
c. Prescription pharmacy
28. Hotel or motel
29. Motion picture theater
30. Non-store retailers
31. Parking or storage garage
32. Pawnbroker (Amended, Ordinance 2013-12; March 4, 2013)
33. Personal services
34. Pet services
35. Place of Worship. All structures shall be located at least forty (40) feet from any
side or rear lot line located within a residential district.
36. Professional office uses.
37. Public Uses, provided that all buildings shall be located at least forty (40) feet from
any side or rear lot line:
a. Community center
b. Library
XII-2
c. Parks and playgrounds
d. Public art gallery
e. Public museum
38. Public utility facilities, regional
39. Radio or television broadcasting station or studio
40. Recreation, commercial: indoor facilities.
41. Religious facility
42. Rental establishments
43. Rental, passenger automobiles, passenger trucks and passenger vans. (Amended,
Ordinance 2016-36, June 20, 2016)
44. Repair shops
45. Residential care home (large or small), when located at least 1,000 feet from any
other residential care home.
46. Restaurants: carry-out; convenience; fast food; drive-in; sit down, temporary
facilities.
47. Retail uses. Outdoor storage is permitted only when fully enclosed within a sitebreak
fenced area.
48. Schools, Commercial: Para-professional.
49. Supermarkets, including superstores and warehouse markets
50. Studio
51. Similar uses: those uses that are determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
similar to the uses enumerated herein and are consistent with the purpose and intent
of the district. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34, May 17, 2010)
52. Tattoo or body piercing parlor
53. Video Gaming Parlor (Amended, Ordinance No. 2015-40, August 17, 2015)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-02, January 20, 2004)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
B. CONDITIONAL USES
Consistent with the provisions of Section XXII of this Ordinance, the following special
uses may be allowed with a conditional use permit:
1. Ambulance service
XII-3
2. Animal Clinic or Hospital with outdoor kennel located at least 100 feet from any
Residential District. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-27, April 19, 2004)
3. Animal kennel, provided that any outdoor kennels be located not less than 100
feet from a property line of any property located in a residential district.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-27, June 5, 2017)
4. Car wash, automatic or coin operated self service
5. Cemetery or cremation garden, provided that all above ground structures
(excluding monuments or grave markers) shall be located at least forty (40) feet
from any side or rear lot line
6. Crematory or Crematorium as an ancillary use to a funeral home
7. Mixed use-residential and any combination of office and/or commercial in one
building
8. Recreation, commercial: outdoor facilities, when located a minimum of 100 feet
from any side or rear lot line in a residential district
9. Schools, Commercial: Trade and technical
10. Swim club
11. Licensed Truck Stop Establishment
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-19, April 20, 2009)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-02, January 20, 2004)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-47, September 17, 2018)
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS
1. Minimum Lot Area (square feet): 10,000
2. Minimum Lot Width (feet): no requirement
3. Minimum Front Yard (feet): 25
4. Minimum Rear Yard (feet):
a. Adjacent to property in a residential district: 25
b. All others: no requirement
5. Minimum Side Yards (feet):
a. Adjacent to property in a residential district: 5
b. All others: no requirement
XII-4
6. Building Height (see Section XXI for exceptions to height regulations):
a. No. of stories: 3
b. Maximum height (feet): 45
7. Minimum Distance Between Structures (feet): 8
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-02, January 20, 2004)
XII-5
SECTION XIII. B-3 PLANNED SHOPPING CENTER DISTRICT
A. GENERALLY
The B-3 Planned Shopping Center District shall be laid out and developed as a unit
according to an approved plan as provided below in order to accomplish its purposes to
provide for modern retail shopping facilities of integrated design in appropriate locations
to serve residential neighborhoods.
B. PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
1. Buildings or premises shall be used only for the uses listed as permitted or
conditional uses in the B-1 and B-2 Commercial Districts.
2. Any conditional uses requested for the development at the time of initial petition
may be approved as part of the B-3 plan for the proposed shopping center; however,
any subsequent conditional uses must be approved according to the procedures
outlined in Section XX.II.
3. Any use listed as a conditional use in the B-1 District that is also listed as a
Permitted Use in the B-2 District shall be considered to be a permitted use in the
B-3 District.
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS
1. Minimum Lot Area (square feet): 3 acres for the total project. No single lot within
the contiguous project may be less than 20,000 square feet.
2. Minimum Lot Width (feet): no requirement
3. Setbacks: The location and arrangement of buildings shall be specifically approved
according to the procedures in this section, subject to the following:
a. No building shall be closer than 50 feet from any side lot line of any property
located within a residential district.
b. No building shall be closer than 25 feet from any rear lot line of any property
located within a residential district.
4. Building Height (see Section XXI):
a. Maximum height (feet): 35
b. Additional height exception: A part of the shopping center containing a ground
floor area of not more than 10,000 square feet may be erected to a height of six
( 6) stories or ninety (90) feet when located not less than 150 feet from all
property lines and when specifically approved as to arrangement and design, as
specified hereinafter, and provided further that the aggregate ground area
occupied by buildings shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total area
of the shopping center site.
XIII-1
D. PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
Off-street parking shall be provided on a ratio of not less than one automobile space for
every 200 square feet of building floor area, the floor area to be determined as provided in
Section XXIV. However, if the center proposed has known uses that need more spaces
than the above ratio, such as, but not limited to, motion picture theaters, bowling alleys, or
restaurants, then the required off-street parking as set forth in Section XXIV shall apply
for the building area showing that use. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-02, January 20,
2004)
E. APPLICATION
The owner or owners of a tract of land which comprises three (3) acres or more may submit
to the City Council a plan for the use and development of such tract for the purpose of and
meeting the requirements set forth in this Section. Said plan may be accompanied by
evidence concerning the compatibility of the project and its effects on surrounding property
and other physical conditions. The plan and supporting evidence shall include each of the
following:
1. A site plan showing the following information:
a. Existing and proposed contours, at a minimum of 2 foot intervals
b. Location, setbacks, exterior dimensions and square footage of all structures.
c. Location and dimensions of all access points adjacent to site
d. Location, number and dimensions of parking spaces, loading spaces and traffic
circulation on site
e. Location and size of existing and proposed natural waterways, sanitary sewers,
storm sewerage systems, and water distribution system.
f. Areas subject to flooding
g. Landscaping, subject to the minimum requirements of Section XXVIII, and any
additional landscaping as required by the Plan Commission and City Council
h. Lighting, including drawings indicating light output within and adjacent to the
property.
i. Signage, including elevations, dimensions, and locations of all proposed signs
J. Pedestrian walkways
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
2. Traffic survey report by engineers with recognized expertise showing the
following. This requirement may be waived by the Public Works Director if the
anticipated impact is minimal.
a. The effect of the proposed shopping center on the nearby and adjacent street
system
b. Estimated traffic volume generated by proposed shopping center, peak and offpeak
hours.
XIII-2
3. Such additional reasonable provisions related to the development of the property as
appear necessary or desirable for the protection of adjoining or nearby properties.
F. REVIEW AND APPROVAL
1. Technical Review Committee
The Technical Review Committee (TRC) shall review the site plan at a date scheduled
by the Secretary of the TRC. The applicant and his/her design professionals may
participate in this meeting. Based upon the information provided by the applicant, and
other information that may come to their notice, the TRC may recommend approval,
conditional approval, or denial to the Plan Commission. The recommendation of the
TRC will be compiled into draft conditions of approval. If the TRC determines that
more information is needed before the application can be approved, they may place the
application on hold, in which case the TRC will advise the applicant as to the contents
which will be required before approval can be recommended. Applications placed on
hold will be rescheduled to the next meeting of the TRC unless the applicant requests
more time.
2. Plan Commission review
After the rezoning application and site plan have been filed with the Secretary to the
Plan Commission, and have received the recommendation of the TRC, said application,
site plan, and draft conditions of approval will be considered by the Plan Commission
at a public hearing. The Plan Commission will review the application, site plan, and
draft conditions of approval and will make findings concerning the consistency of the
application with the comprehensive plan, and with the zoning ordinance and other land
development regulations if appropriate; and, based upon these findings, will
recommend to the City Council that the project be approved, approved with conditions,
or disapproved.
3. Plan Commission findings
In making its recommendations, the Plan Commission shall make the following
findings:
a. Whether the proposed development is being developed in accordance with an
integrated overall design plan, and can be developed within that plan.
b. Whether the location and arrangement of buildings, signage, parking areas,
lighting, landscaping, and other facilities are compatible with surrounding uses.
c. Whether the proposed development will have an adverse impact on any nearby
residentially zoned properties
d. Whether adequate provisions have been included in the plan to prohibit the
storage of merchandise, materials, or equipment that would constitute a hazard
or seriously interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or that would create a
conflict between vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
e. Whether roads, driveways, parking and loading areas shall be constructed in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the City
XIII-3
4. Council action
City Council will review the recommended findings of the Plan Commission along
with the application, site plan, and draft conditions of approval, and will approve or
disapprove the application. In the event that Council chooses to approve the
application, the approval shall be contingent upon the conditions of approval listed in
the final B-3 Ordinance.
G. CONSTRUCTION
1. All construction shall be in conformance with the final B-3 Ordinance as approved
by the City Council.
2. The Zoning Administrator may approve minor changes in locations, siting or
character in the final development order, provided that no changes may be
authorized that may lead to the following: (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34)
a. An increase of twenty percent (20%) or more in the size of any building or
structure (excluding signage); (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-44)
b. A change in location of any building or structure by more than 10 feet in any
direction;
c. Make changes beyond any minimum or maximum requirements set forth in the
approved development order.
H. SIGNAGE
Signage in the B-3 district shall be consistent with the terms of the approved final B-3
Ordinance.
I. DELAY IN CONSTRUCTION
In the event that construction of the project is not begun within two years of the date of
approval by City Council, the district shall revert to the same zoning classification existing
prior to approval of B-3 District and the zoning regulations of said p1ior district shall
thereupon be in full force and effect.
J. AMENDMENTS TO COMPLETED PROJECTS
1. Minor changes to completed projects in the B-3 District may be authorized by the
Zoning Administrator, subject to the same conditions imposed on new construction
in paragraph G.2 above. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34)
2. All other changes must be approved via the same process as required for new
construction
XIII-4
SECTION XIV. B-4 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
A. PERMITTED USES
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Accessory buildings and uses: Accessory buildings or structures are only permitted
to be constructed and I or continued if there is a main building or structure present.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
2. Animal Clinic or Hospital, without outdoor kennels (Amended, Ordinance No.
2004-27, April 19, 2004)
3. Automated teller machines
4. Bar or cocktail lounge
5. Business service establishments, on-site
6. Clubs: fraternal, membership organization, and private.
7. Cultural facilities, private
8. Dancing or music academy
9. Drive-through or drive-up facilities attached to a permitted use; except restaurants;
however, all amplified equipment shall be located at least 25 feet from any side or
rear lot line in a residential district.
10. Fabrication, Commercial
11. Financial institutions and services
12. Food stores, neighborhood and specialty.
13. Funeral home
14. Government building or use
15. Health care uses:
a. Medical or dental offices, clinics or laboratories
b. Medical equipment sales and rental
c. Prescription pharmacy
16. Hotel or motel
17. Intermodal transit facility for the movement of passengers, bus station and/or taxi
facilities
18. Motion picture theater.
XIV-1
19. Multiple dwellings, when located above the ground floor.
20. Non-store retailers
21. Outdoor market: An outdoor market shall be limited to Central Park and its
environs, and regulated in a manner set forth by the City Council.
22. Parking or storage garage
23. Personal services
24. Pet services
25. Place of worship.
26. Professional office uses.
27. Public Uses:
a. Community center
b. Library
c. Parks and playgrounds
d. Public art gallery
e. Public museum
28. Radio or television broadcasting station or studio, but not including sending or
receiving towers
29. Recreation, commercial, excluding outdoor facilities
30. Religious facility
31. Rental establishments. (Amended, Ordinance 2016-36, June 20, 2016)
32. Repair shops.
33. Restaurants: carry-out; convenience; fast food; sit down.
34. Retail uses. Outdoor storage is not permitted.
35. Schools, Commercial: Para-professional.
36. Studio
37. Similar uses: those uses that are determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
similar to the uses enumerated herein and are consistent with the purpose and intent
of the district. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34, May 17, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-02, January 20, 2004)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
XIV-2
B. CONDITIONAL USES
Consistent with the provisions of Section XXII of this Ordinance, the following uses may
be permitted by conditional use in the B-4 District:
1. Ambulance service
2. Automobile and equipment dealers
3. Automobile repair and service, major or minor; excepting there from service to
buses, trailers and semi-trucks; also excepting body and fender repair and painting.
4. Multiple dwelling units located on the ground floor.
5. Public utility facilities, regional
6. Rental, passenger automobiles, passenger trucks and passenger vans. (Amended,
Ordinance 2016-36, June 20, 2016)
7. Restaurants with drive up or drive through facilities.
8. Tattoo or body piercing parlor
9. Transfer terminal or freight house or bus garage and repair shop.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-02, January 20, 2004)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-47, September 17, 2018)
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS
1. Minimum Lot Area (square feet): 200
2. Minimum Lot Width (feet): no requirement
3. Minimum Setbacks: no requirement
4. Building Height (see Section XXI for exceptions to height regulations):
a. No. of stories: 12
b. Maximum height (feet): 150
5. Minimum Distance Between Structures (feet): 8
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
XIV-3
SECTION XV. PMR-1 PARK MOBILE HOME RESIDENCE
DISTRICT
A. USE REGULATIONS
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Placement and occupation of mobile homes as dwelling units
2. Mobile home park administration
3. Supportive facilities customaiily allied with mobile home dwelling uses, such as
social, recreational, meeting, laundry, and like rooms, only if the use thereof is
limited to park personnel and residents and their guests, and which are so designed
and located as to exhibit such limited use and to discourage use by the general
public, and which may include an interiorly located convenience store having no
direct access to or orientation toward a public way.
4. Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to any of the foregoing uses in
this Section: Accessory buildings or structures are only permitted to be constructed
and I or continued if there is a main building or structure present. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
5. Mobile home sales: No more than eight (8) models may be displayed at any time.
B. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS
The height and area regulations set forth in the Mobile Home Park Ordinance of the City
shall be observed.
1. Minimum Distance Between Structures (feet): 8
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
C. PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
The parking and loading regulations set forth in said Mobile Home Park Ordinance and in
Section XXIV of this Ordinance shall be observed.
XV-1
SECTION XVI. M-1 INTENSE COMMERCIAL LIGHT
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
A. PERMITTED USES
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
1. Accessory buildings and uses Accessory buildings or structures are only permitted
to be constructed and I or continued if there is a main building or structure present.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
2. Animal Clinic or Hospital, with outdoor kennel located at least 100 feet from any
Residential District. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-27, April 19, 2004)
3. Animal kennel, provided that any outdoor kennels be located not less than 100 feet
from a property line of any property located in a residential district.
4. Ambulance service, private
5. Automatic Teller Machines
6. Automobile Repair and Service, major and minor
7. Automobile service station
8. Automobile and equipment dealers
9. Bar or cocktail lounge, when located not less than 100 feet from a side or rear lot
line of any property within a residential district
10. Building materials sales
11. Business service establishments, on-site and off-site
12. Car wash, automatic and coin-operated self-service
13. Cleaning and maintenance service
14. Clubs: fraternal, membership organization, and private.
15. Contractors and builders
16. Convenience food and beverage store, including extended hours.
17. Cultivation Center (Amended, Ordinance No. 2014-27, June 16, 2014)
18. Dancing or music academies
19. Drive-through or drive-up facilities attached to an allowed use; however, all
amplified equipment shall be located at least 25 feet from any side or rear lot line
in a residential district.
20. Financial institutions and services
XVI-1
21. Food stores
22. Freezer and locker meat providers.
23. Funeral home, mortuary, or crematory. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105,
December 19, 2005)
24. Gasoline station.
25. Government use.
26. Health care uses:
a. Medical or dental offices, clinics or laboratories
b. Medical equipment sales and rental
c. Prescription pharmacy.
27. Hotel or motel.
28. Intermodal transit facility for the movement of passengers, bus station and/or taxi
facilities
29. Laboratory, research and development
30. Licensed Truck Stop Establishment (Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-47, September
17, 2018)
31. Manufacturing, light.
32. Medical cannabis dispensing organization, dispensing organization or dispensary
organization. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2014-27, June 16, 2014)
33. Motion picture theater.
34. Non-store retailers.
35. Parking or storage garage.
36. Personal services.
37. Pet services.
38. Pet shop.
39. Professional office uses.
40. Public utility facilities regional.
41. Recreation, commercial: indoor facilities.
42. Recycling Center: All collected recyclables shall be stored within a structure,
mobile recycling truck or other enclosed container. (Amended, Ordinance No.
2009-54, July 20, 2009)
XVI-2
43. Rental establishment.
44. Rental, passenger automobiles, passenger trucks and passenger vans. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2016-36, June 20, 2016)
45. Rental, trucks and trailers. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2016-36, June 20, 2016)
46. Repair shops.
47. Restaurants: carry-out; convenience; fast food; sit down, temporary facilities.
48. Retail uses.
49. Riding academy. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-27, April 19, 2004)
50. Schools, commercial.
51. Self-service storage facility, or mini-warehouse.
52. Storage, enclosed.
53. Supermarkets, including superstores and warehouse markets.
54. Tattoo or body piercing parlor.
55. Underground bulk storage.
56. Video Gaming Parlor (Amended, Ordinance No. 2015-40, August 17, 2015)
57. Warehouse, private, or distribution facilities.
58. Wholesale dealer.
59. Similar uses; those uses that are determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
similar to the uses enumerated herein and are consistent with the purpose and intent
of the district. (Amended, Ordinance No,. 2010-34, May 17, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-27, April 19, 2004)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-02, January 20, 2004)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
B. CONDITIONAL USES
Conditional uses may be needed in the development of a unified development such as an
industrial park. In addition, conditional use permits act to provide further regulation of
land uses with special needs or intensities. Consistent with the provisions of Section XXII,
the following land uses may be permitted as a conditional use in the M-1 Light Industrial
District:
1. Airport, landing field, or landing strip
2. Amusement park.
3. Day care center.
XVI-3
4. Intermodal transportation facility for the warehousing and distribution of goods
and/or materials.
5. Pet cemetery
6. Recreation, commercial: outdoor facilities, when located a minimum of 100 feet
from any side or rear lot line in a residential district.
7. Rifle or pistol range
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-54, July 20, 2009)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-02, January 20, 2004)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS
1. Minimum Lot Area (square feet): 6,500
2. Minimum Lot Width (feet): no requirement
3. Minimum Front Yard (feet): 25
4. Minimum Rear Yard (feet):
a. Adjacent to property in a residential district: 25
b. All others: no requirement
5. Minimum Side Yards (feet):
a. Adjacent to property in a residential district: 5
b. All others: no requirement
6. Building Height (see Section XXI for exceptions to height regulations):
a. No. of stories: 10
b. Maximum height (feet): 125
7. Minimum Distance Between Structures (feet): 8 (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-
105, December 19, 2005)
D.PERFORMANCESTANDARDS
All land uses within the light industrial district shall be expected to function within the
following requirements:
1. Noise.
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound in such a manner
as to create a sound level which is discernible from the property line of the noiseintensi
ve use. Emergency vehicles, sirens, communications, as well as aircraft
operations, construction and worship bells or chimes, are exempt from these
requirements.
XVI-4
2. Odor.
No odor from the following sources shall be detectable at the property line:
a. Dead or decaying matter,
b. Storage of waste, garbage or untreated sewage;
c. Animal offal and similar byproducts.
3. Glare, dust, and vibrations. '
All emissions of glare, dust and/or vibration shall be contained within the property line.
Vibration or glare shall not be discernible from the street or sidewalk adjoining the
property.
4. Outdoor storage; screening.
Any outdoor storage of equipment or materials, other than vehicles for sale, must be
enclosed by a six-foot high fence, six-foot high hedge or similar landscape materials,
or an appropriate combination thereof. However, if the property is located within 300
feet of any property that is zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-5, R-6, PMR-1, 0-1, B-1, B-2, B-3
and PD or any non-industrial use in the city limits or neighboring jurisdiction it must
be screened by a six-foot high site break fence, six-foot high hedge or similar landscape
materials, or an appropriate combination thereof. Measurements shall be made from
the nearest point on the property/lot lines of each property.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2015-28, June 15, 2015)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
XVI-5
SECTION XVII. M-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
A. PERMITTED USES
1. Accessory buildings and uses. Accessory buildings or structures are only permitted
to be constructed and I or continued if there is a main building or structure present.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
2. Adult entertainment use, when located at least 500 feet from any property located
in a residential district or any school, mobile home park, or public park, and at least
1,000 feet from any other adult entertainment use. Measurements shall be made
from the lot lines of the property containing the proposed adult entertainment use
and any residentially-zoned property, school, mobile home park, public park,
and/or other adult entertainment use.
3. Ambulance service.
4. Animal Clinic or Hospital, with outdoor kennel located at least 100 feet from any
Residential District. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-27, April 19, 2004)
5. Animal kennel.
6. Automobile Repair and Service, major and minor
7. Automobile service station.
8. Automobile and Equipment Dealers.
9. Building materials sales.
10. Car wash, automatic and coin-operated self-service.
11. Cleaning and maintenance service.
12. Contractors and builders.
13. Drive-through or drive-up facilities attached to an allowed use; however, all
amplified equipment shall be located at least 25 feet from any side or rear lot line
in a residential district. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
14. Gasoline station.
15. Government use.
16. Intermodal transit facility for the movement of passengers, bus station and/or taxi
facilities
17. Intermodal transportation facility for the warehousing and distribution of goods
and/or materials.
18. Laboratory, research and development
19. Manufacturing, light or heavy.
XVII-I
20. Parking or storage garage.
21. Public utility facilities: regional and system.
22. Radio or television broadcasting station or studio.
23. Recycling Center: All collected recyclables shall be stored within a structure,
mobile recycling truck or other enclosed container. (Amended, Ordinance No.
2009-54, July 20, 2009)
24. Repair shops.
25. Self storage facility or mini-warehouse.
26. Storage, enclosed.
27. Tattoo or body piercing parlor
28. Underground bulk storage.
29. Warehouse, private or distribution facilities.
30. Watchman or caretaker residence, when located on the same premises as the use
that is served by the watchman or caretaker.
31 . Wholesale dealer.
32. Similar uses: those uses that are determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
similar to the uses enumerated herein and are consistent with the purpose and intent
of the district. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34, May 17, 2010)
B. CONDITIONAL USES
1. Any industrial land use not listed as a permitted use in the M-1 or M-2 districts.
2. Automotive salvage operations.
3. Automotive storage yards.
4. Extraction uses
5. Industrial and commodity scrap processing.
6. Retail salvage operations or junk yards.
7. Storage yards.
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS
1. Minimum Lot Area (square feet): 10,000
2. Minimum Lot Width (feet): no requirement
3. Minimum Front Yard (feet): 25
XVIl-2
4. Minimum Rear Yard (feet):
a. Adjacent to property in a residential district: 25
b. All others: no requirement
5. Minimum Side Yards (feet):
a. Adjacent to property in a residential district: 5
b. All others: no requirement
6. Building Height (see Section XXI for exceptions to height regulations):
a. No. of stories: 10
b. Maximum height (feet): 125
7. Minimum Distance Between Structures (feet): 8 (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-
105, December 19, 2005)
D.PERFORMANCESTANDARDS
All land uses within the heavy industrial district shall be expected to function within the
following requirements:
1. Noise.
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound in such a manner
as to create a sound level which exceeds 80 dBA, when measured in accordance with
the American Standard for the Physical Measurement of Sound. Such measurement
shall take place at the property line of the noise-intensive use. Emergency vehicles,
sirens, communications; as well as aircraft operations, construction and worship bells
or chimes, are exempt from these requirements. A Special Use Permit shall be obtained
from the City Council to operate where sounds may exceed 80 dBA.
2. Odor.
a. No odor from the following sources shall be detectable at the property line:
i. Dead or decaying matter,
ii. Storage of waste, garbage or untreated sewage;
iii. Animal offal and similar by-products.
b. Other odors that are incurred in the processing or manufacturing stages shall be
permitted unless deemed an air pollutant by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (USEP A), the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
(IEPA) or the City Council.
3. Outdoor storage; screening.
Any outdoor storage of equipment or materials, other than vehicles for sale, must be
enclosed by a six-foot high fence, six-foot high hedge or similar landscape materials,
or an appropriate combination thereof. However, if the property is located within 300
feet of any property that is zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-5, R-6, PMR-1, 0-1, B-1, B-2, B-3
and PD or any non-industrial use in the city limits or neighboring jurisdiction it must
XVII-3
be screened by a six-foot high site break fence, six-foot high hedge or similar landscape
materials, or an appropriate combination thereof. Measurements shall be made from
the nearest point on the property/lot lines of each property. (Amended, Ordinance No.
2015-41, August 17, 2015) (Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
XVII-4
SECTION XVIII. M-3 LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
A.GENERALLY
Development in the M-3 Limited Industrial District shall be laid out and developed
according to an approved plan as provided in this Section in order to accomplish its purpose
to provide space in attractive and appropriate locations for certain types of business and
manufacturing free from offense in modern, landscaped buildings, to provide opportunities
for employment closer to residence with a reduction in travel time from home to work.
B. PERMITTED USES
A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
I. Art needle work, hand weaving and tapestries.
2. Books, hand binding and tooling.
3. Compounding of cosmetics and pharmaceutical products.
4. Health care uses: medical or dental offices, clinics or laboratories.
5. Jewelry, manufacture from precious metals.
6. Manufacture of clay, leather, metal and glass products of a handicraft nature.
7. Manufacture of medical, dental and drafting instruments.
8. Manufacture of optical goods and equipment, watches, clocks, and other similar
precious instruments.
9. Manufacture of small electrical or electronic apparatus, musical instruments, games
and toys.
10. Medical equipment establishment.
11. Motion picture producing.
12. Parking area -ground level.
13. Professional office uses: Accounting; employment agencies; governmental offices;
insurance; law; real estate and title services; income tax services; non-profit social
service agency offices, and similar professional offices.
14. Radio and television broadcasting stations and studios but not including sending or
receiving towers.
15. Uses not listed that conform to the intent of the M-3 District that are approved by
the Council via the development approval process.
XVIII-I
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS
1. Maximum heights.
No building shall exceed a height of two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet, except that
a building may be erected to a height of sixty (60) feet when the distances from the
street and any residential district boundary line required in this Section are increased
by one foot for each foot of building height above thirty-five (35) feet.
2. Distances from other buildings.
No part of any building or accessory structure shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet
from any portion of a lot in an adjoining residential district and all buildings and
accessory structures shall maintain a minimum front yard setback of not less than
twenty-five (25) feet.
D.PROCEDURE
The owner or owners of land sought to be placed in this district shall submit to the
Technical Review Committee a plan for the use and development thereof for the purposes
permitted by, and meeting the requirements provided in this section. Said plan shall be
accompanied by a report showing the number of persons to be employed, the projected
effects of the development on surrounding property including adjacent or nearby streets,
and other material physical conditions. Said plan shall include a site development plan
defining the areas to be occupied by buildings and by parking facilities; the location of
roads, driveways and walkways; the location and height of walls; the location of loading
facilities; and, the character and extent of landscaping, planting and other treatment for
adjustment to surrounding property. No development or use of land included within this
district shall be made or permitted except as shown on such site development plan.
Additions to and amendments of said plan may be permitted but only upon the same
procedure as set out herein for initial development.
E. REVIEW AND APPROVAL
1. Technical Review Committee
The Technical Review Committee (TRC) shall review the site plan at a date scheduled
by the Secretary of the TRC. The applicant and his/her design professionals may
participate in this meeting. Based upon the information provided by the applicant, and
other information that may come to their notice, the TRC may recommend approval,
conditional approval, or denial to the Plan Commission. The recommendation of the
TRC will be compiled into draft conditions of approval. If the TRC determines that
more information is needed before the application can be approved, they may place the
application on hold, in which case the TRC will advise the applicant as to the contents
which will be required before approval can be recommended. Applications placed on
hold will be rescheduled to the next meeting of the TRC unless the applicant requests
more time.
2. Plan Commission review.
XVIII-2
After the rezoning application and site plan have been filed with the Secretary to the
Plan Commission, and have received the recommendation of the TRC, said application,
site plan, and draft conditions of approval will be considered by the Plan Commission
at a public hearing. The Plan Commission will review the application, site plan, and
draft conditions of approval and will make findings concerning the consistency of the
application with the comprehensive plan, and with the zoning ordinance and other land
development regulations if appropriate; and, based upon these findings, will
recommend to the City Council that the project be approved, approved with conditions,
or disapproved.
3. Plan Commission findings.
In making its recommendations, the Plan Commission shall make the following
findings:
a. Whether the proposed development is being developed in accordance with an
integrated overall design plan, and can be developed within that plan.
b. Whether the location and arrangement of buildings, signage, parking areas,
lighting, landscaping, and other facilities are compatible with surrounding uses.
c. Whether the proposed development will have an adverse impact on any nearby
residentially zoned properties.
d. Whether adequate provisions have been included in the plan to prohibit the
storage of merchandise, materials, or equipment that would constitute a hazard
or seriously interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or that would create a
conflict between vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
e. Whether roads, driveways, parking and loading areas shall be constructed in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the City.
4. Council action.
City Council will review the recommended findings of the Plan Commission along
with the application, site plan, and draft conditions of approval, and will approve or
disapprove the application. In the event that Council chooses to approve the
application, the approval shall be contingent upon the conditions of approval listed in
the final M-3 Ordinance.
F. CONSTRUCTION
1. All construction shall be in conformance with the final M-3 Ordinance as approved
by the City Council.
2. The Zoning Administrator may approve minor changes in locations, s1tmg or
character in the final development order, provided that no changes may be
authorized that may lead to the following: (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34)
a. An increase in the size of any building or structure;
b. A change in location of any building or structure by more than 10 feet in any
direction;
XVIII-3
c. Make changes beyond any minimum or maximum requirements set forth in the
approved development order.
G. DELAY IN CONSTRUCTION
In the event that construction of the project is not begun within two years of the date of
approval by City Council, the district shall revert to the same zoning classification existing
prior to approval of M-3 District and the zoning regulations of said prior district shall
thereupon be in full force and effect.
H. AMENDMENTS TO COMPLETED PROJECTS
1. Minor changes to completed projects in the M-3 District may be authorized by the
Zoning Administrator, subject to the same conditions imposed on new construction
in paragraph F.2 above. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34)
2. All other changes must be approved via the same process as required for new
construction.
XVIII-4
SECTION XIX. PD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
A. GENERALLY
1. Intent
a. The intent of the Planned Development district is to encourage more efficient
use of land and provision of greater amenities by allowing, under certain
circumstances, a more flexible means of land development and redevelopment
than is otherwise permissible under the lot-by-lot restrictions of the zoning
districts.
b. The Planned Development District is intended for application to larger and/or
unique sites where a flexible approach to zoning regulations would facilitate
more efficient use of the site and/or would allow greater protection of natural
resources and open space through clustering, traditional neighborhood
development, or other innovative site planning and design practices.
c. Typically, use of the Planned Development District enables the development of
all or portions of a site at higher densities and/or with less restrictive lot
provisions in exchange for preserving other portions of the site in open space
or providing above-normal site amenities. The Planned Development District
shall not be used mainly as a means for avoiding the standards required by the
other zoning districts.
2. Development in the PD Planned Development District shall be laid out and
developed as a unit according to an approved plan as provided below in order to
conform to the intent of the District.
3. The City Council may approve the rezoning of a tract of land to PD Planned
Development District in the absence of a plan when it is determined that it would
be in the best interest of the City and the surrounding neighborhood to insure that
development of the property be in accordance with an approved overall
development plan. No development of such a property may occur until a plan for
such development has been approved by the City Council in accordance with the
procedures in this Section.
B. PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES
Buildings or premises may be used for any of the uses listed as permitted uses or
conditional uses in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-5, R-6, 0-1, B-1, B-2, B-4, M-1, M-2 and M-3
districts, subject to any limitations approved by the Council in the planned development
ordinance for each Planned Development.
C. HEIGHT AND AREA REGULATIONS
Height and area restrictions, including front, rear, and side yard setbacks, shall be as
established in the approved planned development ordinance.
XIX-1
D. PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Parking and loading requirements for each Planned Development shall be consistent with
the requirements in Section XXIV for all uses approved within the development; however,
the City Council may approve more or less restrictive parking and loading standards in the
final planned development ordinance, if evidence is provided that there will be no current
or potential increase in parking congestion on surrounding streets.
E. SIGNAGE
Signage in the PD Planned Development district shall be consistent with the terms of the
approved planned development ordinance.
F. PROCEDURE; CONTENTS OF APPLICATION
The owner or owners of a tract of land may submit to the City Council a petition for
rezoning to PD, Planned Development District (if the property has not previously been
zoned PD) and a plan for the use and development of such tract for the purpose of and
meeting the requirements set forth in this Section. Said plan shall be accompanied by
evidence concerning the compatibility of the project and its effects on surrounding property
and other physical conditions which plan and supporting evidence may include each of the
following:
1. A site plan showing the following information:
a. Existing and proposed contours
b. General location and size of all structures
c. Location of all access points adjacent to site
d. Number and size of parking spaces, loading spaces and traffic circulation on
site
e. Location and size of walkways, sanitary sewers, storm sewerage systems, and
water distribution system
f. Areas subject to flooding
g. Landscaping, subject to the minimum requirements of Section XXVII, and any
additional landscaping as required by the Plan Commission and City Council
h. Lighting, including drawings indicating type of fixtures used and light output
within and adjacent to the property, in accordance with Section XXVII
i. Signage, including sign drawings or elevations, dimensions, and locations of all
proposed signs.
J. Pedestrian walkways
k. Such additional information as required to meet the intent and requirements of
this Section. ·
XIX-2
2. Traffic impact report by engineers with recognized expertise, showing the
following. This requirement may be waived by the Public Works Director if the
anticipated impact is minimal.
a. The effect of the proposed development on the nearby and adjacent street
system
b. Estimated traffic volume generated by the proposed development, during peak
and off-peak hours.
c. A traffic impact study projecting the impact of the proposed project on the
City's transportation network
d. Recommended mitigating improvements, if any
e. That approval has been sought from the Illinois Department of Transportation
for development affecting roadways which fall within the jurisdiction of that
agency.
3. Additional provisions
The City may require such additional reasonable provisions as appear necessary or
desirable for the protection of adjoining or nearby properties.
G. REVIEW AND APPROVAL
1. Technical Review Committee
a. The Technical Review Committee (TRC) shall review the site plan at a date
scheduled by the Secretary of the TRC. The applicant and his/her design
professionals may participate in this meeting. Based upon the information
provided by the applicant, and other information which may come to their
notice, the TRC may recommend approval, conditional approval, or denial to
the Plan Commission. If the TRC determines that more information is needed
before the application can be approved, they may place the application on hold,
in which case the TRC will advise the applicant as to the contents which will
be required before approval can be recommended. Applications placed on hold
will be rescheduled to the next meeting of the TRC unless the applicant requests
more time.
b. Upon approval by the TRC, the Secretary of the TRC shall prepare draft
conditions of approval that outline all requirements and conditions of approval
for the Planned Development. The draft conditions of approval shall be
forwarded to the Plan Commission for review and recommendation.
2. Plan Commission review.
After the rezoning application and site plan have been filed with the Plan Commission,
and after having received the recommendation of the TRC, said application, site plan,
and draft conditions of approval will be considered by the Plan Commission at a public
hearing. The Plan Commission will review the application, site plan, and draft
conditions of approval and will make findings concerning the consistency of the
application with the comprehensive plan, the zoning ordinance and other land
XIX-3
development regulations if appropriate; and, based upon these findings, will
recommend to the City Council that the Planned Development be approved, approved
with conditions, or disapproved.
3. Plan Commission findings.
In the course of review and recommendation of a development within the PD District,
the Plan Commission shall consider the following factors and will issue written
findings on each of them:
a. Compatibility with the character of the surrounding neighborhood and general
area
To this end, the Commission may require in the absence of an appropriate
physical barrier, that uses of least intensity and/or a buffer of green space or
screening be arranged along the borders of the project.
b. Effect on area
The effect of the proposed Planned Unit Development upon the immediate area
c. Design and amenities
Whether or not development within the PUD District, as opposed to
development in traditional zoning districts is warranted by virtue of the design
and amenities incorporated in the development plan.
d. Consistency with comprehensive plan
That the proposed Planned Unit Development is generally consistent with the
Decatur comprehensive plan and with the intent of this Ordinance
e. Traffic capacity
That the existing and proposed streets are adequate to can·y anticipated traffic
within the proposed Planned Unit Development and in the general vicinity
thereof
f. Adequacy of utilities
That existing and proposed utility services are adequate for the proposed
development
g. Integration
Whether the proposed development is being developed in accordance with an
integrated overall design plan, and can be developed within that plan.
h. Adequacy of parking facilities
Whether roads, driveways, parking and loading areas shall be constructed in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the City
4. Council action
City Council will review the recommended findings of the Plan Commission along
with the application, site plan, and draft conditions of approval, and will approve or
XIX-4
disapprove the rezoning and planned development application. In the event that
Council chooses to approve the application, the Council may incorporate the draft
conditions of approval into the final Planned Development ordinance or may alter said
conditions as the Council deems necessary.
H. CONSTRUCTION
1. All construction shall be in conformance with the development order as approved
by the City Council.
2. The Zoning Administrator may approve minor changes in locations, siting or
character in the final development order, provided that no changes may be
authorized that may lead to the following: (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34)
a. An increase of twenty percent (20%) or more in the size of any building or
structure (excluding signage); (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-44)
b. A change in location of any building or structure by more than 10 feet in any
direction;
c. Make changes beyond any minimum or maximum requirements set forth in the
approved planned development ordinance.
3. Proposed changes that do not conform to the above paragraph may only be
approved via amendment to the Planned Development, subject to the same
procedures as required for initial approval.
I. DELAV IN CONSTRUCTION
1. In the event that construction of the project is not begun within two (2) years of the
date of approval by City Council, the Planned Development shall expire and no
longer be in force or effect. Any future development of the same site shall require
approval of a new Planned Development in accordance with the requirements of
this Section.
2. In the case of a property zoned PD upon petition initiated by the City, the PD
classification shall remain unless and until a petition to rezone the property or a
portion thereof is approved by the City Council.
J. AMENDMENTS TO COMPLETED PROJECTS
1. Minor changes to completed projects in the PD District may be authorized by the
Zoning Administrator, subject to the same conditions imposed on initial
construction in paragraph H.2 above. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34)
All other changes must be approved via the same process as required for initial
construction.
XIX-5
SECTION XX. SPECIAL DISTRICTS
A. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
The following overlay districts may be applied in addition to and over the zoning existing
at the time the overlay district was approved. All uses within any overlay district are
subject to the use, height and area requirements of the underlying zoning district, as well
as all other requirements of this Ordinance, except as modified by the requirements of the
overlay district.
B. PROCESS
The process for including property within an overlay district shall be the same as for
rezoning, as enumerated in Section XXIX, except as provided in this Section.
C. 1-0L INSTITUTIONAL OVERLAY DISTRICT
1. Intent
The intent of the I-OL Institutional Overlay District is to provide standards for regional
and community-wide institutions that serve the general good of the public, such as
hospitals, colleges and universities. The I-OL District is designed to meet the special
needs of these uses while providing safeguards to the surrounding neighborhoods.
2. District Boundaries
a. The I-OL District may extend beyond the current boundaries of an institutional
campus to include future expansion areas.
b. At the time of application, the institution seeking establishment of an I-OL
Institutional Overlay District must provide (in addition to the required
submittals for rezoning, as outlined in Section XXIX) the following:
i. a map depicting the boundaries of the 1-0L District, with a legal description
of the same;
ii. justification of the proposed boundaries: This may take the form of a master
plan, site plan or projections of future land use needs.
c. The boundaries may be amended via the same process as used to establish the
initial overlay district.
3. Permitted Uses
a. The following uses may be located within the Institutional Overlay District:
i. Hospitals, clinics, laboratories, medical offices, family residential care
facilities and intermediate and long-term care facilities, surface parking and
other parking facilities, located upon an integrated and contiguous healthcare
campus, including any accessory uses and buildings clearly accessory
and ancillary to the health care institution. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-
95, December 6, 2004)
IL Colleges and universities, along with associated facilities, fraternities,
sororities and similar, if located contiguous to the main campus
XX-1
b. The above uses may be established regardless of the underlying zoning, subject
to all requirements and restrictions listed in this Section.
4. Established uses; undeveloped property
Uses other than those listed in subparagraph 3, above, that were established prior to
adoption of the I-OL District may be used, developed or redeveloped subject to the
underlying zoning only and shall only be subject to the I-OL requirements if used,
developed, or redeveloped into the institutional use or otherwise made a part of the
institution. This shall include any undeveloped property that is not contiguous to the
institutional campus.
5. Minimum Area
No I-OL Institutional Overlay District may be less than 20 acres in contiguous area.
6. Buildings Per Lot.
More than one building may occupy a single lot, provided that all applicable
regulations, including minimum setback, building separation and off-street parking
requirements, can be met.
7. Height, Area and Setback Regulations
a. Minimum Lot Area: none
b. Front Yard Setback: 25 feet.
c. Rear Yard Setback
i. Adjacent to residential uses in an underlying residential district: 40 feet
ii. All others: none
d. Side Yard Setback
i. Adjacent to residential uses in an underlying residential district: 40 feet
ii. All others: none
e. Minimum Building Separation: 10 feet (Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-95,
December 6, 2004)
f. Maximum Building Height
i. Number of stories: 10 for the main building; 7 for all other buildings
u. Maximum height: 120 feet for the main building; 75 feet for all other
buildings. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-95, December 4, 2004)
8. Signage
a. Identifying signs: For the purpose of this section, an "identifying sign" is a
freestanding sign that identifies and advertises the institution and/or the campus
as a whole.
1. Number: Each institution may have one (1) identifying sign for each 500
feet of campus frontage on a major or a1terial street, regardless of individual
lot frontage.
XX-2
ii. Maximum Area: 80 square feet.
iii. Maximum Height: J 5 feet.
iv. Minimum Setback: Ten (10) feet
v. 111umination: Such sign may be illuminated but non-flashing if located a
minimum of 25 feet from any side or rear lot line of a lot used for residential
purposes.
vi. Four (4) Electronic Message Unit signs shall be permitted. The four (4)
permitted locations are as follows: (a) The Southwest corner of the
intersection of North Main Street and West McKinley Avenue; (b) The
Northwest corner of the intersection of North Main Street and West
Kenwood A venue; ( c) The Southeast corner of the intersection of West
McKinley Avenue and North Monroe Street; (d) The Northeast corner of
the previously vacated West Hay Street and North Monroe Street.
The four (4) permitted Electronic Message Unit signs shall not exceed
twenty-five (25) feet in height and shall not exceed one hundred (100)
square feet in area. The Electronic Message Unit portion of the sign shall
not exceed fifty (50) square feet in area. The Electronic Message Unit shall
be dimmed to fifty percent (50%) between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-03, January 20, 2009; Ordinance No. 2004-
95, December 6, 2004)
b. Individual building signs: Each individual building within the institutional
campus may have a freestanding sign or signs identifying the name, use,
purpose and/or tenants of the building, subject to the requirements below:
i. Number per Building: One (1); however, a building located on a corner that
has access drives to each street may have two (2) signs, located near or
approximate to each access drive.
ii. Maximum Area: 80 square feet (Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-95)
iii. Maximum Height: Ten (10) feet
iv. Minimum Setback: Ten (10) feet
v. Illumination: Such sign may be illuminated but non-flashing if located a
minimum of 25 feet from any side or rear lot line of a lot used for residential
purposes.
c. Wall Signs: Wall signs shall be subject to the requirements of Section XXV .E.
d. Wayfinding Signs: For the purpose of this Section, a "wayfinding sign" shall
be a sign with the express purpose of giving directions to locate a specific
XX-3
building or portion thereof or to any location, individual, use or program within
the institution. Wayfinding signs may be placed anywhere on the campus for
the purpose of directing vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Such signs may
contain multiple faces, provided that the total area of each face does not exceed
the maximum stated below. A wayfinding sign may contain a logo or other
script identifying the institution, provided that no more that 25 percent of the
area of any sign face shall be utilized for such advertising. Wayfinding signs
shal1 be divided into two (2) categories, major and minor. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2004-95, December 6, 2004)
1. Number: There is no limit to the number of wayfinding signs, provided that
they are placed in appropriate locations to direct traffic. Major wayfinding
signs shall be limited to one ( 1) per street intersection. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2004-95, December 6, 2004)
IL Maximum Area: Minor sign 50 square feet per sign face; Major sign 80
square feet per sign face. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-95)
iii. Maximum Height: Minor sign is five (5) feet; Major sign is 14 feet.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-95, December 6, 2004)
IV. Illumination: Such sign may be illuminated but non-flashing if located a
minimum of 25 feet from any side or rear lot line of a lot used for residential
purposes.
9. Parking Lot Setbacks: Required parking lot setbacks shall follow the requirements
for the 0-1 District, as listed in Section XXIV.D.2.
10. Landscaping and Exterior Lighting: All institutional development within the I-OL
District shall be subject to the requirements for commercial development in Section
XXVIII. Remove all tree landscaping required in the parking lot islands except at
grade plantings. The total landscape points shall be increased by a factor of 1.2 for
the number of points required for trees within the parking lot. All trees shall be
planted on the perimeter. Also, al1 parking lot islands may be fil1ed with landscape
rock with a trim border instead of mulch. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-95,
December 6, 2004)
11. Development
a. All development within the I-OL District shall be reviewed by the Plan
Commission and approved by the City Council, unless all of the following
conditions apply:
1. The property to be developed is at least one-half (1/2) acre for parcels
contiguous to the developed institutional campus; allow the property to be
developed if it is at least one (1) acre in size and within the Overlay District
boundaries. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-95)
II. The property is within the Overlay District boundary and is a natural
expansion of the campus. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-95)
iii. None of the property under development is contiguous to a one or two
family property on more than two sides of said one or two family property,
XX-4
excepting there from any one or two family property already owned in fee
simple title by the institution.
b. A site plan shall be submitted for recommendation by the Plan Commission and
approval by the City Council if all of the above conditions are not met. The site
plan submittal shall follow the same requirements for a site plan to be submitted
for rezoning to PD Planned Development District, as outlined in Section XIX,
and shall be rezoned as such.
12. Variances
a. Any request by an institutional use for a variance to the requirements of this
Section or to the requirements of the underlying zoning district must be
reviewed by the Plan Commission in a public heaiing, after which the Plan
Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council. The City
Council will then mle on said variance, and may impose conditions on the same
to insure that the variance meets the intent of the I-OL District, the intent of the
underlying district, and the general purpose and intent of the Zoning Ordinance.
This requirement shall apply only to the institutional use and its ancillary uses. Any
variance request by any other property owner or use within the I-OL District must follow
the requirements of Section XXX.
D. A-OL, AIRPORT OVERLAY DISTRICT
1. Intent
The intent of the A-OL Airport Overlay District is to promote the use and
development of land in a manner that is compatible with the continued operation
and utility of the Decatur Airport so as to protect the public investment in, and
benefit provided by this facility to the community and region.
2. District Boundaries
a. The boundaries of the A-OL District are to be applied as an overlay district
to lands which are owned by the Decatur Park District and I or the Decatur
Park Foundation and commonly referred to as the Decatur Airport property.
b. This District may be extended beyond the current boundaries of the Airport
property to include future expansion areas. Such boundary changes may be
allowed provided copies of deeds are submitted and annexation petitions
have been approved by the City Council.
3. Definitions
In addition to the definitions set forth in Article II, the following definitions shall
apply specifically to the A-OL. In the event that there is a conflict between
definitions in Article II and this Article, those in this Article shall control.
a. FAR Part 77 Surfaces - A map or plan depicting the three dimensional
airspace that includes the obstruction identification surfaces, including
XX-5
approach, transition, horizontal and conical surfaces, obstructions to those
surfaces and navigational slopes for instrument and non-instrument landing
systems related to airfield operations of a civil airport.
b. Airport Layout Plan - A map or plan, prepared by a professional engineer,
showing existing and future (planned) airport facilities including runways,
taxi ways, operations facilities, hangars and tie-downs, ancillary and
support facilities, navigational facilities, building restriction line(s), runway
and other protection zones and fuel farms
4. Permitted Uses
The following uses may be located within the A-OL provided they are developed
in accordance with the applicable processes and any amendments thereto:
a. Airport runways, taxi ways, taxi lanes, aircraft parking aprons, and auxiliary
roads
b. Individual unit hangars
c. Multiunit hangars
d. T-hangars
e. Terminal buildings
f. Aircraft maintenance and repair shops
g. Rental car facilities
h. Control towers
1. Aviation fueling facilities
J. Aviation museums
k. Aircraft rescue and fire fighting facilities
I. Landing and Navigational aids
m. Airport related administration offices
n. Aircraft wash facilities
o. Public rest room facilities
p. U.S. Customs and Foreign Trade Zone operations and facilities
q. Air cargo warehouse and storage facilities
r. Air freight service facilities
s. Distribution operations and facilities
t. Packaging and minor production facilities
u. Research and Development related uses and facilities
v. Intermodal Transportation operations
XX-6
w. Airport parking areas and parking structures
x. Pilot training facilities
y. Public recreational facilities
z. Agricultural uses provided they comply with all other regulations applicable
to the operation of the airport
aa. Restaurants (as an accessory use to a terminal building)
bb. Retail stores (as an accessory use and located in the terminal building)
cc. Public recreational facilities
dd. Other directly related auxiliary and I or accessory facilities
5. Conditional Uses
Other uses which may be directly related to an airport or ancillary use which have
not been previously permitted but are considered by the Zoning Administrator to
be consistent with the intent of the Airport Overlay District and in general harmony
with the surrounding land uses. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34)
6. Minimum Area
No A-OL Airport Overlay District may be less than 100 acres in contiguous area.
7. Buildings Per Lot
Multiple buildings currently exist and additional buildings may be constructed
provided that all applicable regulations, including minimum setback, building
separation and off-street parking requirements, can be met.
8. Height, Area and Setback Regulations
1. Minimum Lot Area: None
2. Front Yard Setback: 25 feet
3. Rear Yard Setback
a. Adjacent to residential uses in an underlying residential district: l 00
feet
b. All others: None
4. Side Yard Setback
a. Adjacent to residential uses in an underlying residential district: 100
feet
b. All others: None
5. Minimum Building Separation: 25 feet
6. Maximum Building Height:
No structure shall be permitted to exceed sixty (60) feet in vertical height.
In addition, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree
shall be permitted to grow in any regulated zone or airspace to a height in
excess of the applicable height limit established by the FAR Part 77 surfaces
as approved by the IDOT Division of Aeronautics. Such applicable height
limitations have been heretofore established for each of the zones in
XX-7
question by State and I or Federal Statute and as such are hereby
incorporated by reference.
9. Signage
a. Identifying signs: For the purpose of this section, an "identifying sign" is a
freestanding sign that identifies and advertises the airport district as a whole.
1. Number: One (1) identifying sign
2. Maximum Area: 80 square feet
3. Maximum Height: 15 feet
4. Minimum Setback: 25 feet
5. Illumination: Such sign may be illuminated but non-flashing if located
a minimum of 25 feet from any side or rear lot line of a lot used for
residential purposes.
6. One (1) electronic message unit may be located on the identifying sign
structure and may not exceed 50 square feet in area.
b. Individual building signs: Each individual building within the airport
overlay district may have a freestanding sign or signs identifying the name,
use, purpose and I or tenants of the building, subject to the requirements
below:
1. Number per Building: One ( 1 ); however, a building located on a corner
that has access drives to each street may have two (2) signs, located near
or approximate to each access drive.
2. Maximum Area: 50 square feet
3. Maximum Height: Ten (10) feet
4. Minimum Setback: Ten (10) feet
5. Illumination: Such sign may be illuminated but non-flashing if located
a minimum of 25 feet from any side or rear lot line of a lot used for
residential purposes.
6. One (1) electronic message unit may be located on the Airport Terminal
building sign structure and may not exceed 50 square feet in area.
c. Wall signs:
1. Number per Main Building: No limit; provided that the aggregate
square footage of all wall signs does not exceed the maximum square
footage as required below.
2. Maximum Area: Ten ( 10) percent of the fac;ade or wall on which the
sign( s) is I are attached, or one ( 1) square foot per linear foot of occupant
frontage, whichever is larger.
3. Illumination: A wall sign may be illuminated but non-flashing iflocated
a minimum of 25 feet from any residential side or rear lot line.
4. A wall sign may not extend above the top of the wall where displayed.
10. Parking Lot Setbacks
1. Front Yard Setback: 15 feet
XX-8
2. Rear Yard Setback: 5 feet
3. Side Yard Setback: 5 feet
11. Landscaping and Exterior Lighting
All new development within the A-OL District shall be subject to the requirements
for commercial development in Section XXVIII.
12. Development
All development within the A-OL District shall require the submittal of a site plan
to be approved by the Department of Planning and Building Services and the Public
Works Department.
13. Variances
Any request for a variance to the requirements of this Section or to the requirements
of the Ordinance must be reviewed by the Plan Commission in a public hearing,
after which the Plan Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Council.
The City Council will then rule on said variance, and may impose conditions on the
same to insure that the variance meets the intent of the A-OL District, the intent of
the underlying district, if applicable, and the general purpose and intent of the
Zoning Ordinance.
This requirement shall apply only to airport operational use(s) and ancillary uses.
Any variance request by any other property owner or use within the A-OL District
must follow the requirements of Section XXX.
14. Airport Layout Plan, FAR Part 77 Surfaces
1. The Airport Layout Plan and FAR Part 77 Surfaces will serve as the underlying
standard for land use planning and development in the A-OL District.
2. The Decatur Park District shall, from time to time, or upon update and approval
of plans by the IDOT, Division of Aeronautics, file the then current version of
the Airport Layout Plan and FAR Part 77 Surfaces with the Zoning
Administrator (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34)
E. WM-OL, WEST MAIN STREET OVERLAY DISTRICT
1. Intent
The intent of the West Main Street Overlay District is to provide standards to allow
historic neighborhood uses and preserve the historic character of the area. The West
Main Street Overlay is designed to meet the special needs of the area while preserving
the historic character and providing safeguards for the surrounding neighborhoods.
2. District Boundaries
a. Property with frontage along the 200 through 1000 blocks of West Main Street.
b. Property with frontage along the east side of the 100 through 150 block of North
Edward Street.
XX-9
c. The boundaries may be amended within the Olde Towne TIF District via the
same process as used to establish the initial overlay district.
3. Permitted Uses
a. The following uses may be located within the West Main Street Overlay
District:
i. Single family residence, multi-family residence, bed and breakfast
establishments and mixed use (permitted with a residential use only).
ii. Professional and medical offices.
iii. Personal services (not to include dry cleaning laundry services, photo drop
off or health clubs/spas).
iv. Retail (permitted hours of operation 6 am to 9 pm, no outdoor display or
storage of merchandise, may not exceed 3000 square feet in area).
b. The above uses may be established regardless of the underlying zoning, subject
to all requirements of this Section.
4. Eligibility
a. Existing structures
b. Existing structures with modifications of up to 20% of the gross floor area.
5. Height, Area and Setback Regulations
The underlying zoning will determine all height, area and setback regulations
unless otherwise permitted within this section.
6. Signage
a. One (1) freestanding sign shall be allowed per lot except for single-family and
two-family residential uses.
b. One (I) wall sign or one (I) projecting yard sign shall be allowed per lot except
for single-family and two-family residential uses.
c. All signage must conform to the West Main Street prototypes as shown in the
West Main Street Design Guidelines.
d. All signage must maintain a minimum five (5) foot setback from all property
lines.
e. No signage shall have internal illumination.
7. Parking and Circulation
a. Required parking lot setbacks shall follow the requirements for the underlying
zoning district as listed in Section XXIV.D.2.
b. The rear or side yard parking lot setback may be reduced from five (5) foot to
zero (0) feet where parking is provided between the alley and the parking lot,
as applicable.
XX-10
c. The required width for circulation drives may be reduced where unique
circumstances prevent the provision of required drives, subject to approval by
the Zoning Administrator and the Public Works Director. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2010-34, May 17, 2010)
d. Required parking shall be reduced by 75% if on street parking is available.
e. All required ADA parking shall be located on the premise unless otherwise
approved by the Public Works Director.
8. Landscaping and Exterior Lighting
a. All uses established under the provisions of the West Main Street Overlay
District shall be subject to the requirements of the West Main Street Design
Guidelines for landscaping and exterior lighting.
b. All other uses, provisions and requirements shall be in accordance with Section
XXXIII.
9. Historic and Site Plan Review
a. Developments meeting the requirements of the West Main Street Overlay
District within the local historic district must be submitted to and approved by
the Historical and Architectural Sites Commission.
b. All development site plans must be submitted to and approved by the
Department of Planning and Building Services and the Public Works
Department.
10. Variances
Any request for a variance to the requirements of this Section or to the requirements
of the underlying zoning district must be reviewed by the Plan Commission in a
public hearing, after which the Plan Commission shall make a recommendation to
the City Council. The City Council will then rule on said variance, and may impose
conditions on the same to insure that the variance meets the intent of the West Main
Street Overlay District, the underlying zoning district, and the general purpose and
intent of the Zoning Ordinance.
West Main Street Overlay Design Guidelines
Section XXV & XXVIII of Decatur's existing zoning ordinance sets the standards
for all signs and landscaping in the city. The West Main Street Overlay Design Guidelines
set out additional standards and/or recommendations for signs and landscaping within the
overlay district. The purpose of the overlay is to provide guidance in the use and design
of signs and landscaping to visually unify and define particular areas. The overlay would
not mandate specific signs and landscaping, rather it would provide a palette of shapes,
colors, plants and materials that could be combined in various ways. In this way, signs and
landscaping will show the character and tastes of individuals, while contributing to the
identity of the district where they are located.
Sign Requirements
XX-11
1. Supports - Since this is a historic area, sign supports shall complement the
structures and be in character with the historic district.
2. Materials: Metals:
Masonry:
Accent masonry:
Black or dark (gun
metal) blue/gray
Dark red brick blend
Smooth (terra cotta) red/brown
tinted concrete/sandstone
Cut limestone
3. Shapes - Both commercial and residential areas exist within this zone.
Commercial signs shall be predominately horizontal in shape with angular
projections. The area near downtown is older where commercial signs were
typically very horizontal against the building just above the awning.
4. Graphics - Designated geometric shape: Square with rounded corners
Dominant color: Bright Blue
Dark color:
Secondary background color:
5. Commercial Signs
Dark (terracotta) red/brown
Tan or sand
a. Freestanding Sign
I. Monument Sign
11. Shingle Sign
1. Maximum Height: Five (5) feet
2. Maximum Area: Thirty-two (32) square feet
1. Maximum Height: Ten (10) feet; Six (6) foot minimum
clearance from ground to the bottom of the sign face
2. Maximum Area: Twelve (12) square feet
b. Attached Building (Wall) Sign
i. Maximum Area: Twenty-five (25) square feet
6. Residential Signs
a. Freestanding Sign: All uses except for one and two family residences are
permitted to erect a freestanding sign subject to the following:
i. Monument Sign
11. Shingle Sign
1. Maximum Height: Five (5) feet
2. Maximum Area: Six (6) square feet
1. Maximum Height: Ten (10) feet; Six (6) foot minimum
clearance from ground to the bottom of the sign face
2. Maximum Area: Eight (8) square feet
XX-12
m. Post Supported Sign
I. Maximum Height: Five (5) feet
2. Maximum Area: Twenty-four (24) square feet
Required Landscaping
The following plants have characteristics (color, texture, form) that would complement
signs in this district. These generally have red and pink flowers. The plants listed below
will be required with any development within the Overlay District unless substitute plant
material is approved by the Zoning Administrator. All point requirements will be
determined by the underlying zoning district and be in accordance with Section XXVIII of
the Zoning Ordinance. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34, May 17, 2010)
Low-Profile Plants (6-24" height)
Perennials - Red-flowering Daylilies, Autumn Joy Sedum, Miscanthus Flame
Grass
Evergreen Ground Cover- Liriope, Buffalo Juniper
Medium-Profile Plants (3' to 6' height)
Deciduous Shrubs (Two (2) points each) - Roses (Nearly Wild and Knock-out),
Spirea (Froebelii, Anthony Waterer)
Evergreen Shrubs (Three (3) points each) - Hardy Boxwood, Spreading Yew,
Japanese Holly, Oregon Holly-Grape, Techny Arborvitae
Small Trees (15' to 30' height) -Twelve (12) points each
Deciduous - Red-Pink Flowering Crabapple (Prairiefire, Cardinal), Redbud, Pink
Flowering Dogwood
Large Trees (30' and over height) - Eighteen (18) points each
Canopy Trees (Deciduous) - Sugar Maple, Norway Maple, Red Oak, Swamp
White Oak, Black Tupelo, Redmond Linden
Evergreen Trees - Blackhills Spruce
XX-13
City of
Decatur, IL
Commercial Attached
Building Sign
~ Decatur ~
Commercial Masonry
Monument Sign
Commercial Shingle Sign
XX-14
Massie Massie & Associates
1210 S Fifth Street
Springfield, IL 62703
217-544-3210
10n1106
fl
Residential Masonry Monument
Post Supported Residential Sign
City of
Decatur, IL
Residential Shingle Sign
XX-15
Min
Massie Massie &. Associates
1210 S Fifth Street
Springfield. IL 62703
217-544-3210
10127/06
F. LF-OL LAKEFRONT OVERLAY DISTRICT
1. Intent
The intent of the LF-OL Lakefront Overlay District is to provide standards that
encourage recreation and allow for the continued preservation and use of the parks and
the lake while supporting special needs that facilitate the use of the parks and the lake as
economic catalysts that draw visitors to the City of Decatur. The Overlay District shall
link traditional park and lake activities with uses that generate revenues to offset the
expense of non-revenue generating elements and support the long-term care and
maintenance of the park and lake and overall growth and development of the Decatur
community. The Overlay District shall be designed to protect and preserve the existing
character of surrounding neighborhoods.
2. District Boundary
a. At the time of application, the applicant seeking establishment of an LF-OL
Lakefront Overlay District must provide (in addition to the required submittals
for rezoning, as outlined in Section XXIX) the following:
L A map depicting the boundaries of the LF-OL District, with a legal
description of the same;
11. Justification of the proposed boundaries. This may take the form of a master
plan, site plan or projections of future land use needs.
b. The boundaries may be amended via the same process as used to establish the
initial overlay district.
c. The Overlay District Boundary has been divided into four areas designated by
use. Each area has been defined herein.
3. Definitions
In addition to the definitions set forth in Section II, the following definitions shall apply
specifically to the LF-OL. In the event that there is a conflict between definitions in
Section II and this Section, those in this Section shall control.
a. Area 1 - Beginning at the Intersection of the East right of way line of 22nd
Street with the South right of way line of Powers Boulevard; thence easterly
along the said R.O.W. line of Powers Boulevard to its intersection the East right
of way line of Nelson Boulevard; thence northerly along the said East right of
way line to a point which is 700 feet south (perpendicular) of the Southwest
right of way line of U.S. Route 36; thence Southeasterly on a line which is 700
feet Southwest (perpendicular distance) to the said Southwest line of U.S. Route
36 to a point 100 feet east of Elevation 615; thence westerly on a line 100 feet
east of Elevation 615 1400 feet; thence northwesterly to a point which is 50 feet
west/north of Elevation 615; thence southwesterly 800 feet on a line which is
50 feet west/north of Elevation 615
XX-16
b. and parallel to said elevation; thence northerly 750 feet to a point which is on a
line which is the extension of the north line of East Cantrell Street extended
easterly; thence westerly on the said north line of East Cantrell Street extended
easterly to the intersection of said line with the East right of way line of 22nd
Street; thence northerly along said right of way line of 22nd Street to the point
of beginning.
c. Area 2 - That part of the Overlay District Boundary lying south and west of
Area 1 and north of the centerline of the intersection of the main entrance access
to St. Mary's Hospital with Lake Shore Drive.
d. Area 3 - That part of the Overlay District Boundary lying between the South
right of way line of U.S. Route 36 and a line which is 700 feet south of and
parallel to the said South right of way line of U.S. Route 36. This area is
bounded by Nelson Boulevard to the west and Lake Decatur to the east.
e. Area 4 - That part of the Overlay District Boundary lying South of the
centerline of the intersection of the main entrance access to St. Mary's Hospital
with Lake Shore Drive. This area is bounded by Lake Shore Drive, Lost Bridge
Road and Lake Decatur.
f. Hardscape - The manmade part of the grounds including the building, paved
areas, pavilions, patios, retaining walls and the like.
g. Pervious Pavement - A paving material that allows water to penetrate to the
ground below. Pervious pavement is designed to allow percolation or
infiltration of storm water through the surface into the soil below where the
water is naturally filtered and pollutants are removed.
h. Recreational Rental Establishments - A facility that rents recreational items
such as, but not limited to: paddle boats, canoes, skis, boats, golf carts, bikes,
kayaks, segways, and sporting, swimming, recreational and boating equipment.
i. Commercial Space - Space that is utilized by retail, restaurants, and
professional offices.
4. Permitted Uses
a. The following uses may be located within the Lakefront Overlay District, Area
1:
1. Automated teller machines (walk up facility only).
2. Commercial boat tour facilities.
3. Government building or use.
4. Parking or storage garage.
5. Recreation, commercial: indoor and outdoor facilities.
XX-17
6. Recreational rental establishments.
7. Retail uses (may not exceed 1,200 square feet in area).
b. The following uses may be located within the Lakefront Overlay District, Area
2:
1. Automated teller machines (walk up facility only).
2. Commercial boat tour facilities.
3. Government building or use.
4. Parking or storage garage.
5. Professional office uses.
6. Recreation, commercial: indoor and outdoor facilities.
7. Recreational rental establishments.
8. Restaurants: carry-out; convenience; fast food; sit down. Drive-thru
facilities are prohibited.
9. Retail uses (may not exceed 1,200 square feet in area).
10. Two family residence, multiple family dwelling, and mixed use
(permitted with a residential use only).
c. The following uses may be located within the Lakefront Overlay District, Area
3:
1. Automated teller machines (walk up facility only).
2. Commercial boat tour facilities.
3. Government building or use.
4. Hotel or motel.
5. Parking or storage garage.
6. Recreation, commercial: indoor and outdoor facilities
7. Recreational rental establishments.
8. Restaurants: carry-out; convenience; fast food; sit down.
9. Retail uses (may not exceed 1,200 square feet in area).
d. The following uses may be located within the Lakefront Overlay District, Area
4:
1. Automated teller machines (walk up facility only).
2. Commercial boat tour facilities.
3. Government building or use.
4. Parking or storage garage.
5. Professional office uses.
6. Restaurants: carry-out; convenience; fast food; sit down. Drive-thru
facilities are prohibited.
7. Retail uses (may not exceed 1,200 square feet in area).
8. Two family residence, multiple family dwelling, and mixed use
(permitted with a residential use only).
XX-18
e. The uses listed herein may be established regardless of the underlying zoning,
subject to all requirements of Section XX.F.
5. Buildings per Area
More than one ( 1) building may occupy an Area as defined in this Section, provided that
all applicable regulations, including minimum setback, building separation and off-street
parking requirements as defined herein, can be met.
6. Height, Area and Setback Regulations
As this development is a master planned development with the Decatur Park District
being the owner of all of the property there will be no subdivision of the property into
lots. The only setback will be to the property line.
Area 1
a. Minimum Lot Area: none
b. Front, Rear and Side Yard Setbacks: 40 feet from any property line
c. Minimum Distance Between Structures: 8 feet
d. Maximum Building and/or Structure Height:
i. One (1) 4 story building and/or structure not to exceed 50 feet in height;
Two (2) stories for all other buildings and/or structures not to exceed 30 feet
in height.
e. Number of Residential Units: None
f. Maximum Square Footage of Commercial Space: 10,000
Area2
a. Minimum Lot Area: none
b. Front, Rear and Side Yard Setbacks: 25 feet from any property line
c. Minimum Distance Between Structures: 8 feet
d. Maximum Building and/or Structure Height:
I. Two (2) 5 story buildings and/or structures for mixed use not to exceed 60
feet in height; Three (3) stories for all other buildings and/or structures not
to exceed 40 feet in height.
e. Number of Residential Units: Not to exceed 60
f. Maximum Square Footage of Commercial Space: 110,000
Area3
a. Minimum Lot Area: none
b. Front, Rear and Side Yard Setbacks: 40 feet from any property line
c. Minimum Distance Between Structures: 8 feet
d. Maximum Building and/or Structure Height:
1. One (1) 8 story building and/or structure, not to exceed 100 feet in height;
Two (2) 5 story buildings and/or structures not to exceed 60 feet; all other
building and/or structures, Two (2) stories not to exceed 30 feet in height.
e. Number of Residential Units: None.
XX-19
f. Maximum Square Footage of Commercial Space: 50,000
Area4
a. Minimum Lot Area: none
b. Front, Rear and Side Yard Setbacks: 40 feet from any property line
c. Minimum Distance Between Structures: 8 feet
d. Maximum Building and/or Structure Height:
1. Number of stories: Seven (7) 3 story buildings and/or structures, not to
exceed 40 feet in height; Two (2) 8 story buildings and/or structures, not to
exceed 120 feet in height.
e. Number of Residential Units: Not to exceed 300
f. Maximum Square Footage of Commercial Space: 80,000
No structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be permitted
to grow in any regulated zone or airspace to a height that would nullify or void any
state or federal licenses or approvals held by St. Mary's Hospital as of April 4, 2012
for the operation of a hospital heliport, or materially impede the operations of St.
Mary's Hospital heliport as the same existed on April 4, 2012. All construction
must adhere to all federal and state requirements as set forth in applicable state and
federal Regulations.
7. Parking
a. No less than fifty-percent (50%) of required parking shall be paved with a
minimum of two (2) inches of Class I asphalt or concrete over a six (6) inch
aggregate base. The remainder of the parking shall be constructed with an
approved pervious pavement system.
b. All parking lots shall be setback a minimum of ten ( 10) feet from any property
line.
Area 1
a. Parking is not required to be located within 300 feet of the building and/or
structure.
b. Amphitheatre
i. One ( 1) space per every four ( 4) fixed seats and one ( 1) space for every I 00
square feet of performance lawn area.
c. Pavilion
i. One ( 1) space for every 100 square feet of floor area.
Area2
a. Parking spaces are not required to be located within 300 feet of the building.
b. One and one-half (1.5) parking spaces per residential unit.
c. One ( 1) parking space for every 200 square feet of commercial space.
Area3
XX-20
a. Hotel
t. One (1) parking space for each room to be rented, plus one (1) additional
space for each three (3) employees.
b. Miniature Golf
i. One and one-half (1.5) parking spaces per hole.
c. Water Park
t. One (1) parking space per four (4) persons based on design capacity.
Area4
a. Fifty-percent (50%) of required spaces must be located within 300 feet of
building served.
b. One and one-half ( 1.5) parking spaces per residential unit.
c. One (1) parking space for every 200 square feet of commercial space.
8. Landscaping
a. For every tree removed within Areas 1, 2, 3, and 4 a tree must be replanted
within that same Area.
b. Front yard points shall be required for any construction of hardscape within
seventy-five (75) feet of public right of way. It shall be calculated at one-half
(.5) point for every linear foot of affected frontage.
c. All deciduous trees shall be a minimum of Two (2) inch caliper and all
evergreens shall be a minimum of Six (6) Feet in height at time of installation.
9. Exterior Lighting
All lighting shall be subject to the requirements set forth in Section XXVIII.J.
10. Signage
a. Identifying signs. For the purpose of this section, an "identifying sign" is a
freestanding sign that identifies the park and/or the developed campus as a
whole.
i. Maximum Number: Ten (10)
ii. Maximum Area: 100 square feet
iii. Maximum Height: 30 feet
iv. Minimum Setback: Five (5) feet
v. One (1) of the identifying signs may be a total of 150 square feet and may
only be located in Area 3.
b. Individual building or attractions identification signs. Each individual building
or attraction within the LF-OL may have a freestanding sign or signs identifying
the name, use, purpose and/or tenants of the building, subject to the following
requirements:
i. Maximum Number per Building or Attraction: Two (2)
II. Maximum Area: Ten (10) square feet
XX-21
iii. Maximum Height: Seven (7) feet
iv. Minimum Setback: Five (5) feet
c. Wall Signs. Wall Signs shall be subject to the requirements set forth in Section
XXV.E.
d. Wayfinding Signs. For the purpose of this Section, a "wayfinding sign" shall
be a sign with the express purpose of giving directions to locate a specific
building, attraction, or portion thereof or to any location, individual, use or
program within the overlay. Wayfinding signs may be placed anywhere on the
campus for the purpose of directing vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Such signs
may contain multiple faces, provided that the total area of each face does not
exceed the maximum stated below. A wayfinding sign may contain a logo or
other script identifying the overlay district, provided that no more than 25
percent of the area of any sign face shall be utilized for such advertising.
1. Maximum Number: No limit, provided that they are placed in appropriate
locations to direct traffic. Wayfinding signs shall be limited to one (1) per
street intersection.
ii. Maximum Area: Twenty (25) square feet
iii. Maximum Height: Fifteen (15) feet
iv. Minimum Setback: Ten (10) feet
e. Electronic Message Units - Electronic Message Units shall only be allowed in
Area 2 and Area 3 subject to the requirements set forth in Section XXV.9.a.
thru g. andj. for an 0-1 District. Electronic Message Units in Area 2 and Area
3 shall be subject to the requirements set forth in Section XXV.9.h. and i. for a
residentially-zoned district.
Electronic Message Units shall be included in the total allowed number and
total square footage of identifying signs and freestanding signs.
Electronic message units in Areas 2 and 3 will not be subject to the requirements
in Section XXV.9.k.
f. No off-premise signs shall be permitted in the LF-OL.
g. All signs, unless otherwise specified by ordinance, shall conform to the
requirements of section XXV. Signage.
(Amended Ordinance 2012-17; April 16, 2012)
XX-22
SECTION XXI. EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT AND AREA
REQUIREMENTS
A. TABLE OF HEIGHT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS
The accompanying table is a compilation of the height and area requirements listed for
each zoning district. The table is for reference purposes only and does not override the
standards listed in the foregoing sections for each zoning district.
B. EXCEPTIONS TO MAXIMUM HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
Exceptions to the requirements establishing maximum heights for structures and uses and
to the maximum number of st01ies are as follows:
1. For all uses
Both height in stories and height in feet apply equally. Except by providing additional
setback as otherwise noted, a building may not exceed either limitation.
2. For certain structures
The height regulations prescribed herein shall not apply to steeples and spires, belfries,
minarets, monuments, tanks, water and fire towers, stage towers, or scenery lofts,
cooling towers, ornamental towers and spires, chimneys, grain elevators, elevator
bulkheads, silos, smokestacks, conveyors and flag poles.
3. For certain uses
Public, semi-public, public-utility or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or
schools, where permitted, may be erected to a height not exceeding eighty (80) feet and
places of worship may be erected to a height not exceeding seventy-five (75) feet when
the required front, side and rear yards are each increased by one foot for each foot of
additional building height above the height regulations for the district in which the
building is located.
4. From regulations concerning the maximum number of stories
The limitation on number of stories shall not apply to buildings used exclusively for
storage purposes provided such buildings do not exceed the height in feet permitted in
the district in which they are located.
5. Exception from height for increased setback
Buildings in the R-6, 0-1, B-1, B-2 and B-3 Districts located on property where the
entire property is within 900 feet of the B-4 Central Business District may be built to a
height of 6 stories and 75 feet if the building is set back from all property lines an
additional one (1) foot above the stated setback requirements for each 2 Y2 feet the
building exceeds the height maximum stated for each district. All other buildings on
property in the R-6, 0-1, B-1, B-2 and B-3 districts may be built to a height of 6 stories
and 75 feet if the building is set back from all property lines an additional one (1) foot
above the stated setback requirements for each one ( 1) foot the building exceeds the
height maximum stated for each district.
XXI-1
Buildings Yard Depths Side Yard Width Lot Size
Districts Maximum Height Minimum Minimum Minimum
ggregatc
Stories eet Pront Feet ear Feet !Either Feet eet Width in Feet Area Per Family Square Feel
Residential
R-1 21h 35 30 20 10 20 80 20,000
R-2 21h 35 25 16 8 16 60 9,000
R-3 21h 35 25 12 5 12 50 6,000
R-5 21h 35 25 12 5 12 50 l unit 5,000
2 units 2,500
R-6 3 35 25 20 5 12 80 I unit 4,000
2 units 2,500
> 2 units See Sec.
IX.C
Office
0-1 3 45 25 12 5 12 0 Same as R-6
Business
B-1 2 35 25 0 5 10 0 6,500
B-2 2 45 25 0 5 10 0 10,000
B-3 2 35 30 25 50 0 0 20,000
B-4 12 150 0 0 0 0 0 200
Industrial
M-1 10 125 25 0 5 10 0 6,500
M-2 10 125 25 0 0 0 0 10,000
M-3 See Special Regulations in Section XVIII.
TABLE OF HEIGHT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS: For illustrative purposes only. See text for requirements.
XXI-2
6. Exception from height in the Central Business District
In the B-4 District, a building may exceed twelve (12) stories or 150 feet if set back
from all yard lines one foot for each two feet of height above 150 feet, but no building
shall exceed the cubical contents of a prism having a base equal to the area of the lot
and a height of two (2) times the width of the street upon which said building fronts.
7. Exception from height in the Industrial Districts
Whenever a building in any "M" District adjoins or abuts any Residence District, within
100 feet there from, such building shall not exceed three (3) stories or forty-five (45)
feet in height unless it is set back one (1) foot from the required yard lines for each one
(1) foot of vertical height over forty-five (45) feet.
C. EXCEPTIONS TO YARD SETBACKS - GENERAL
1. Buff er yards
Notwithstanding any exceptions enumerated in this Section, except for fences as
allowed below no structure or parking area may extend into a buffer yard as required
in Section XXVIII.
2. Parking Areas
Parking spaces and lots may be located within any required yard, subject to the
requirements of Section XXIV.
3. Structures and Plantings
In all zoning districts, no structure or planting shall be constructed at a height greater
than three and one-half (3 1/2) feet above the established street grades within the vision
clearance triangle nor shall any structure or planting limit the clear sight of vehicular
traffic.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-38, May 18, 2009)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
4. Fuel pumps and canopies
At automobile service stations and gasoline stations, pumps, pump islands, and
appurtenant fixtures located thereon may be located within a required setback provided
they are not less than fifteen (15) feet from any right-of-way line and not less than forty
(40) feet from the boundary of any residential district. Fuel pumps and pump islands
may be located beneath a fixed and permanent canopy, provided that the leading edge
of the canopy is set back from all property lines no less than ten ( 10) feet and the support
structures are situated so that clear sight distances are unobstructed along adjacent
streets.
XXI-3
5. Signs and outdoor advertising
On-premise and off-premise signs, including free-standing signs and signs that project
into a required yard, may be located within a required setback consistent with the
provisions of Section XXV, Signage.
6. Exterior lighting
Light standards may be located within a required yard setback provided such standards
are located not less than five (5) feet from any right-of-way line, nor within ten (10)
feet of any residential district, with the condition that the light pattern be shielded so
that the illumination does not carry over to adjacent residential district property,
consistent with Section XXVIII, Landscaping and Exterior Lighting. No billboard,
poster, flag, pennant, streamer, outdoor display or other advertising device shall at any
time be attached to such light standards.
7. Sills, etc.
The ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, cornices, roof overhang and ornamental
features may extend to a distance not to exceed eighteen (18) inches into a required
yard. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
8. Wheelchair ramps
An open, uncovered wheelchair ramp may project into a required yard of a dwelling
occupied by a handicapped person, provided that no alternative placement of the ramp
is available which does not require extension into the required setback, and further that
any such extension into the required setback be minimized as much as possible, giving
due consideration to the individual circumstances of the property.
D. EXCEPTIONS TO FRONT YARD SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
Regulations concerning the minimum setbacks for front yards are as follows:
1. Single family districts
In R-1, R-2, and R-3 Single Family Residential Districts, a dwelling unit may project
beyond the minimum front yard setback provided the following requirements are
satisfied:
a. At least forty ( 40) percent of the lots fronting the same side of the street located
between two intersecting streets already maintain less than the minimum
setback as required by the applicable zoning district; and
b. The front yard setback shall meet or exceed the mean front yard setback
distance of all developed properties located between the two intersecting
streets.
2. Corner and through lots
On lots having multiple frontages (i.e. with frontage on two or more streets) the
required front yard shall be provided adjacent to all streets.
XXI-4
3. Porches and terraces
An open, uncovered porch or paved terrace may project into the required front yard for
a distance of not more than five (5) feet, but this shall not be interpreted to include or
permit fixed canopies.
4. Non-Conforming Porches and Terraces
An existing non-conforming porch or terrace may be replaced or rebuilt to its current
dimensions, provided that the replacement structure does not project into the required
front yard more than eight (8) feet.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-92, November 15, 2004)
5. Display of merchandise within setback
Except on pump islands where incidental to a permitted outdoor automobile service
station or gasoline station, merchandise offered for sale or rent shall not be displayed
or stored in the required front yard.
E. EXCEPTIONS TO SIDE YARD SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
Regulations concerning the minimum setbacks for side yards are as follows:
1. Corner lots
On a corner lot the width of the yard along the side street shall not be less than any
required front yard on such street, provided, however, that the buildable width of a lot
of record shall not be reduced to less than twenty-six (26) feet. Such corner side yard
is subject to all the same restrictions and exceptions for front yards.
2. Porte-cocheres and canopies
A porte-cochere or canopy may project into a required side yard provided that the
exterior walls of such porte-cochere or canopy are unenclosed and that no part of the
structure is less than five (5) feet from any side lot line.
3. Two-family and multiple dwellings
For the purpose of side yard regulations, a two-family dwelling or multiple dwelling
shall be considered as one building occupying one lot.
4. Lots less than 50 feet in width
Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance is less than fifty
(50) feet in width, the required aggregate side yard may be reduced to ten (10) percent
of the width of the lot, provided, however, that no interior side yard shall be less than
three (3) feet.
XXI-5
F. EXCEPTIONS TO REAR YARD SETBACK REQUIREMENTS
Regulations concerning the minimum setbacks for rear lots are as follows:
Accessory buildings
An accessory building not exceeding twenty (20) feet in height may occupy no more
than thirty (30) percent of the area of the entire rear yard; however, no accessory
building shall be closer than eight (8) feet to the main building nor closer than three (3)
feet to any rear or side lot line.
1. Unenclosed parking areas
Unenclosed parking spaces may occupy not to exceed ninety (90) percent of the area
of a required rear yard
2. Fire escapes, etc.
Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, outside stairways and balconies opening upon
fire towers, and the ordinary projects of chimneys and flues into a rear yard may be
permitted by the Building Inspector for a distance not to exceed five (5) feet when these
are so placed as not to obstruct light and ventilation.
G. EXCEPTIONS TO MINIMUM LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS
The following regulations concern exceptions to the minimum lot areas prescribed in this
Ordinance:
1. Single family dwellings
Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance has less area or
width than herein required in the district in which it is located, and the owner of such
lot does not own any other parcel or tract adjacent thereto, said lot may nonetheless be
used for a one-family dwelling or for any non-dwelling use permitted in the district in
which it is located.
2. Multiple family dwellings
If the building site, or any part thereof, for a multiple dwelling is more than 900 feet
from a B-4 Central Business District, the minimum lot area per dwelling unit may be
reduced by two and a half (2Y2) percent for each story thereof above two (2), provided
that said minimum lot area shall not be reduced to less than 90% of that required by the
provisions of Section IX or 5,000 square feet, whichever is the larger.
3. Retirement housing facilities-exception based upon reduction in required parking
spaces.
If the building site, or any part thereof, for retirement housing facilities is more than
900 feet from a B-4 Central Business District, and the minimum number of required
parking spaces is permitted to be reduced pursuant to the provisions of Section XXIV
then the required minimum lot areas for said multiple dwelling may be reduced by 300
square feet for each parking space by which said minimum number of required parking
spaces is so reduced, provided that no such lot area shall be reduced to less than 5,000
square feet.
XXI-6
4. Exception from minimum lot size
The minimum lot area for multiple dwellings shall be determined by the type and number
of dwelling units therein as set out herein, provided that no such lot area shall be less than
5,000 square feet. If the entire building site for such multiple dwelling is within 900 feet
of a B-4 Central Business District, the minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be 750
square feet. If the building site, or any part thereof, is more than 900 feet from a B-4
District, the minimum square feet of lot area per dwelling unit shall be: 750 square feet for
each efficiency unit; 900 square feet for each one bedroom unit; 1200 square feet for each
two bedroom unit; and 1500 square feet for each unit with three or more bedrooms.
XXI-7
SECTION XXll. CONDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS
A. CONDITIONAL USES, GENERALLY
1. Authority of Council
The City Council may by ordinance grant a conditional use permit only for the uses
prescribed in the "Conditional Use" subsections of Sections V through XVIII inclusive,
of this Ordinance. The Council may impose appropriate conditions and safeguards,
including a specified time period for the permit, to conform to the comprehensive plan
and to conserve and protect property values in the neighborhood.
2. Review by Plan Commission
Before authorization of any of the above conditional uses, the request therefore shall
be referred to the City Plan Commission for study and report concerning the effect of
the proposed use on the comprehensive plan and compliance with the standards as
enumerated below, and a public hearing shall be held in relation thereto before the Plan
Commission, notice and publication of the time and place for which shall conform to
the procedure prescribed in Section XXIX for hearings on amendments. If no report is
transmitted by the Plan Commission within sixty (60) days of notification, the City
Council may take action without further awaiting such report.
3. Standards
No conditional use shall be granted unless the conditional use:
a. Is necessary for the public convenience at that location;
b. Is so designed, located, and proposed to be operated that the public health,
safety and welfare will be protected; and
c. Will not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the
neighborhood in which it is to be located.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
B. APPLICATION
An application for a Conditional Use Permit shall be on a form provided by the Planning
and Building Services Department and shall be accompanied by a site plan containing, at
minimum, the following:
1. General location, setback and size of all structures
2. Location of all access points adjacent to site
3. Number and size of parking spaces, loading spaces and traffic circulation on site
4. Zoning of the property in question and zoning of all adjacent parcels
XXII-1
5. Location of existing and proposed utilities: This requirement may be waived when
the use is proposed to be located within an existing building where adequate utilities
are already provided.
6. Any other information deemed necessary to review the proposal as required by the
Zoning Administrator. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34)
C. HISTORIC NEIGHBORHOOD USE REGULATIONS
In addition to the process required for Conditional Uses, a request for a Historical
Neighborhood Use shall conform to the following:
1. A Historic Neighborhood Use is allowed only on properties within the boundaries
of a locally-designated Historic District, National Register Historic District, or on
a property that has been designated a Historic and Architectural Landmark, as
established under the regulations of Ordinance No. 78-159.
2. Prior to review by the Plan Commission, a request for a Historical Neighborhood
Use must be reviewed by the Historical and Architectural Sites Commission
(HASC). The use may be reviewed by the Plan Commission only if the HASC
determines that the historical and architectural character of the exterior of the
building will be preserved. No Conditional Use Permit for a Historical and
Architectural Use may be issued sooner than 30 days after the application and plans
have been filed with the HASC.
3. In evaluating a Historic Neighborhood Use, the Plan Commission and City Council
must find that the proposed use and exterior appearance as shown by plans and
drawings submitted by the petitioner preserves the historic character of the building
as well as the historic and architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood.
4. A permit for a Historical Neighborhood Use shall be for a specific use only. Any
change in use other than a use specifically permitted within the zoning district will
require a new Conditional Use application.
5. In addition to any other conditions that may be imposed on the use by the City
Council, a Historical Neighborhood Use may only be permitted under the condition
that the exterior appearance of the building, as previously reviewed by the HASC,
is maintained.
D. NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION USE REGULATIONS
In addition to the process required for Conditional Uses, a request for a Neighborhood
Preservation Use shall conform to the following:
1. A Neighborhood Preservation Use is permitted only on property within a
Neighborhood Preservation District as established by ordinance by the City
Council.
2. In evaluating a Neighborhood Preservation Use, the Plan Commission and City
Council must find that the proposed use and exterior appearance as shown by plans
XXII-2
and drawings submitted by the petitioner preserves the residential character of the
building as well as the residential character of the surrounding neighborhood.
3. A permit for a Neighborhood Preservation Use shall be for a specific use only. Any
change in use other than a use specifically permitted within the zoning district will
require a new Conditional Use application.
XXII-3
SECTION XXlll. NON-CONFORMING USES
A. GENERALLY
1. All lawful uses or structures within the City limits of the City of Decatur which
were in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance prior to the adoption or any
subsequent amendment thereto that do not conform to the land use and development
regulations of the City of Decatur as codified herein, are hereby declared to be nonconforming.
A Non-Conforming Use Permit may be granted for uses or structures
in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance prior to the adoption of the Zoning
Ordinance or subsequent amendments that have been rendered non-conforming by
the Zoning Ordinance or amendments thereto.
2. Lawful uses or structures that do not conform to the regulations herein as a result
of changes in district boundaries are also hereby declared non-conforming.
3. Such non-conforming uses or structures are hereby declared to be lawful and shall
not be required to be altered to conform with such regulations as adopted by the
City of Decatur, provided however, that such uses or structures are restricted and
subject to the requirements defined in this Section.
4. Whenever a non-conforming use or structure has been changed or improved to a
more restricted state or to a conforming structure or use, such structure or use may
not thereafter be changed to a less restricted or non-conforming state unless the City
Council grants a non-conforming use permit. A Non-Conforming Use Permit may
be granted when all requirements described in this Section are met.
5. The Planning and Building Services Department shall have the authority to assign
a zoning classification to each non-conforming use. The assigned classification
may be appealed to the City Manager.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-38, May 18, 2009)
B. NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES
Subject to the following regulations, any structure that lawfully existed on the effective
date of this Ordinance that does not conform to all provisions herein:
1. Shall not be extended, enlarged, replaced, reconstructed, moved, or structurally
altered except when required to do so by law or as to conform with the provisions
of this Ordinance.
2. Notwithstanding the above, an existing non-conforming main building or structure
located in an R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-5 district may be enlarged, replaced or altered, but
only if such change does not lead to an increase in the non-conforming nature of
the structure. No such change can be allowed if it would lead to an increase in the
parking requirements for the use or uses unless on-site parking spaces can be
accommodated in accordance with this Ordinance.
XXIII-1
3. In all Districts except R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-5, no changes or structural alterations
shall be permitted which would vary the yard size requirements, setback
requirements, building height or bulk limitation, or the lot size or coverage
limitations of a building or structure housing a non-conforming use, unless such
changes conform to all the provisions of the zoning district in which such a building
is located.
4. Any non-conforming building or structure damaged by fire, explosion, flood,
similar act of God or by the public enemy to the extent that the cost of restoration
would exceed fifty (50%) percent of the structure's assessed value at the time such
event occurred, may be restored or reconstructed without enlargement or extension
and used as before such damage, provided:
a. Restoration or reconstruction is completed and the same use resumed
within twelve (12) months from the date of the damage; and,
b. Proof in the form of a certified land survey performed by a Professional
Land Surveyor licensed by the State of Illinois shall be provided to the
Zoning Administrator illustrating the pre-existing structure's footprint and
setbacks from all property lines.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34, May 17, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-38, May 18, 2009)
C. NON-CONFORMING USES
Subject to the following regulations, any use that lawfully existed on the effective date of
this Ordinance or amendments(s) thereto, that does not conform with all provisions herein:
1. Shall not be expanded, moved or extended beyond the scope and area of its
operation on the effective date of this Ordinance or amendment thereto. However,
a non-conforming use may be expanded provided that it meets all provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance including but not limited to parking, landscaping and lighting.
No non-conforming use shall be expanded, moved or extended except as authorized
by the City Council, following public hearing before the Plan Commission.
2. Shall not be changed to another non-conforming use, unless such change shall be
to a non-conforming use of the same or of a more restrictive classification, and no
structural alteration or expansion of the structure housing the use is required.
3. Shall not, after being discontinued in use for a period of one (1) year or more, be
re-established unless in conformance with all requirements of this Ordinance.
However, a non-conforming use may be re-established provided that it meets the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance for parking, landscaping and lighting. No nonconforming
use shall be expanded, moved or extended except as authorized by the
City Council, following public hearing before the Plan Commission.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-38, May 18, 2009)
XXIII-2
D. NON-CONFORMING USE PERMIT
A Non-Conforming Use Permit shall only be required for the re-establishment of a nonconforming
use, expansion of a non-conforming use, change in non-conforming use to a
more restrictive non-conforming use, and I or for any alterations to a non-conforming
structure.
Non-Conforming Use Permits shall be granted for the use and I or structure subject to the
requirements of this section. A Non-Conforming Use Permit shall permit the use/structure
to continue operation and to be rebuilt if it becomes damaged beyond fifty (50) percent of
its assessed value at the time such event occurred.
A Non-Conforming Use Permit shall be required to continue a use in the event the use has
been discontinued for a period of one (1) year or more; and the use is not permitted within
the Zoning District in which it lies. A Non-Conforming Use Permit shall also be required
for the expansion of a non-conforming use or for a change to a more restrictive use.
Re-establishment of Use
I. The burden of proving any previously established non-conforming use is to be
met by the person seeking to re-establish the use and applying for a NonConforming
Use Permit. Such persons shall provide sufficient proof in a form
acceptable to the Zoning Administrator of the following:
a. Date of construction of the building or structure or date the use was
established (proof may consist of a certified copy of the business license or
building permit).
b. Continuous operation of the non-conforming use (proof may consist of
affidavits signed by persons having personal knowledge of the use of the
premises since the use was established).
c. Such other proof as may be deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34, May 17, 2010)
2. The non-conforming use must have been legally conforming at the time of its
creation.
Expansion of Use
1. Prior to granting an expansion of use, the current use shall be proven to be a legally
non-conforming use. The burden of proving a non-conforming use is to be met by
the person seeking a Non-Conforming Use Permit to allow for expansion. Such
person shall provide sufficient proof in a form acceptable to the Zoning
Administrator of the following:
XXIII-3
a. Date of construction of the building or structure or date the use was
established (proof may consist of a certified copy of the business license or
building permit).
b. Continuous operation of the non-conforming use (proof may consist of
affidavits signed by persons having personal knowledge of the use of the
premises since the use was established).
c. A detailed site plan certified by a Professional Engineer licensed by the State
of Illinois shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator illustrating the
existing structure and proposed expansion.
d. Such other proof as may be deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34, May 17, 2010)
2. The non-conforming use must have been legally conforming at the time of its creation.
Change of Use
1. Prior to granting a change of use, the current use or a previous use shall be proven to
be/have been a non-conforming use. The burden of proving any established nonconforming
use is to be met by the person seeking a Non-Conforming Use Permit. Such
persons shall provide sufficient proof in a form acceptable to the Zoning Administrator of
the following:
a. Date of construction of the building or structure or date the use was established
(proof may consist of a certified copy of the business license or building
permit).
b. Continuous operation of the non-conforming use (proof may consist of affidavits
signed by persons having personal knowledge of the use of the premises since
the use was established).
c. A detailed site plan certified by a Professional Engineer licensed by the State of
Illinois shall be provided to the Zoning Administrator if alterations to the
structure are proposed.
d. Such other proof as may be deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34, May 17, 2010)
2. The non-conforming use must have been legally conforming at the time of its creation.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-38, May 18, 2009)
XXIII-4
SECTION XXIV. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
REQUIREMENTS
A. OFF-STREET PARKING MANDATED
In all districts there shall be provided at the time any building or structure is erected or
structurally altered (except as specified in Subsection B of this Section), off-street parking
spaces in accordance with the following requirements, provided, however, that no off-street
parking need be provided for any of these uses when they are located in the B-4 Central
Business District.
B. COMPUTATION OF REQUIRED SPACES
In computing the number of such parking spaces required, the following rules shall govern:
1. Rounding of spaces
Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be the
nearest whole number, except that fractional results of exactly one-half shall be
rounded upwards.
2. Uses not listed.
The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the
same as required for use of similar nature, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34, May 17, 2010)
3. Expansion of existing use
Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the effective date of this
Ordinance is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number or type
of dwelling units, number of members, seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need
for an increase of 10 percent or more in the number of existing parking spaces, such
spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a
building or use existing prior to the effective date of this Ordinance is enlarged to the
extent of 50 percent or more in floor area or in the area used, said building or use shall
then and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein.
4. Mixed use
In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the
requirements of the various uses computed separately.
5. Bench seating
In stadiums, sports arenas, places of worship and other places of assembly in which
those in attendance occupy benches, pews, bleachers or other similar seating facilities,
each 22 inches of such seating shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of
determining the off-street parking requirements set forth in this chapter.
6. Outdoor seating
XXIV-1
Floor area calculations for off-street parking requirements shall include outdoor seating
areas where applicable.
C. REQUIRED NUMBER OF SPACES BY USE
1. Residential and related uses:
Use Number of Required Spaces
a. Dwelling, single or two- Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit
family:
b. Dwellings, multiple: One guest parking space for every five units,
plus one space for each efficiency or each one
(1) bedroom dwelling unit; one and one-half
(l l/2) spaces for each two (2) bedroom
dwelling unit; and two (2) spaces for each
dwelling unit with three (3) or more
bedrooms.
c. Townhouse or rowhouse Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit
d. Rooming or boarding One ( 1) space for each bed
house
e. Dormitory, fraternity or One (1) space for each 100 square feet of
sorority rooms designed for sleeping or one (1) space
for each three (3) active members residing
thereon, whichever is greater
f. Residential Care Home:
I. Fewer than six ( 6) beds Two (2) spaces plus one ( 1) space for each two
(2) employees
ii. Six (6) to nine (9) beds Three (3) spaces plus one (1) space for each
two employees
iii. Ten (10) to twelve (12) Four ( 4) spaces plus one ( 1) space for each
beds two (2) employees
iv. Twelve (12) or more One ( 1) space per each four ( 4) beds or major
beds: portion thereof, plus one (1) space for each
two (2) employees
g. Congregate elderly One (1) space for each employee on the
housing maximum shift plus one (1) space for each
three units.
h. Bed and breakfast Two (2) spaces plus one (1) space per guest
room
i. Family residential care One ( 1) space per bed
facility
XXIV-2
J. Retirement housing
facilities
Seventy-five (75) percent of the requirement
enumerated above for each type of dwelling
unit (i.e., single family, multiple dwellings,
etc.)
2. Public, semi-public and related uses:
Use Number of Required Spaces
a. Place of worship One (1) space for each four (4) seats in the
main auditorium or sanctuary
b. Community center
c. Cultural facility, museum
or art gallery
d. Country club or golf club
e. Clubs: private, fraternal or
membership organization
f. Hospital
g. Intermediate and long-term
care facilities, assisted
living facilities, and similar
institutions
h. Library
i. Day care center
J. Schools
I. Elementary, middle or
pre-kindergarten
IL High Schools
Ten (10) spaces plus one (1) additional space
for each 300 square feet of floor area in excess
of 2,000 square feet
One ( 1) space for each 1,000 square feet
One ( 1) space for each four members, based
on maximum anticipated membership, plus
three (3) spaces per each golf hole or tee.
One (1) space for every ten (10) members.
One ( 1) space per bed
One ( 1) space for each four ( 4) beds and one
(1) space for each two (2) employees
1 space for each 300 square feet of floor area
Two (2) spaces per each three teachers,
employees or administrators; plus one offstreet
passenger loading space per each eight
children enrolled.
One ( 1) space for each fifteen ( 15) students of
the primary structure's design capacity
One ( 1) space for each employee on the
maximum working shift plus one space for
every four (4) students of design capacity.
XXIV-3
iii. College or University
1v. Community College
v. Commercial Schools,
including music and
dance academies
k. Theater or auditorium
One (1) space for every three (3) employees
and members of the staff and one ( 1) space for
every three (3) full-time students not residing
on-campus. Ancillary uses such as residential
facilities (dormitories, fraternities, apartment
houses, etc.), libraries and public facilities are
subject to the parking requirements of their
respective use. (Amended, Ordinance No.
2004-02, January 20, 2004)
One ( 1) space for each 200 square feet of floor
area in classrooms and other teaching stations.
Ancillary uses such as residential facilities,
libraries, public facilities, etc. are subject to
the parking requirements of their respective
use.
One (1) space for each four (4) pupils during
any class session
One ( 1) space for each four ( 4) seats or bench
seating spaces
3. Service and entertainment business uses:
Use
a. Hotel
b. Automobile repair and
service
c. Automobile service station
and gasoline station
d. Automatic car wash (noncoin
operated)
e. Coin-operated self-service
car wash, coin-operated
automatic wash
Number of Required Spaces
0.9 spaces for each room to be rented, plus
one (1) additional space for each three (3)
employees, plus 75 percent of the requirement
for other uses associated with the
establishment.
Three (3) spaces per service bay plus one (1)
space per each three (3) employees.
One ( 1) space for each 300 square feet of floor
area and one (1) space for each employee on
the maximum working shift.
Three (3) employee parking spaces plus 15
stacking spaces per washing lane.
Three (3) stacking spaces per lane
XXIV-4
f. Restaurant, night club, One (1) space per 100 square feet of floor
cafe, bar, cocktail lounge, area. For drive-up and drive-through uses, ten
or similar food service, (10) stacking spaces per lane are required.
recreation or amusement
establishment
g. Funeral home One ( 1) parking space for each 50 square feet
of floor space in slumber rooms, parlors,
chapels and individual funeral service rooms,
plus one (1) space for each vehicle maintained
on the premises.
h. Repair service One (1) space for each three (3) persons
establishment employed therein.
I. Personal service Two (2) spaces plus one (1) additional space
establishments and pet for each 300 square feet of floor area over
services 1,000.
j. Professional offices One ( 1) space for each 300 square feet of floor
(except medical or dental) area.
or business service
establishments
k. Office, medical or dental One (1) space for each employee plus oneand-
one half (1 Y2) spaces for each examining
room or chair.
1. Financial institutions and One (1) space for each 250 square feet of floor
services area, plus five (5) stacking spaces per lane for
drive-up or drive-through uses.
m. Drive-up and drive-through Five (5) stacking spaces per lane
uses not elsewhere
specified
n. Self-service storage facility Three (3) spaces plus one (1) space per
employee and further provided that a parking
lane having a minimum width of ten feet shall
be provided along and in addition to the
minimum requirement for the traffic lane
serving storage units.
o. All other service and One (1) space for each 200 square feet of floor
entertainment area.
establishments
4. Mercantile business uses:
Use Number of Required Spaces
a. Food stores, supermarkets Six (6) spaces plus one (1) space per 200
and superstores square feet of floor area over 1,000
XXIV-5
b. Convenience food and
beverage store
c. Retail store
d. Furniture or appliance
store, hardware store,
wholesale establishment,
machinery or equipment
sales and service
e. Wholesale or distributing
establishment or
warehouse market open to
the public
f. Automobile Sales
5. Recreational uses:
Use
a. Dance hall, assembly hall
or exhibition hall without
fixed seats
b. Bowling alley
c. Outdoor playing field
d. Golf driving range
e. Golf course, public
f. Health club
g. Sports arena, stadium or
gymnasium
6. Industrial uses:
Use
One (1) space for each 300 square feet of
floor area.
One ( 1) space for each 200 square feet of
floor area except as otherwise specified.
Two (2) spaces plus one (1) additional space
for each 300 square feet of floor area over
1000.
One (I) space for each 500 square feet of
floor area
One ( 1) space for each 600 square feet of
enclosed floor space plus one (1) space for
each 2,000 square feet of outside display area
(Amended, Ordinance 2005-105, 12/19/05)
Number of Required Spaces
One ( 1) space for each 100 square feet of
floor area used therefore.
Five (5) spaces for each alley or lane
One (1) space for each four ( 4) seats or one
(1) space per 3,000 square feet of recreation
area, whichever is greater.
Two (2) spaces plus one (1) space per tee
Two (2) spaces plus four (4) spaces per golf
hole or tee.
One (1) space for each two (2) patrons based
on the maximum occupancy of all on-site
facilities as determined by the Decatur Fire
Chief, plus one (1) space for each employee
on the maximum working shift.
One ( 1) space for each four ( 4) seats
Number of Required Spaces
XXIV-6
a. Wholesale distribution
and/or warehouse,
industrial, laboratory or
manufacturing
(1) space for each two (2) employees on the
maximum working shift plus space to
accommodate all trucks and other vehicles
used in connection therewith.
D. DESIGN OF PARKING SPACES AND LOTS
All parking spaces and parking lots shall be designed as follows:
1. Access to parking spaces
Except in one and two family districts, all parking spaces shall be designed so that the
space can be accessed directly and is not blocked by other parking spaces. One and
two family uses may be allowed to block parking spaces in order to meet the foregoing
minimum parking space requirements, so long as all spaces have access to a public
street or way.
2. Parking Lot Setbacks
a. All parking lots shall be required to meet the following yard setbacks:
R-1, R-2, R-3, 20
R-5, PMR-1 *
R-6, 0-1, B-1, 15
B-2, B-3, M-1,
M-2,M3,PD
B-4 5
Notes:
10
5
0
10
5
0
* This requirement applies to all uses except one and two family residential uses.
See Subsection G, below.
b. Circulation drives may not be located within the required Parking Lot Setback.
Access drives providing direct access from a public right-of-way to the lot may
cross through the required setback.
c. Where a buffer yard is also required, the more restrictive required setback shall
prevail.
d. See Section XXVIII, Landscaping and Exterior Lighting, for reductions
allowed when landscaping is provided.
3. Parking space dimensions: All parking spaces (except parallel spaces) shall have
a minimum width of nine (9) feet and a minimum depth of 18 feet. Angled
spaces shall be designed so that a nominal depth of 18 feet is maintained.
a. Parallel parking spaces shall be nine (9) feet deep and 22 feet wide.
b. An aisle shall be provided behind each parking space (except parallel spaces),
based on the angle of the space, as follows:
XXIV-7
I. Ninety (90) degree spaces: 24 feet
11. Sixty (60) degree spaces: 18 feet
iii. Forty-five (45) degree spaces: 13 feet
1v. Thirty (30) degree spaces: 11 feet
v. Parallel spaces: Parallel spaces shall be adjacent to a traffic aisle as noted
below. The width of the aisle shall be determined by the type of traffic (i.e.,
one- or two-way). Parallel spaces shall be situated so that a vehicle has
adequate room beyond it in order to back into the space.
4. Traffic aisles within parking lots
a. Two-way traffic aisles shall be a minimum of 24 feet wide.
b. One-way traffic aisles:
i. When not providing access to parking spaces: 16 feet wide.
IL When used to access parking spaces: subject to the requirements based on
the angle of the space as enumerated above.
5. Access points
a. Parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access
to a street or alley in such manner as will least interfere with the sight line and
movement of traffic.
b. No driveway or curb cut in any non-residential district shall exceed 25 feet in
width, except that turning radii, divided entrances and exits with island dividers
and joint driveway/curb cuts serving multiple lots or parcels may be permitted
to exceed this standard, subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
c. Accesses that ingress to or egress from roads or highways under jmisdiction
other than the City of Decatur are subject to prior approval by the appropriate
jurisdiction.
6. Landscaping and Lighting. All parking lots shall be landscaped in accordance with
Section XXVIII. All parking lot lighting shall also conform to Section XXVIII.
7. Surface:
a. Paving for One and Two Family Districts
i. Residential uses: All off-street parking areas, driveways and aisles serving
a single family or two family use in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-5 districts
existing prior to the establishment of this ordinance shall be at minimum
improved with an all-weather surface, said surface being a minimum of four
(4) inches of white rock. All such parking areas, driveways and aisles
established after the effective date of this ordinance shall be paved with an
improved surface.
11. A one or two family residential use may request alternative compliance for
paved driveways(s) that extend past 100 feet from the front property line,
which is considered a 100 foot front yard setback for paving purposes. Any
XXIV-8
portion of the driveway(s) that would be located within 100 feet of any
property and I or lot line of any residential use or zone must be on an
improved surface. All parking and vehicle storage areas shall be on an
improved surface. The Zoning Administrator may approve a surface other
than concrete or asphalt for those portions of the driveway which are not
located in the 100 foot setback, are not located within l 00 feet of any
property and I or lot line of any residential use or zone and are not parking
or vehicle storage areas. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010, May 17, 2010;
Ordinance No. 2008-77, October 20, 2008)
iii. Non-residential uses: parking areas and driveways shall be paved with a
minimum of two (2) inches of Class I asphalt or concrete over a six-inch
aggregate base, or other hard surface as approved by the Public Works
Department.
b. Paving for Multiple Dwelling, Office, Commercial, Limited Industrial and
Planned Development Districts: All parking areas, driveways and aisleways
used for traffic circulation in the R-6, 0-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, M-3 and PD
districts shall be surfaced with a minimum of two (2) inches of Class I asphalt
over a six (6) inch aggregate base, or an equivalent surface approved by the
Public Works Department.
c. Paving for Intense Commercial-Light Industrial and Heavy Industrial Districts
All parking areas, driveways and aisleways used for traffic circulation in the Ml
and M-2 districts shall be paved with a minimum of two (2) inches of Class I
asphalt over a six (6) inch aggregate base, or an equivalent surface approved by
the Public Works Department. All storage yards and storage areas shall be
paved with a minimum of six (6) inches of all-weather surface, or an equivalent
surface approved by the Public Works Department. Driveways and aisleways
used for traffic circulation within storage yards and storage areas shall be paved
with a minimum of two (2) inches of Class I asphalt over a six (6) inch aggregate
base, or an equivalent surface approved by the Public Works Department.
A request for an all-weather alternative surface for traffic circulation in storage
yards and areas may be approved by the Public Works Department if the storage
yard or area is located on property the nearest point of which is 300 feet from
the nearest point of any property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-5, R-6, PMR-1, 0-1,
B-1, B-2, B-3 and PD or any other non-industrial use within the corporate limits
of the City of Decatur or neighboring jurisdiction. The request shall be
submitted in a form approved by the City of Decatur and shall be supported by
data desc1ibing the anticipated traffic volume, the size and weight of vehicles
(loaded and empty) anticipated to use the storage yard or area, and the soil and
topographic conditions of the site of the proposed storage yard or area. The City
of Decatur's Public Works Department shall grant or deny requests for an
alternative all-weather surface based on the following criteria: whether the
proposed alternative all-weather surface and soil conditions are reasonably
sufficient for the volume and load of the anticipated use. Under no
circumstances will an alternative all-weather surface be constructed of less than
XXIV-9
six (6) inches of aggregate. Requests for an alternative all-weather surface shall
include an engineered cross section. Continued use of an approved alternative
surface shall only be allowed as per the terms defined in the approved site plan.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2015-42, August 17, 2015) (Amended, Ordinance
No. 2004-02, January 20, 2004)
E. ACCESS DRIVES - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS APPLY
No access drive shall be permitted in violation of the Subdivision Regulation or the City
of Decatur Construction Standards.
F. RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAYS
1. Width at curb
No single-family or two-family residential driveway shall be more than twenty-four
(24) feet in width at the right-of-way line, measured at a right angle to the centerline of
the driveway.
2. Maximum width
Residential driveways shall be limited to a maximum width of sixteen (16) feet, or eight
(8) feet wider than the total width of all garage bays approached by the driveway,
whichever is greater. A garage bay shall equal a maximum of nine (9) feet in width for
purposes of this ordinance.
3. Number of driveways
No residential lot shall have more than two (2) separate residential driveway curb cuts.
G. USE OF REQUIRED YARDS
Parking areas are permitted within required yard setbacks except as following:
1. One and two family residential districts
a. Parking areas are not permitted within the required front yard in an R-1, R-2,
R-3 or R-5 district; however, parking on a driveway located in a required front
yard setback in said districts is permitted, provided that it leads to a garage or
similar accessory structure or, in the absence of a garage or accessory structure,
to the side or rear yard.
b. Residential driveways in a required front, rear or side yard setback established
after the effective date of this ordinance shall be allowed only on an improved
surface as required in subsection D.7, above. Parking in an area other than a
driveway or improved parking area is expressly prohibited.
c. Recreational vehicle storage: A recreational vehicle may be stored outdoors
only in the rear yard or within the front yard on a driveway as noted in
subparagraph "a." above. Storage of a recreational vehicle is permitted on an
improved surface only. Only one (1) recreational vehicle shall be permitted;
however, notwithstanding the above, a combination of a boat (with trailer) and
one ( 1) other recreational vehicle (other than an additional boat) is permitted.
XXIV-10
H. MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS
1. Location
Off-street parking facilities for one or two family dwellings shall be located on the
same lot or plot of ground as the building or use they are intended to serve. The location
of required off-street parking facilities for other than one and two family dwellings
shall be within 300 feet of the building they are intended to serve, measured from the
nearest point of the off-street parking facilities and the nearest point of the building.
2. Joint use of parking spaces
Not more than 50 percent of the parking spaces required for (a) theaters, bowling alleys,
dance halls, night clubs, bars, cocktail lounges or cafes, and up to 100 percent of the
parking spaces required for a place of worship, religious facility or school auditorium
may be provided and used jointly by (b) banks, offices, retail stores, repair shops,
service establishments and similar uses not normally open, used or operated during the
same hours as those listed in (a); provided, however, that written agreement thereto is
properly executed and filed as specified below.
3. Joint use agreement
In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the
building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and
used, a written agreement to assure their retention for such purposes shall be properly
drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form and executed by the
Corporation Counsel and shall be filed with the application for a building permit.
4. Pavement drainage
All off-street parking facilities shall be graded and drained to dispose of all surface
water as approved by the Public Works Department upon review of plans and
specifications submitted in accordance with the Building Code.
5. Handicapped parking spaces
Handicapped parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the
Illinois Accessibility Code or successive legislation pertaining to the provision of
handicapped parking.
I. LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
Every building or part thereof erected or occupied for retail business, service,
manufacturing, storage, warehousing, hotel, mortuary, or any other use similarly involving
the receipt or distribution by vehicles of materials or merchandise, shall provide and
maintain on the same premises loading space in accordance with the following
requirements:
1. Number ofloading spaces required.
In the B-1, B-2 and B-3 Shopping and Commercial Districts and in the M-1, M-2 and
M-3 Manufacturing Districts, one loading space for each 10,000 square feet, or fraction
thereof, of floor area in the building.
XXIV-11
2. Loading spaces in the B-4 district
In the B-4 Central Business District, one loading space shall be provided for the first
5,000 to 15,000 square feet of floor area in the building and one additional loading
space for each 15,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of floor area in excess of 15,000
square feet.
3. Blocking of rights-of-way prohibited.
All loading areas shall be located so that a public street or sidewalk will not be occupied
during the loading or unloading process.
4. Front yard loading spaces.
Except in the M-2 Industrial District, no loading space or portion thereof shall be
located in any front yard.
5. Vision clearance triangle
No loading space or portion thereof shall be located within the vision clearance triangle.
6. Adequate access required.
Each loading space shall be served by appropriate means of vehicular access to a street
or alley in a manner which will not require backing or other traffic movements on a
public street. A request for alternative compliance may be approved by the Public
Works Department if a practical hardship or difficulty exists that hinders the ability to
design/redesign the development so as to provide adequate access to loading areas. The
Public Works Department will base its decision for alternative compliance on the effect
of the backing maneuver on traffic flow, the frequency and size of trucks, the use of
the road and the structure of the road.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2015-28, June 15, 2015)
7. Loading space size
Each loading space shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width by thirty-five
(35) feet in length.
XXIV-12
SECTION XXV. SIGNAGE
A. PERMIT REQUIRED.
1. Regulation
All signs, unless otherwise specified by ordinance, shall conform to the requirements
of this section. No on premise or off premise sign, billboard, poster, flag, outdoor
display or other advertising device not meeting the requirements mentioned herein shall
be permitted.
2. Permit Required.
Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful to erect, construct,
reconstruct, enlarge, or structurally modify a sign without first obtaining a sign permit
from the Building Inspector.
8. GENERALL V
1. Prohibited signs
a. Pennants, streamers, lines of whirling or spinning elements, and similar
b. Revolving or flashing beacons that resemble traffic control devices or
emergency vehicle signals.
c. Signs which are an imitation of, or resemble in shape, size, copy or color an
official traffic sign or signal.
d. Signs portraying obscene, indecent or immoral matter
2. Flashing signs
Signs employing exterior brilliant, intermittent, rotating or flashing lights, including
electronic message unit signs, shall not be permitted within 100 feet of the boundary of
any "R" District.
3. Signs in the vision clearance triangle
a. No portion of any sign, exclusive of the standard of a freestanding sign, located
within a vision clearance area as herein defined, shall be less than nine feet
above the level of the sidewalk, or if there is no sidewalk, the level of the lot
line nearest the sign, except that where traffic lights may be obscured, the
minimum height shall be twelve feet. The standard or support for a freestanding
sign within a vision clearance zone shall be limited to the following: (1) a single
pole or column with a maximum diameter or width of twenty-four inches or (2)
a maximum of two poles or columns with a maximum diameter or width of
eighteen (18) inches each and further provided a minimum clear distance of six
(6) feet be provided between such poles or columns.
b. Notwithstanding the above, a directional sign as herein regulated may be
located within the vision clearance triangle.
4. Awning, canopy and sloping roof signs
XXV-1
Signs located on awnings, canopies and marquees, and signs on sloping roofs with an
angle relative to flat grade of greater than 45 degrees, shall be considered to be wall
signs and shall be included in the maximum number of signs and area of signs as
required for wall signs.
5. Multiple signs on one standard
Two or more signs may be mounted on the same standard of a freestanding advertising
sign, provided that the combined areas of such signs do not exceed the area
requirements for a single freestanding sign as provided herein.
6. Comer lots
In addition to the signs allowed in or to project into a front yard as herein above
provided, such signs shall also be allowed in the comer side yard of a comer lot, subject
to the same conditions and restrictions as those permitted in the front yard.
On those comer lots having frontage on marked highways and streets where offpremises
signs are permitted, an off-premise sign may be located only in the yard
fronting the marked highway.
7. Portable signs
No portable sign shall be in place more than a total of thirty-five (35) days per calendar
year. One (1) portable sign shall be permitted per lot. Portable signs shall not exceed
32 square feet in area and may not exceed five (5) feet in height. The permit for a
portable sign shall stipulate the number and type of portable signs and dates of display.
Portable signs shall be permitted in the B-2, M-1, and M-2 Districts. Illuminated
elements are permitted, provided that the sign is located a minimum of 50 feet from
any side or rear lot line in a residential district.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
8. Directional signs
a. Directional signs are permitted for any use in any district except one and two
family uses and shall not be counted towards the maximum number of
freestanding signs permitted.
b. No directional sign may exceed four (4) square feet in area and shall not exceed
three (3) feet in height.
c. Directional signs that contain advertising shall be counted towards the
maximum area of signs permitted; directional signs that contain no advertising
shall not be counted towards the maximum area of signs permitted.
9. Electronic Message Unit Signs
a. Electronic message unit signs may be located on the same sign structure as nonelectronic
message unit signs. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-48)
XXV-2
b. Electronic message unit signs located in 0-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, M-1, M-2 and
PD districts may not be located within one-hundred ( l 00) feet of the boundary
of any residentially-zoned district or residential use. Electronic message unit
signs in any residentially-zoned district may not be located within one-hundred
(100) feet of the property and/or lot line of any residential use. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2008-48, August 4, 2008)
c. No electronic message unit sign may exceed fifty (50) square feet in area in the
0-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, M-1, M-2 and PD districts. No electronic message
unit sign may exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area in any residentiallyzoned
district. Electronic message unit signs must have a minimum front yard
setback of ten (10) feet. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-48, August 4, 2008)
d. Electronic message unit signs may only display advertising information related
to the business or businesses located on the same premises.
e. Electronic message unit signs may also display time and temperature as well as
information which is nonprofit, civic or charitable in nature. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2008-48, August 4, 2008)
f. Electronic message unit signs located in all zoning districts shall be constant or
steady in nature. Displayed messages shall not change at a rate greater than one
(1) message per every six (6) seconds. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-48,
August 4, 2008)
g. Electronic message unit signs located in all zoning districts shall not scroll or
travel, grow, melt, x-ray, up or down, bounce, inverse, roll, twinkle, snow or
present pictorials or other animation at a rate faster than one (1) frame per one
(1) second. No electronic message unit sign shall have both the background
and foreground in motion simultaneously. No electronic message unit sign
shall have animation without test.
h. A flashing display is prohibited in all residentially-zoned districts. Where
permitted, repeated text or graphics shall not flash at a rate faster than one ( 1)
frame per every one (1) second.
i. Electronic message unit signs in residentially-zoned districts shall only operate
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11 :00 p.m.
j. Electronic message unit signs shall adjust brightness in response to changes in
light levels so that the signs are not unreasonably bright for the safety of the
motoring public and the comfort of the neighboring uses. The spillover at any
property line shall not exceed 0.5 foot candles.
k. Electronic message unit signs located in any residentially-zoned district shall
only be permitted in an electronic message unit monument style sign structure
and constructed of stone and/or masonry.
1. All existing non-conforming electronic message unit signs installed prior to this
Ordinance No. 2008-48 shall conform to the display regulations within
Subsections 9.d., 9.e., 9.f., 9.g., 9.h., 9.i., 9.j., and 9.k. within one (1) year of the
date of the approved Ordinance amendment.
XXV-3
(g through 1 inclusive Amended by Ordinance No. 2008-48, August 4, 2008)
10. Signs in the iight-of-way
No sign, except those necessary for traffic and parking control and projecting yard signs
as listed in subparagraph 13 below, shall be posted in a right-of-way, boulevard, or
other publicly-owned space.
11. Removal of abandoned signs
Abandoned signs and sign structures shall be removed within sixty (60) days. Signs
and I or sign structures shall be considered abandoned when any of the following
occurs:
a. Signs that refer to businesses or products that are no longer in existence or
operation at the location of the sign for a period of at least sixty (60) days
b. Multi-tenant signs but only as to the tenant or product that is no longer in
existence or operation at the location of the sign a period of at least sixty
(60) days.: The entire sign and structure shall be considered abandoned
when all businesses or products refen-ed to on a multi-tenant sign shall no
longer be in existence or operation at the location of the sign for a period of
sixty (60) days and the structure is non-conforming.
c. Non-conforming structures that refer to business or products no longer in
existence or operation at the location of the sign
d. Signs or structures bearing visible damage for a period exceeding sixty (60)
days
e. Signs or structures in which the internal illumination is no longer fully
functional or inoperative for a period exceeding sixty (60) days
f. Any sign with an open cabinet.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
12. Setbacks
a. All sign setbacks, as required herein, shall be measured from the nearest
property or right-of-way line to a line extended from the leading edge of the
sign to the ground.
b. A sign shall not be allowed to extend over an adjacent property or overhang a
right-of-way line; however, a projecting yard sign in the B-4 District and within
any specially designated sign district, planned unit development or other
overlay district may be permitted to extend over the right-of-way, subject to
proof of liability insurance and indemnification of the City.
XXV-4
13. Maximum Height
The maximum height of all signs, as required herein, shall be measured from the grade
at the base of the sign to the top-most sign element.
14. Sign Area.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the area of a sign shall consist of the area of the
smallest rectangle or sum of the area of multiple contiguous rectangles (including air
space and painted background, but excluding frame or support materials) enclosing the
extreme limits of the sign display. Curved, spherical or any other shaped sign shall be
computed on the basis of actual surface area. Where a sign has two opposite sides on
the same plane, or where the opposite sides are angled no greater than 30 degrees, only
the area of one side of the sign shall be considered its total area. See illustration.
8.0 FT
12.0FT
Sign area ~ the sum oft he area c?f contig11aus rectangles enclosing the sign display.
15. Occupant Frontage
When required in this Section, the maximum allowed area of a wall sign shall be
determined by the linear width in feet of the occupant frontage in the building. For the
purposes of this Section, "occupant frontage" shall mean that side or wall or portion
thereof of a building, which is generally situated towards the street and on which is
usually (but not always) located the main public entrance for an individual premises or
business. In a single tenant building, the occupant frontage shall be the width of the
building, whereas for a multi-tenant building, the occupant frontage shall be the width
of that portion of the main building occupied by each premises or business.
16. Political Signs
Outdoor political campaign signs on residential property for residential use are exempt
from the time period regulations and the number of temporary signs to be displayed as
outlined in the following subsections. (Amended, Ordinance 2012-66; September 17,
2012)
XXV-5
C. SIGNS IN SINGLE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
1. General
a. Regulations in this subsection shall apply to the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-5 zoning
districts.
b. Notwithstanding the above, a home occupation that meets the requirements of
this Ordinance shall be permitted to erect a single, non-illuminated wall sign
that does not exceed two square feet in area and is mounted flush to the wall of
the main building.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
2. Freestanding Signs: All uses except for one and two family residences and any
accessory use are permitted to erect a freestanding sign subject to the following:
a. Number per Frontage: One (1). (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-02)
b. Maximum Area per Sign: ,50 square feet, properties containing five (5) acres
or more may have a maximum area of 75 square feet. (Amended, Ordinance
No. 2011-02)
c. Maximum height: Ten (10) feet, properties containing five (5) acres or more
may have a maximum height of 15 feet. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-02)
d. Minimum Setbacks: Five feet from any property line.
e. Illumination: Such sign may be illuminated but non-flashing if located a
minimum of 25 feet from any residential side or rear lot line.
3. Wall Signs: All uses except for one and two family residences and accessory uses may
erect a wall sign, subject to the following:
a. Number per Main Building: One ( l)
b. Maximum Area per Sign: 25 square feet or ten (10) percent of the face of the
wall where displayed, whichever is larger, to a maximum of 50 square feet.
c. Illumination: A wall sign may be illuminated but non-flashing if located a
minimum of 25 feet from any residential side or rear lot line
d. A wall sign may not extend above the top of the wall where displayed
4. Subdivision Identification Signs:
Residential subdivisions and residential planned unit developments may erect up to two
(2) subdivision identification signs with a maximum area of 50 square feet each, at each
major entrance to the subdivision. Such sign may be externally-illuminated but nonflashing,
provided that the light fixtures are directed onto the signs only and the light
source is not visible from adjacent residential properties.
5. Permit-Exempt Signs
a. Temporary freestanding signs may not exceed three (3) feet in height and six
(6) square feet in area. Only five (5) signs are allowed per lot.
XXV-6
b. Extended temporary signs may not exceed three (3) feet in height and six (6)
square feet in area. Only one (1) sign is allowed.
c. One and two family residences may attach temporary wall signs or banners to
the main building in lieu of placing freestanding signs. The combined area of
the temporary freestanding signs and any wall-mounted signs or banners may
not exceed eighteen ( 18) square feet.
d. All uses except for one and two family residences and accessory uses may
attach temporary wall signs or banners to the main building subject to the
following:
1. The wall sign or banner may only be attached to the main building.
· 2. A total of three (3) temporary wall signs or banners will be allowed on
the main building and when combined with the permanent wall signs
may not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the wall on which it is located.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
D. SIGNS IN THE MULTIPLE FAMILY .RESIDENCE DISTRICT
1. Generally
Regulations in this subsection shall apply to the R-6 zoning district.
2. Freestanding Signs: All uses except for one and two family residences and any
accessory use are permitted to erect a freestanding sign subject to the following:
a. Number per Frontage: One (1). (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-02)
b. Maximum Area per Sign: 50 square feet, properties containing five (5) acres
or more may have a maximum area of 75 square feet. (Amended, Ordinance
No. 2011-02)
c. Maximum height: Ten (10) feet, properties containing five (5) acres or more
may have a maximum height of 15 feet. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-02)
d. Minimum Setbacks: Five (5) feet from any property line.
e. Illumination: Such sign may be illuminated but non-flashing if located a
minimum of 25 feet from any residential side or rear lot line.
3. Wall Signs
All uses except one family and two family residences and accessory uses, may erect a
wall sign, subject to the following:
a. Number per Main Building: One (1)
b. Maximum Area per Sign: 25 square feet or ten ( 10) percent of the face of the
wall where displayed, whichever is larger, to a maximum of 50 square feet.
c. Illumination: A wall sign may be illuminated but non-flashing if located a
minimum of 25 feet from any residential side or rear lot line
d. A wall sign may not extend above the top of the wall where displayed
XXV-7
4. Permit-Exempt Signs
a. Temporary freestanding signs may not exceed three (3) feet in height and six
(6) square feet in area. Only three (3) signs are allowed per lot.
b. Extended temporary signs may not exceed three (3) feet in height and six (6)
square feet in area. Only one (1) sign is allowed per lot.
c. Temporary wall signs or banners may only be attached to the main building. A
total of three (3) temporary wall signs or banners will be allowed on the main
building and when combined with the permanent wall signs may not exceed
fifteen (15) percent of the wall on which it is located. (Amended, Ordinance
No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
E. SIGNS IN THE OFFICE DISTRICT
1. Generally
Regulations in this subsection shall apply to the 0-1 zoning district.
2. Freestanding Signs
a. Number per Frontage: One (1). (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-02)
b. Maximum Area per Sign: 50 square feet, properties containing five (5) acres or
more may have a maximum area of 75 square feet. (Amended, Ordinance No.
2011-02)
c. Maximum height: Ten (10) feet, properties containing five (5) acres or more
may have a maximum height of 15 feet. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-02)
d. Minimum Setbacks: Five (5) feet from any property line.
e. Illumination: Such sign may be illuminated but non-flashing if located a
minimum of 25 feet from any residential side or rear lot line.
3. Wall Signs
All uses except one family and two family residences and accessory uses, may erect a
wall sign, subject to the following:
a. Number per Main Building: No limit; provided that the aggregate square
footage of all wall signs does not exceed the maximum square footage as
required in (b.) below. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-06, February 20, 2007)
b. Maximum Area per Sign: Ten percent (10%) of the fa\:ade or wall on which
the sign(s) is/are attached, or one (1) square foot per linear foot of occupant
frontage, whichever is larger. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2007-06, February
20,2007)
c. Illumination: A wall sign may be illuminated but non-flashing if located a
minimum of 25 feet from any residential side or rear lot line
d. A wall sign may not extend above the top of the wall where displayed
XXV-8
4. Permit-Exempt Signs
a. Temporary freestanding signs may not exceed ten (I 0) feet in height and thirtytwo
(32) square feet in area. Only one (1) sign is allowed per lot.
b. Extended temporary signs may not exceed three (3) feet in height and six (6)
square feet in area. Only one (1) sign is allowed per lot.
c. Temporary wall signs or banners may only be attached to the main building. A
total of three (3) temporary wall signs or banners will be allowed on the main
building and when combined with the permanent wall signs may not exceed
fifteen (15) percent of the wall on which it is located. (Amended, Ordinance
No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
F. SIGNS IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
1. General
Regulations in this subsection shall apply to the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, M-1, M-2 and M-
3 zoning districts.
2. Freestanding signs in the B-1 District.
a. Number per Frontage: One (1). (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-02)
b. Maximum Area per Sign: 75 square feet. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-02)
c. Maximum height: Twenty (20) feet
d. Minimum Setbacks: Five (5) feet from any property line.
e. Illumination: Such sign may be illuminated but non-flashing if located a
minimum of 25 feet from any residential side or rear lot line.
3. Freestanding signs in all other Business and Industrial Districts.
a. Number per Frontage: One (1); however, properties that have 500 feet of linear
frontage or more are permitted two (2) freestanding signs and properties with
800 feet of linear frontage or more are permitted three (3) freestanding signs.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-02)
b. Multi-Tenant Sign Advertising Three or More Businesses: One (1) per
development (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-71, September 20, 2010)
c. Maximum Area per Sign:
i. Sign Advertising One or Two Businesses: 75 square feet or one (1) square
foot per each linear foot of frontage, to a maximum of 100 square feet.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-02)
ii. Multi-Tenant Sign Advertising Three or More Businesses: 75 square feet
or one ( 1) square foot per each linear foot of frontage, to a maximum of 200
square feet. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-02)
d. Maximum height: Thirty-five (35) feet
e. Minimum Setbacks: Five (5) feet from any property line.
XXV-9
f. Illumination: Such sign(s) may be illuminated but non-flashing if located a
minimum of 25 feet from any residential side or rear lot line.
4. Wall signs
a. Number per Main Building: No limit; provided that the aggregate square
footage of all wall signs does not exceed the maximum square footage as
required below.
b. Maximum Area: Ten (10) percent of the facade or wall on which the sign(s)
is/are attached, or one (1) square foot per linear foot of occupant frontage,
whichever is larger.
c. Illumination: A wall sign may be illuminated but non-flashing if located a
minimum of 25 feet from any residential side or rear lot line
d. A wall sign may not extend above the top of the wall where displayed.
5. Permit-Exempt Signs
a. Temporary freestanding signs may not exceed ten (10) feet in height and thirtytwo
(32) square feet in area. Only one (1) sign is allowed per lot.
b. Extended temporary signs may not exceed three (3) feet in height and six (6)
square feet in area. Only one (1) sign is allowed per lot.
c. Temporary wall signs or banners may only be attached to the main building. A
total of three (3) temporary wall signs or banners will be allowed on the main
building and when combined with the permanent wall signs may not exceed
fifteen (15) percent of the wall on which it is located.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
6. Projecting yard signs: Projecting yard signs not exceeding 40 square feet plus one
additional square foot for each additional foot of occupant frontage over 40 feet are
allowed, subject to the following:
a. In the B-4 District
In the B-4 District, a combination of projecting yard signs and wall signs are
permitted, subject to the area limitations for projecting yard signs and wall signs as
noted above.
b. All other districts
In all other business and industrial districts, on a property where there are no
freestanding signs and no wall signs, one projecting yard sign may be attached to
the building
7. Rooftop signs: In the B-4 District, a building consisting of three (3) stories or more
may erect a rooftop sign, provided that:
a. The total height of the sign above the roof deck, coping line or parapet wall
does not exceed 20 feet, provided that the combined height of the building and
sign do not exceed the maximum height for a structure within the B-4 District;
XXV-10
b. The width of the sign does not exceed one-third (1/3) of the width of the
building face at the top of the building on the side on which the sign faces; and;
c. The maximum area of the sign does not exceed 300 square feet.
8. Signs in the M-3 District: Only the following signs are permitted in the M-3
District:
a. Wall signs: One (1) sign is permitted, which may not exceed 25 square feet in
area.
b. A freestanding monument-style sign of not more than 50 square feet nor more
than five (5) feet in height may be used. Only one freestanding sign is permitted
per lot and must be located not less than five (5) feet from any lot line.
c. Illumination: Signs in the M-3 District may be illuminated but non-flashing if
located at least 25 feet from any lot line in a residential district.
9. Off-Premise Signs:
An off-premise (billboard) sign shall be permitted in the B-2, B-3, M-1, and M-2 zoning
districts. For the purposes of this Ordinance, an off-premise sign is considered to be
an accessory use.
a. No off-premise sign shall exceed three-hundred (300) square feet in area
including border and trim but excluding ornamental base or apron, supports and
other structural members. Back to back displays erected at no greater than a
thirty (30) degree angle to each other shall be permitted and deemed to be a
single sign.
b. In the case of an off-premise sign that is located on a one way street, two (2)
sign faces of three-hundred (300) square feet in area each may be displayed
facing the one-way traffic, provided that such faces are arranged in a vertical
manner and advertising on the reverse side shall be prohibited. The reverse side
shall be painted and maintained. An off-premise electronic message unit sign
located on a one-way street shall only have one (1) face of up to three- hundred
(300) square feet in area facing the flow of traffic and advertising on the reverse
side shall be prohibited. The reverse side shall be painted and maintained.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-48, August 4, 2008)
c. No off-premise sign shall be located closer than seven-hundred and fifty (750)
feet from any other off-premise sign located on either side of the street or
highway. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-48, August 4, 2008)
d. An off-premise sign shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any rear
or side lot line of a residentially-zoned district. An off-premise electronic
message unit sign shall be set back a minimum of one-hundred (100) feet from
any property and/or lot line of a residentially-zoned district and/or residential
use. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-48, August 4, 2008)
e. No off-premise sign shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in vertical height;
however, an off-premise sign on a one-way street with two (2) sign faces as
permitted above may be erected to a maximum height of forty (40) feet.
XXV-11
f. No more than one (1) off-premise sign shall be permitted per lot.
g. Off-premise electronic message unit signs located in all permitted zoning
districts shall be static, constant and steady in nature. Off-premise electronic
message unit signs shall not scroll or travel, flash, grow, melt, x-ray, up or
down, bounce, inverse, roll, twinkle, snow or present pictorials or other
animation. Displayed messages shall not change at a rate greater than one ( 1)
message per every ten (10) seconds. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-48,
August 4, 2008)
h. Off-premise electronic message unit signs shall adjust brightness in response
to changes in light levels so that the signs are not unreasonably bright for the
safety of the motoring public and the comfort of the neighboring residential
uses. The spillover at any property line shall not exceed 0.5 foot-candles.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-48)
i. All off-premise electronic message unit signs must be connected to the
Emergency Communications Systems which may override any display at any
time. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2008-48)
J. For every one (1) off-premise sign converted to an off-premise electronic
message unit sign within City limits, it shall be required to remove onethousand
and five-hundred (1,500) square feet of existing off-premise signs
and/or existing non-conforming signage in the Core Area. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2008-48)
k. Off-premise signs shall be allowed only on properties with frontage upon the
following local streets and marked State, County and Federal highways. Where
more than one (1) such marked highway shares the same roadway, the
provisions of both highways as enumerated below shall apply.
i. U. S. 36, except that portion between Union Street and Martin
Luther King, Jr. Boulevard.
11. U. S. 51 (Busn.), except those portions of North Main/South Main
streets and Franklin Street/North Water Street between Grand
A venue and Decatur Street.
iii. IL 121.
iv. IL 48, north of Pershing Road and south of the Sangamon River.
v. IL 105, between 22nd Street and 32nd Street and between 34th
Street and Brush College Road.
v1. IL 105, between U.S. 51 (Busn.) and IL 48.
XXV-12
vii. Macon County Hwy. 1 (Brush College Road), north of IL 105.
Vlll. I-72.
10. Interstate signs
Lots located within 250 feet of the centerline of Interstate 72 that are zoned B-2, B-3,
M-1 or M-2 and have a minimum of 150 feet of frontage adjacent to the interstate may
increase the area of a freestanding sign along the interstate frontage to 900 square feet
and 170 feet in height. No interstate sign may be located within 200 feet of another
interstate freestanding sign. One interstate freestanding sign is permitted per lot and
shall not be counted towards the total number of freestanding signs permitted
for a single lot. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2017-28, June 5, 2017)
XXV-13
SECTION XXVI. RESERVED
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-35, June 6, 2011)
XXVI-1
SECTION XXVll. WIRELESS FACILITIES
A. PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the purpose and intent of this Section to protect the health, safety and general welfare
of the people of Decatur, in a manner consistent with the provisions of the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996, the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act of 2018
(Public Act 100-0585 of Illinois), and Chapter 41.2 Small Wireless Facilities of the City
Code of the City of Decatur. These regulations are necessary in order to: (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2018-40, September 4, 2018)
1. Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication services to the residents and
businesses of the city;
2. Minimize adverse visual effects of towers through careful design and siting
standards;
3. Encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas through performance
standards and incentives;
4. Assure that unnecessary towers are not erected, and that towers which are no longer
in operation are promptly removed at the owner's expense;
5. Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through structural
standards, icing conditions, and inadequate setbacks; and,
6. Provide mechanisms for the mitigation of tower proliferation through tower sharing
requirements for all new tower applicants and those existing towers that are
physically capable of sharing.
B. JURISDICTION
1. These regulations apply to all wireless communications facilities, including small
wireless facilities, as defined in Section II, Definitions, located within the corporate
limits of the City of Decatur, except small wireless facilities if they are collocated
(i) in rights-of-way in any zoning district, or (ii) outside rights-of-way in property
zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use. These exempted small wireless
facilities are subject to provisions contained in Chapter 41.2 Small Wireless
Facilities of the City Code of the City of Decatur. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-
40, September 4, 2018)
2. Except those exempted small wireless facilities as noted in Paragraph B.1. above,
no wireless communications facility may be constructed without a site plan
approved by the City of Decatur. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2018-40, September
4, 2018)
XXVII-1
C. WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY APPLICATION
PROCEDURE & APPROVAL PROCESS
1. General procedure: The content of applications for wireless communication
facilities shall follow the procedures described in this Ordinance.
2. Additional procedures: In addition to the information required elsewhere in this
Ordinance, development application for wireless communication facilities shall
include the following supplemental information:
a. A report from a qualified structural engineer or architect licensed to practice in
the State of Illinois which:
i. Illustrates the tower height and design including a cross-section and
elevation;
II. Documents the height above grade for all potential mounting positions for
co-located antennas and the minimum separation distances between
antennas;
iii. Describes the tower's capacity, including the number and type of antennas
that it can accommodate;
iv. Documents what steps the applicant will take to avoid interference with
established public safety telecommunications;
v. Includes a structural engineer's or architect's stamp and registration number,
and,
vi. Includes all other information necessary to evaluate the request
b. For all commercial wireless telecommunication service towers, a letter of intent
committing the tower owner and his or her successors to allow the shared use
of the tower if all additional users agree in writing to meet reasonable terms and
conditions for shared use, shall be submitted.
c. The applicant shall provide a copy of a signed lease, or in the case where the
applicant is owner of the property, a letter of intent, containing a commitment
to remove the tower and appurtenant equipment should the tower become
inactive or abandoned as defined below.
d. Before the issuance of a building permit, the applicant will provide the
following supplemental information to the City Staff:
i. A copy of FAA's response to the applicants "Notice of Proposed
Construction or Alteration" (FAA form 7460-1 or its successor);
ii. Proof of compliance with applicable Federal Communications Commission
regulations; and,
iii. A report from a qualified structural engineer or architect licensed to
practice in the State of Illinois that demonstrates the tower's compliance
with the City's structural and electrical standards.
3. Site Plan Requirements:
XXVII-2
In addition to the Site Plan requirements adopted by the City, site plans for wireless
facilities shall include the following information:
a. Location and approximate size and height of all buildings and structures within
200 feet adjacent to the proposed wireless communication facility, measured
from the outermost perimeter of the base of the tower.
b. Site plan of entire development, indicating all improvements including
landscaping and screening
c. Elevations showing facades of all buildings, including a scale elevation of the
tower structure, indicating exterior materials and color of the tower(s) on the
proposed site
d. Plans shall be drawn at a minimum scale of 1 inch equals 50 feet.
4. General approval standards
The petition of an application for a wireless communication facility will be granted if
the following items are met to the satisfaction of Council:
a. The location of the proposed tower is compatible with the City's
Comprehensive Plan and with the City's land development regulations.
b. Efforts to co-locate on an existing tower or structure have not been successful
or are not legally/physically possible, as shown by proof of such attempts
submitted by the applicant and verified by Staff.
c. The submitted site plan complies with the performance criteria set in these
regulations.
d. The proposed facility tower will not unreasonably interfere with the view from
any public park, natural scenic vista, historic building or district, or major view
corridor.
e. The lowest eight (8) feet of the facility/tower shall be visually screened by trees,
large shrubs, solid walls, fences, or nearby buildings.
f. The height and mass of the facility/tower does not exceed that which is essential
for its intended use and public safety.
g. The owner of the wireless communication facility has agreed to permit other
persons/wireless providers to attach wireless antenna or other communications
apparatus which do not interfere with the primary purpose of the facility.
h. There exists no other existing facility/tower that can reasonably serve the needs
of the owner of the proposed new facility/tower.
1. The proposed facility/tower is not constructed in such a manner as to result in
needless height, mass, and guy-wire supports.
j. The color of the proposed facility/tower will be of a light tone or color (except
where required otherwise by the FAA) as to minimize the visual impact and
that the tower will have a security fence of at eight feet (8') in height around the
tower base or the lot where the tower is located.
XXVII-3
k. The facility/tower is in compliance with any other applicable local, state, or
federal regulations.
D. GENERAL WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
1. Co-location requirements: All commercial wireless telecommunication towers
erected, constructed, or located within the municipality shall comply with the
following requirements:
a. A proposal for a new commercial wireless telecommunication service tower
shall not be approved unless Council finds that the telecommunications
equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an
existing or approved tower or building within a two mile search radius (one
mile search radius for towers under 120 feet in height, one half mile search
radius for towers under 80 feet in height) of the proposed tower due to one or
more of the following reasons:
i. The planned equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing
or approved tower or building, as documented by a qualified and licensed
structural engineer or architect, and the existing or approved tower cannot
be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate planned or equivalent
equipment at a reasonable cost.
IL The planned equipment would cause interference materially impacting the
usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower or building as
documented by a qualified and licensed professional engineer and the
interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
iii. Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search radius cannot
accommodate the planned equipment at a height necessary to function
reasonably as documented by a qualified and licensed professional
engineer.
iv. Other unforeseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the planned
telecommunications equipment upon an existing or approved tower or
building.
b. Any proposed commercial wireless telecommunication service tower shall be
designed, structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate both the
applicant's antennas and comparable antennas as specified in Subsection F,
Tower Height, of this Section.
E. TOWER AND ANTENNA DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
Proposed or modified towers and antennas shall meet the following design requirements:
1. Towers and antennas shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment
through the use of color and camouflaging architectural treatment, except in
instances where the color is dictated by federal or state authorities such as the
Federal Aviation Administration.
XXVII-4
2. Commercial wireless telecommunication service towers shall be of a monopole
design unless Council determines that an alternative design would better blend with
the surrounding visual environment.
3. No rungs or other appurtenances used for the purpose of tower access shall be
located within 20 feet of the ground. The owner shall take necessary precautions
to prevent unauthorized access to the tower equipment.
F. TOWER HEIGHT
The maximum tower height(s) permitted in the City of Decatur are calculated by applying
the following:
1. If the tower is designed to accommodate only one service provider, the maximum
height shall be 120 feet from grade.
2. If the tower is designed to accommodate two service providers, the maximum
height shall be 160 feet from grade.
3. If the tower is designed to accommodate more than two service providers, the
maximum height shall be 200 feet from grade.
G. ACCESSORY UTILITY BUILDINGS
All utility buildings and structures accessory to a tower shall be architecturally designed to
blend in with the surrounding environment and shall meet the minimum setback
requirements of the underlying zoning district. Ground mounted equipment shall be
screened from view by suitable vegetation, except where a design of non-vegetative
screening better reflects and complements the architectural character of the surrounding
neighborhood.
H. TOWER LIGHTING
Towers shall not be illuminated by artificial means and shall not display strobe lights unless
such lighting is specifically required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other
federal or state authority for a particular tower.
I. ANTENNAS MOUNTED ON STRUCTURES, ROOFS, WALLS,
AND EXISTING TOWERS
The placement of wireless telecommunication antennas on roofs, walls, and existing towers
may be approved by the City Manager, provided the antennas meet the requirements of
these regulations, after submitted of:
1. A final site and building plan as specified by Subsection C of this Section, and;
2. A report prepared by a qualified engineer licensed to practice in the State of Illinois
indicating the suitability of the existing structure to accept the antenna, and the
proposed method of affixing the antenna to the structure. Complete details of all
fixtures and couplings, and the precise point of attachment shall be indicated in the
text of the report.
XXVII-5
J. TEMPORARY WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
Any facility designed for temporary use (as defined in Section II), is subject to the
following;
1. Use of a temporary facility is allowed only if the owner has received a temporary
use permit from the City of Decatur.
2. Temporary wireless facilities are permitted for use of no longer than 30 days while
constructing permanent facilities, and no longer than 5 days for use during a special
event.
3. The maximum height of a temporary wireless facility is 50 feet from grade.
4. Temporary facilities are subject to all applicable portions of these regulations.
K. INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC SAFETY
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
No new or existing telecommunications service shall interfere with public safety
telecommunications including those of law enforcement, fire, and emergency medical
services. All applications for new service shall be accompanied by an intermodulation
study that provides a technical evaluation of existing and proposed transmissions and
indicates all potential interference problems. The applicant's engineer will provide a
written summary of the findings of the study. Before the introduction of new service or
changes in existing service, telecommunication providers shall notify the municipality at
least ten ( 10) business days in advance of such changes and allow the municipality to
monitor interference levels during the testing process.
L. ABANDONED OR UNUSED TOWERS OR PORTIONS OF
TOWERS
Abandoned or unused towers or portions of towers shall be removed as follows:
1. The owner of a wireless facility shall file annually a declaration with the Zoning
Administrator as to the continuing operation of every facility installed subject to
these regulations. Failure to do so shall be determined to mean that the facility is
no longer in use and considered abandoned, thus subject to the following:
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34, May 17, 2010)
2. All abandoned or unused towers and associated facilities shall be removed within
180 days of the cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension is
approved by the City Manager. A copy of the relevant portions of a signed lease
that requires the applicant to remove the tower and associated facilities upon
cessation of operations at the site shall be submitted at the time of application. In
the event that a tower is not removed within 180 days of the cessation of operations
at a site, the tower and associated facilities may be removed by the municipality
and the costs of removal assessed against the property.
XXVII-6
M. SIGNS AND ADVERTISING
1. The use of any portion of the site, including fences and accessory buildings, for
signs other than warning or equipment information signs is prohibited.
2. The street address (number) must be displayed on the perimeter fence or accessory
building, subject to City Code Chapter 35.
N. FALL ZONE REQUIRED
1. A horizontal fall zone equal in radius to one-half of the tower's vertical height ( 1 :2)
shall be provided. Buildings, parking facilities, or other improvements where
falling debris may cause injury to persons or real property shall not be permitted
within designated fall zones. The fall zone shall be measured from the outer
perimeter of the base of the tower.
2. In the case where cellular towers are located adjacent to residential zoning dist:Iicts
or residential homes, apartment complexes, etc., a fall zone equal to one foot in
horizontal radius for every one foot in vertical height ( 1: 1) shall be required.
Roadways, alleys, and pedestrian ways shall not be located within the fall zone.
The fall zone shall be owned and maintained by the tower operator or, where
ownership is not possible; the tower operator shall secure a land lease to maintain
the fall zone. Building permits shall not be issued for additional structures or
parking areas located in fall zones that were not a part of the approved site plan.
0. CONCEALED SITING
Communications towers shall be located in concealed areas wherever possible. Potential
concealed areas include park conservation areas, woodlands and remote sites in public or
private areas. Minimum setbacks or fall zones may be waived by the City Council when
towers are proposed in suitable concealed areas.
P. LANDMARKS AND HISTORIC DISTRICTS
Proposals for towers within five hundred (500) feet of a National Register Landmark,
National Register Historic District or locally designated landmarks and districts shall
provide a report of the visual impact on the designated area. This report shall be considered
in the Council decision to permit a tower.
Q. ZONING-SPECIFIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
1. Commercial wireless communication facilities are a permitted use in the following
zoning districts, subject to Subsection D, General Wireless Communication Facility
Performance Standards.
a. B-2 Commercial District
b. B-4 Central Business District, when co-located on existing facilities or mounted
to existing buildings.
XXVII-7
c. M-1 Light Industrial District
d. M-2 Heavy Industrial District
e. M-3 Limited Industrial District
2. Commercial wireless communication facilities are allowed only by conditional use
requiring the approval of City Council, in the following districts, subject to
Subsection D, General Wireless Communication Facility Performance Standards:
a. R-1 Single Family Residence District
b. R-2 Single Family Residence District
c. R-3 Single Family Residence District
d. R-5 Two Family Residence District
e. R-6 Multiple Dwelling District
f. 0-1 Office District
g. PMR-1 Park Mobile Home District
h. B-1 Neighborhood Shopping District
l. B-3 Planned Shopping Center District
J. B-4 Central Business District, when ground mounted.
3. Non-commercial wireless facilities also known as amateur radio antennas are
subject to Subsection R, Non-Commercial Wireless Facility Standards.
R. NON-COMMERCIAL WIRELESS FACILITY (AMATEUR RADIO
ANTENNA) STANDARDS
1. Towers supporting amateur radio antennas and conforming to all applicable
provisions of these regulations shall be allowed only in the rear yard ofresidentially
zoned parcels.
2. In accordance with the Federal Communications Commission's preemptive ruling
PRB 1, towers erected for the primary purpose of supporting amateur radio antennas
may exceed 30 feet in height provided that a determination is made by the City
Manager that the proposed tower height is technically necessary to
engage successfully in amateur radio communication.
XXVII-8
SECTION XXVlll. LANDSCAPING AND EXTERIOR LIGHTING
A. INTENT
The intent of this Section is to protect and increase property values by requiring landscape
treatments around buildings and parking areas in high-density residential, commercial and
industrial areas; to provide buffers between high-density residential/commercial/industrial
uses and adjacent low density residential uses; to provide shade and variegation of the
landscape; and to insure that exterior lighting does not have a negative impact on
surrounding uses.
B. LANDSCAPE AND EXTERIOR LIGHTING PLANS: WHEN
REQUIRED
1. All development, excluding one and two family residential development, is subject
to the requirements of this Section.
2. All new subdivisions shall provide landscaping in the public boulevards as required
by this Section.
C. LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS, GENERALLY
1. Landscape Plan Required
A landscape plan showing the following information shall be submitted with the site
plan at the time of application for building permit and/or with a subdivision plat where
applicable:
a. North arrow, scale, date of preparation and revisions;
b. Location of all proposed and existing buildings, structures and pavement;
c. Location and dimensions of all property lines;
d. Location of all existing or proposed ponds, lakes, watercourses, or drainage
facilities;
e. Location of the 100 year floodplain on the site, if applicable;
f. Location, size and common name of any existing trees or shrubs to remain on
site;
g. Location of all landscaping proposed for the site (drawn at one-half (Yz) of
mature size) including trees, shrubs, ground cover, ornamental grasses or flower
beds;
h. Location of all existing or proposed signs, walls, fences, earthen berms (drawn
at 1-foot contour interval), site furniture, lights, fountains, and/or sculptures on
the site;
I. Location of all existing or proposed sidewalks, bike trails, pedestrian paths, etc.
on the site;
J. Plant list for all existing or proposed trees or shrubs on the site, including:
XXVIII-1
i. Common Name
ii. Quantity
iii. Installation Size
iv. Height/Width at Maturity
v. Point Value per Tree/Shrub (as defined below)
k. Location of all existing or proposed curb lines and curb cuts for streets, alleys,
or parking lots;
I. Schedule of total required points, as defined herein, classified by trees or shrubs,
and total points provided; and
m. Any additional information as determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
necessary for approval of the proposed plan. (Amended, Ordinance 2010-34)
2. Installation of Materials
A landscape plan must be approved by the Planning and Building Services Department
prior to the installation of required landscaping.
3. Certificate of Occupancy
All landscaping must be installed and inspected prior to the issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy. The Zoning Administrator may, at his/her discretion, permit the posting
of a bond in an amount equal to one hundred twenty percent ( 120%) of the estimated
cost of all improvements where inclement weather or seasonal conditions prohibit the
installation of landscaping materials. All bonds deposited with the City of Decatur
shall have as security thereon a surety company qualified to do business in the state of
Illinois. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34, May 17, 2010)
4. Performance Standards
All landscaping shall be required to perform in accordance with the following
provisions:
a. Safety
1. Landscaping shall not hinder the v1s1on of motorists and pedestrians
necessary for safe movement into, out of, and within the site. All
landscaping materials shall comply with the clear vision requirements as
stated in Section II of this Ordinance.
ii. Landscaping materials shall be selected and placed in such a manner that
they do not interfere with or damage existing or proposed utilities or
overland drainage.
iii. Landscaping materials shall be selected and placed so that the safe and
enjoyable use of surrounding properties is not inhibited.
1v. Landscaping materials shall be selected and placed with sensitivity toward
the ultimate size that will be achieved over time.
v. Landscaping with thorns, berries and other harmful plant characteristics
shall be carefully placed to avoid potential harm to people or property on
and off-site.
XXVIII-2
vi. Weak-wooded trees shall only be used where limb breakage will not cause
harm to property or life.
b. Maintenance
i. The owner of the premises shall be responsible for the watering,
maintenance, repair and replacement of all landscaping, fences and other
visual barriers including refuse disposal area screens which have died (in
the case of plant material) or fallen into disrepair (in the case of fences or
walls).
ii. All required plant materials shall be maintained in a healthy, vigorous
growing condition, and neat and orderly appearance. They shall be replaced
as necessary, and shall be kept free of refuse and debris.
iii. All fences, walls and other barriers shall be maintained in good repair,
meaning structurally sound and attractive in appearance. All fences in the
R-6, 0-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, M-1, M-2, M-3 or PD districts, required or
otherwise, shall have the finished face directed toward residential property,
where a residential property is located adjacent to or across from the subject
site.
c. Size of Plant Material
All plant materials required by this ordinance shall be of the following minimum
sizes at the time of planting:
i. Shade Trees:
ii. Evergreen Trees:
iii. Intermediate Trees:
iv. Shrubs (all):
Trunk caliper (diameter) of two (2) inches.
Six (6) feet in height.
Single-stem varieties shall have a trunk caliper
(diameter) of one and one-half (1 Yz) inches. Multistem
varieties shall have a minimum height of six
(6) feet.
Two (2) feet in height or spread.
d. Mulching, Ground Covers and Weed Control
1. All required shrubs and trees shall be mulched and maintained with
shredded hardwood bark, cypress, or gravel mulch. Plant groupings shall
be mulched in a continuous bed in which the edge of the mulching bed does
not extend more than four (4) feet beyond the anticipated edge (at maturity)
of plantings.
11. When required shrubs or trees are planted individually and away from
nearby plants they shall be encircled in a mulched area with a diameter of
no more than five (5) feet. Evergreen trees are allowed a mulched circle
extending no more than four (4) feet beyond the anticipated edge (at
maturity) of the tree.
iii. Mulch adjacent to parking lots shall be of shredded hardwood bark or
cypress mulch. Gravel mulch shall not be permitted adjacent to parking
lots.
XXVIII-3
iv. Mulch shall be applied so as to prevent or retard weed growth and be kept
free of weeds.
v. When low-growing broadleaf evergreen plants (for example, Pachysandra,
Vinca minor, and Purpleleaf Wintercreeper) are utilized as ground covers,
they shall be planted together in continuous beds and spaced to achieve a
substantially continuous ground cover within two (2) years of the issuance
of a Certificate of Occupancy. Said ground covers must be mulched as set
forth herein until such substantially continuous coverage is achieved.
e. Penalty for Noncompliance
A property owner, upon notification by the Zoning Administrator, shall have a
period of not less than fifteen (15) days to restore, replace or repair plant material,
fences or other screening found to be in violation of the Pe1formance Standards set
forth herein. If said violation is not corrected within the specified time, the property
owner shall be subject to a fine of three hundred dollars ($300) per day for the first
violation and five hundred dollars ($500) per day, per violation, thereafter. In the
case of landscaping that performs poorly, Alternative Compliance may be utilized
pursuant to Subsection F of this Section. No fine shall be levied during the time
that an Alternative Compliance proposal to remedy the problem situation is being
reviewed by the Planning and Building Services Department. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2010-34, May 17, 2010)
D. LANDSCAPING CLASSIFICATIONS
The amount of all required landscaping shall be determined using the point system herein
described. All landscaping requirements shall be based on formulas herein set forth. Each
section requiring landscaping shall be deemed a portion of the total required landscaping.
Fractional calculations of one-half (0.5) or greater shall be rounded up to the nearest whole
number. The following points shall apply for each unit of landscaping.
1. Tree Classification
a. Shade trees shall constitute eighteen (18) points each.
b. Evergreen trees shall constitute eighteen ( 18) points each.
c. Intermediate trees shall constitute twelve (12) points each.
2. Shrub Classification
a. Evergreen shrubs shall constitute three (3) points each.
b. Deciduous shrubs shall constitute two (2) points each.
3. Frontage and Corner Lots
Landscaping for front yards shall be determined by lot frontage. In the case of corner
lots, required points shall be determined by the sum of all sides having frontage.
E. DETERMINATION OF REQUIREMENTS
1. Residential Subdivisions
XXVIII-4
a. Boulevard Trees
As a component of plat approval, residential subdivisions in the City of Decatur
shall be required one (1) shade tree a minimum of every fifty (50) linear feet on
center, within the public boulevard. Plantings shall be regulated by the City of
Decatur Arboricultural Specifications Manual.
b. Preservation Credit
Where existing native canopy exists, the property owner may substitute existing
trees for required trees, subject to the Alternative Compliance provisions of this
Section.
2. Multi-Family, Office, Commercial and Manufacturing Districts
All lots improved with office, commercial, industrial or multi-family residential
development in the R-6, 0-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, M-1, M-2, M-3 and PD districts shall be
required to provide landscaping as set forth herein.
a. Front Yard Requirements
The number of points that must be achieved through landscaping for front and
corner side yards shall be based on one-half (Vi) required points of landscaping for
each one (1) foot of lot frontage (0.50 points per foot). All landscaping required
for front yards shall be planted within the required front yard, except as may be
approved by the Alternative Compliance provisions of this Section. Of the total
required points, fifty (50) percent of the total must be achieved by using plants
from the tree classification and fifty (50) percent must be achieved by utilizing
plants from the shrub classification. A minimum of seventy-five percent of all area
within the required front yard not occupied by parking lots shall be planted with
live plant material, such as shrubs, ground cover or turf grass.
b. Corner Lot
Corner lots shall be required to provide front yard landscaping on all sides fronting
on a public street or highway.
c. Refuse Disposal Areas
Refuse disposal areas shall be screened on all sides, including a solid gate for
access, by a solid, commercial-grade wood privacy fence, wall, or equivalent
material with a minimum height of six (6) feet and not greater than seven (7) feet.
The finished face of the fence shall face away from the refuse disposal area.
d. Mechanical Equipment
All roof top and ground level mechanical equipment and utilities shall be fully
screened from view of the centerline of any street or the nearest boundary of a
single- or two-family residence district as seen from a height six (6) feet above
ground level.
3. Buffer Yards
a. Buffer Yard Required
XXVIII-5
Whenever a side or rear yard in the R-6, 0-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, M-1, M-2, M-3 or PD
districts abuts, or, in the absence of an alley, would abut, any R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-
5 district or any residential use in the city limits or neighboring jurisdiction, a buffer
yard shall be required. (Amended, Ordinance No. 20 l 0-71)
b. Depth of Yard
The buffer yard shall be ten (10) percent of the lot width or depth, whichever is
applicable. No buffer yard shall be less than ten (10) feet in width. No buffer yard
shall be required to be more than fifty (50) feet in width. For property located on a
corner lot where both the rear lot line and the interior side lot line abut property in
the R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-5 district, the buffer yard depth for both required buffer
yards may be determined by the lesser dimension of the lot width or lot depth.
c. Dispute of Yard
Where there is a dispute over the location or size of the required buffer yard, the
Technical Review Committee shall make final determinations based on best
available information.
d. Total Points Required
The number of points that must be achieved through landscaping for buffer yards
shall be based on one and one-half ( 1.5) required points of landscaping for each one
(1) foot of lot length along the buffer yard (1.5 points per foot). All landscaping
required for buffer yards shall be planted within the required buffer yard, except as
may be approved by the Alternative Compliance provisions of this Section. Of the
total required points, fifty (50) percent of the total must be achieved by using plants
from the tree classification and fifty (50) percent must be achieved by utilizing
plants from the shrub classification. Of the total required points, fifty (50) percent
must be evergreen or broadleaf evergreen plantings.
e. Berm.
Where a semi-continuous berm measuring a minimum of three (3) feet and a
maximum of four ( 4) feet in vertical height and not having a slope greater than 3: l
on either side is provided, required buffer yard landscaping points may be reduced
by twenty (20) percent. Slopes may be increased above 3: l where retaining walls
are used, subject to approval under the Alternative Compliance provisions of this
section. No individual section of said berm may measure more than forty (40) feet
in length. Berms should present an aesthetically-pleasing screen, such as the berm
shown in Exhibit XX-1. The berm should be integrated into the overall landscaping
plan, including landscaping on the berm where practical.
f. Prohibited Use
All driveways, refuse containers, storage areas, aisleways, vehicular maneuvering
areas, mechanical equipment and structures are prohibited within the required
buffer yard. A sidewalk or paved trail may be located within a buffer yard when
used as a connection to other pedestrian and/or recreational corridors. A concrete
pad for emergency exits from a building shall be permitted in the buffer yard
provided that it is required by the Building Code.
XXVIII-6
g. Activity areas
All on-site activity areas located within twenty-five (25) feet of a required buffer
yard shall be screened by a fence, wall, berm, evergreen planting or combination
thereof such that a substantially solid visual barrier of six (6) feet in height is
attained. Fences or walls, when provided, must be located between the activity area
and the buffer yard. Activity areas shall include refuse containers/dumpsters;
storage; display of materials or merchandise; loading or unloading of passengers or
goods, production assembly, processing or demolition of goods; and parking of
vehicles. Plantings provided to screen activity areas shall not count toward required
landscaping.
4. Parking Lots
Parking lots in all districts are subject to the following requirements; however, any
portion of a parking lot not visible from the street in the B-4 District is exempt from
landscaping requirements.
a. Points Required.
The number of points that must be achieved for all parking lots through landscaping
shall be equal to one and one-half (1.5) points for every one (1) parking space
provided. The points may be achieved through the use of both trees and shrubs.
Parking lots with fifty (50) or more spaces must provide all required landscaping in
curbed islands or medians within the interior of the parking lot. Parking lots with
less than fifty (50) spaces may place landscaping in interior curbed parking islands
and/or within ten ( 10) feet of the perimeter of the parking lot.
b. Shade tree requirements
Fifty (50) percent of the required landscaping for parking lots must be met with
shade trees. Intermediate trees and/or shrubs may fulfill the remaining fifty (50)
percent of the requirements. Shade trees shall be arranged as to provide maximum
pavement shading, where possible.
c. Islands
Where internal landscaping of the parking lot is required, there shall be a minimum
of one curbed island provided for each 15 parking stalls in each row. The minimum
area for planting all types of trees within parking lots shall not be less than 180
square feet. Shade trees and intermediate trees shall not be planted in any area with
a width of less than ten (10) feet. Shrubs shall not be planted in an area of less than
two (2) feet in width. Measurements of width and area shall be from the inside
edge of the curb(s). A minimum of fifty (50) percent of every landscape island
shall be planted with live plant material, such as shrubs, ground cover or turf grass.
XXVIII-7
d. Curb mateiials.
Parking lot islands and medians shall be curbed with concrete or a functionally
equivalent mate1ial that must be approved by the Zoning Administrator. The
following materials are not considered functionally equivalent to concrete curbs
and are therefore unacceptable for use as curbs: asphalt, landscape timbers, railroad
ties, wood or lumber, and concrete wheel stops. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-
34, May 17, 2010)
e. Minimum parking lot setback
The Zoning Administrator may review and approve alternative compliance
landscaping plans to reduce parking lot setbacks due to unique circumstances. An
alternative compliance landscape plan may be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator to reduce the front, rear and/or side yard setback. Petitioners
requesting alternative compliance shall provide an additional twenty percent (20%)
increase in landscaping points than are required by this Section.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34, May 17, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-54, July 20, 2009)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
F. ALTERNATIVE COMPLIANCE PROVISIONS
1. Alternative compliance established.
Petitioners may choose to follow the point system described herein or submit a
landscape plan to the Planning and Building Services Department under the alternative
compliance provisions of this section. The alternative compliance provisions are
intended to give flexibility where unique situations complicate the provision of required
landscaping.
2. Waiver of appeal
If a petitioner chooses to submit a landscape plan through the alternative compliance
process and is denied, the petitioner may appeal the Zoning Administrator's decision
to the Zoning Board of Appeals subject to Section XXX.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34, May 17, 2010)
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-54, July 20, 2009)
3. Authority of Director
The Zoning Administrator, at his/her discretion, may choose to forward an alternative
compliance proposal to the Technical Review and/or Policy Review Committees for
final approval. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34)
4. Poor performance
Alternative compliance may be used where landscaping has repeatedly performed
poorly and the property owner wishes to propose alternative plantings/arrangements.
XXVIII-8
G. RECOMMENDED AND PROHIBITED PLANTING MATERIALS
The following list of recommended trees is designed to provide preferred plantings,
however, trees not listed below may be pem1itted provided that they are not judged to be a
nuisance or problem species. Prohibited trees may not be planted in the City of Decatur.
1. Recommended Trees
a. Recommended Intermediate Trees - 12 Tree Points Each
Common Name Scientific Mature Mature Native/
Name Height Spread Non-
Native
Amur Maple Acer ginnala 15' - 15' - Non-
20' 20' native
Crabapple Malus spp. 10' - 8' -20' Native
30'
Japanese Tree Lilac Syring a 20' - 20' - Nonreticulata
30' 30' native
Kousa Dogwood Cornus kousa 20' - 20' - Non-
30' 30' native
Redbud Cercis 25' - 25' - Native
canadensis 30' 35'
Service berry Amelanchier 15' - 15' - Native
30' 25'
Star Magnolia Magnolia 10' - 10' - Native
stellata 20' 15'
American Hophornbeam Ostrya 30' - 20' - Native
virginiana 40' 30'
Black Gum Nyssa 30' - 20' - Native
sylvatica 50' 30'
Blue Beech Carpinus 20' - 20' - Native
caroliniana 35' 35'
Callery Pear Pyrus 35' - 25' - Noncallervana
45' 35' native
Hedge Maple Acer 30' - 25' - Noncampestre
40' 35' native
Paperbark Maple Acer griseum 25- - 15' - Non-
35' 30' native
XXVIII-9
b. Recommended Shade Trees - 18 Tree Points Each
Common Scientific Mature Mature Native/ Non-Native
Name Name Height Spread
Baldcypress Tax odium 60' - 20' - Native
distichum 80' 45'
Black Maple Acer nigrum 50' - 20' - Native
60' 30'
Blue Ash Fraxinus 50' - 35' - Native
quadrangulat 75' 50'
a
Bur Oak Quercus 70' - 60' - Native
macrocarpa 90' 90'
Chinkapin Quercus 35' - 35' - Native
Oak muehlenbergi 50' 50'
1
English Oak Quercus 60' - 50' - Non-native
robur 80' 70'
Gingko Gingko 50' - 40' - Non-native
(Male only) biloba 80' 80'
Kentucky Gymnocladus 55' - 45' - Native
Coffetree dioicus 75' 65'
(Male only)
Lace bark Ulm us 40' - 30' - Non-native
Elm parvifolia 50' 40'
Northern Quercus rubra 60' - 45' - Native
Red Oak 80' 65'
Shumard Quercus 60' - 45' - Native
Oak shumardii 80' 65'
Silver Tilia 60' - 45' - Non-native
Linden tomentsa 70' 55'
Swamp Quercus 60' - 50' - Non-native
White Oak bi color 80' 80'
2. Prohibited Trees
a. Prohibited Trees
Common Name Scientific Name
Carolina Poplar Populus x canadensis
Cottonwood Populus deltoides
Willow Salix spp.
Siberian Elm Ulmus pumila
Silver Maple Acer saccharinum
Tree of Heaven Ailanthus altissima
Osage Orange (female) Madura pomifera
Gingko (female) Gingko biloba
XXVIII-10
a. Prohibited Trees
Kentucky Coffeetree (female) I Gymnocladus dioicus
H. PRESERVATION OF EXISTING LANDSCAPING
1. Incentive
Existing landscaping that is in a vigorous growing condition and is not specifically
prohibited by this ordinance may count toward meeting the requirements of this
ordinance. Plant materials, when preserved, will be awarded ten (10) additional points
per tree. Shrubs shall not be eligible for preservation credits.
2. Minimum size for preservation
Plants must meet the following minimum size criteria to receive preservation points:
a. Shade Trees: 12 inches trunk diameter or greater,
b. Intermediate Trees: 15 feet vertical height or taller, and
c. Evergreen Trees: 15 feet vertical height or taller.
3. Protection during construction
Trees that are to be preserved under the provisions of this ordinance shall be fenced
around the drip line of the tree and marked to be saved during construction. Care shall
be taken to prevent damage to the tree and its root structure during construction.
I. INCENTIVE FOR LANDSCAPE AESTHETIC INITIATIVE
1. Incentive
It is the intent of the City Council to provide incentives for initiative in landscaping and
providing an aesthetically pleasing environment for residents of Decatur. Initiative is
considered going above and beyond the requirements of the landscaping regulations by
providing public space, urban vistas and attractive corridors for public use. Example
of aesthetic initiative may include provision of biking trails, pedestrian paths, parking
lot safety corridors, park or green space areas, etc. Incentives shall be provided via
various tax abatements available to developers. All incentives shall be approved by the
City Council.
2. Conditions for incentive
Incentives will only be provided when the developer has provided all of the required
landscaping for the subject property. Although required landscaping may be utilized
in incentive areas, it is generally expected that incentive areas will provide more
landscaping than required. All incentive applications must be reviewed under the
Alternative Compliance provisions of this section. Incentives will be reviewed based
on the proposed landscaping meeting the following factors:
a. That the proposed landscaping is generally considered to be above and beyond
the normal landscaping requirements for the proposed development;
XXVIII-11
b. That the proposed landscaping is generally considered to be a major aesthetic
improvement;
c. That the developer is making a substantial contribution in landscaping and
aesthetic initiative to the development;
d. That the developer has integrated aesthetic, safety and circulation factors into
the plan; and;
e. That the proposed landscaping is in harmony with the intent of the ordinance
3. Cluster parking with landscaped buffers.
The use of clustering for parking, with structures located to the front of a parcel, shall
be eligible for incentive. Clusters should be designed to control traffic and should have
a ten (10) foot landscape buffer around each cluster parking area. Each cluster should
contain no more than 25% of the required parking spaces for the development and
should contain appropriate interior parking lot landscaping. The example shown below
illustrates the clustering effect.
4. Parking lot safety corridors
Landscaped medians, integrating pedestrian paths and landscaping, when providing
access to a structure, shall be eligible for incentive. An example median is shown in
the illustration below. Medians must have pedestrian paths located within the median,
must eliminate unnecessary pedestrian/vehicle interactions, must provide robust
landscaping and appropriate lighting for public safety. Medians should be continuous,
thereby segmenting the parking lot for increased traffic control.
5. Dedication of green space I corridor
Where a proposed corridor, green space or other public recreation amenity is located
on the site to be developed, or where the provision of a corridor or green space
represents a logical extension of existing facilities, the developer may receive incentive
for the dedication of land and/or capital improvements toward the extension of the
facility. Dedications or improvements of this type must be arranged for acceptance by
the appropriate entity (Decatur Park District, City of Decatur, Macon County
Conservation District, etc.). All parties must be in agreement regarding the proposed
facility and capital improvements for the facility to qualify for incentive(s). Green
space/corridor projects should be well-integrated into the development where possible,
provide maximum safety for pedestrians and motorists, and should achieve a high level
of aesthetic quality. Corridors provided under this alternative maybe located in a
required buff er yard.
J. EXTERIOR LIGHTING
1. Lighting Plan Required
An exterior lighting plan shall be submitted with the site plan at the time of application
for a building permit for all new construction excluding single-family and two-family
residences. The lighting plan shall show the following information:
a. North arrow, scale, date of preparation and revisions;
XXVIII-12
b. Location of all existing buildings; structures and pavement;
c. Location and dimension of all property lines;
d. Location of all existing or proposed sidewalks, bike trails, pedestrian paths, etc.
on and adjacent to the site;
e. Location of all existing or proposed curb lines and cuts for streets, alleys, or
parking lots;
f. Location of all proposed free-standing and wall-mount lighting including mast
height for free-standing (or pole) lights;
g. Location of all illuminated signs, externally-illuminated storefronts and any
externally-mounted neon lighting;
h. Location of all canopy-mounted lighting on the site;
i. Detail Sheet showing:
I. Proposed illumination by fixture;
11. Catalog cuts or drawings of horizontal isolux (mounting height and
horizontal footcandles for each fixture);
iii. Maximum allowable illumination based on the proposed use;
iv. Proposed canopy illumination;
v. Proposed sign lighting if any; and
vi. Proposed exposed neon lighting, if any.
j. Any additional information as determined by the Zoning Administrator to be
necessary for approval of the proposed plan. (Amended, Ordinance 2010-34)
2. Combination of Plans
The landscape plan and exterior lighting plan may be combined on one (1) sheet where
the detail can be reasonably discerned, however, the Detail Sheet as described above
shall be shown on a separate sheet.
3. Photometric Plans
A photometric plan shall be required for all multi-family, office, commercial and
industrial development on sites greater than 10,000 square feet in area. Photometric
plans shall be superimposed on the site plan for each classification of lighting with
points no greater than 30 feet apart.
4. Installation of lighting
An exterior lighting plan must be approved by the Planning and Building Services
Department prior to the installation of any exterior lighting regulated herein, excluding
single-family and two-family residences. All lighting must meet the applicable sign
code, building code and electrical code of the City of Decatur.
5. Applicability
a. Major Additions
XXVIII-13
All new land uses, changes in use, new buildings and major modifications shall
provide full compliance with this Section. All building additions or modifications
of twenty-five (25) percent or more in terms of additional dwelling units, gross floor
area, or parking spaces, either with a single addition or with cumulative additions
subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance, shall invoke the requirements of
this section for the entire property, including previously installed or new exterior
lighting. A major addition shall also include the replacement or installation of
twenty-five (25) percent or more of the allowable lumens on the parcel.
b. Minor Additions
Additions or modifications of less than twenty-five (25) percent to existing uses as
described in the preceding paragraph shall require the submission of a complete
inventory and site plan detailing all existing and proposed lighting. All new
lighting shall meet the requirements enumerated herein. The total light output after
the modifications shall not exceed those on site prior to construction, or that
permitted by this Section, whichever is larger.
c. The addition of one (single bulb) light fixture per property may be allowed to be
installed in a commercial or industrial district without the submission of a lighting
plan with the following conditions:
i. The light fixture shall be placed on an existing pole that is located within
public right-of-way or within an easement;
ii. Written approval of all owners of adjacent property or property that in the
absence of right-of-way or an alley would be adjacent property;
iii. Only one (single bulb) light fixture shall be added from the effective date
of this amendment; and,
iv. A catalog cut of the fixture must be provided. All new lighting shall meet
the requirements enumerated herein.
For purposes of this subsection, property is defined as the contiguous lot(s) that are
used for the purposes of conducting business to include all buildings, parking, etc.
6. Performance Standards
All lighting shall be required to perform in accordance with the following provisions:
a. Safety
i. Lighting shall be installed to provide pedestrians and motorists safe travel
through parking lots and pedestrian facilities;
II. Lighting shall be so arranged as to highlight nodes of travel for motorists
and pedestrians;
iii. Lighting shall not create excessive glare that may interfere with safe travel.
7. Maintenance
a. The owner of the premises shall be responsible for maintenance, repair and
replacement of any lighting or light standards that have fallen into disrepair or
are no longer in operation.
XXVIII-14
b. Nuisance
1. Any exterior lighting installed that is not in conformance with the
requirements of this section shall be considered a nuisance to the public.
11. All lighting shall be arranged so that no glare is projected upon any
adjoining premises.
8. Penalty for Nonconformance
9.
All non-conforming multi-family, office, commercial or industtial exterior lighting
installed after the effective date of this ordinance shall be considered a violation of the
Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator, at his/her discretion, may require the
removal of non-conforming lighting immediately where said lighting creates a nuisance
condition or poses imminent danger to life or property. (Amended, Ordinance No.
2010-34, May 17, 2010)
Permitted and Required Lighting Thresholds:
Allowable Spillover
Adjacent to Adjacent to
Minimum Maximum R-1, R-2, all other
Average Average R-3, R-5, zoning
Level Level and R-6 districts
Use (fc) (fc) (fc) (fc)
Regional Shopping 0.9
Community Shopping 0.6
Neighborhood Shopping 0.8
Cultural, Civic,
Recreational 0.6
Office 0.6
Airport, Commuter Parking 0.6
Apartment Complex 0.6
Hospital 0.6
Fast Food 0.9
Industrial Parking 0.8
Educational Facilities 0.8
Churches 0.8
Active (pedestrian/conveyance) 4.0
Inactive (normally locked, fire egress) 1.0
XXVIII-15
4.0
3.0
1.5
3.0
3.0
3.0
3.0
3.0
4.0
1.5
1.5
1.5
5.0
2.0
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
Building
(inactive)
Environs
NIA
XXVIII-16
1.0 0.5 1.0
Circulation NIA 10.0 0.5 1.0
Merchandise NIA 50.0 0.5 1.0
Feature Display NIA 75.0 0.5 1.0
Approach NIA 3.0 0.5 1.0
Driveway NIA 5.0 0.5 1.0
Pump Island, Canopy NIA 30.0 0.5 1.0
Service Areas NIA 7.0 0.5 1.0
Active* NIA 20.0 0.5 1.0
Inactive NIA 1.0 0.5 1.0
*Does not include self-service storage (mini-warehouses)
"Allowable spillover" refers to the amount of light allowed to cross the property line
between the subject property and adjoining premises.
10. Seasonal Decorations
Seasonal lighted displays are not regulated by this Section.
11. Single-Family and Two-Family Residences
Lighting shall be arranged so as not to shine directly on any adjoining property. A
person shall not conduct a use that has a source of illumination that produces glare
clearly visible beyond a property line or creates a sensation of brightness within a visual
field so as to cause annoyance, discomfort, or impairment of vision. The use of lenses,
deflectors, shields, louvers, or prismatic control devices shall be used to eliminate
nuisance and hazardous lighting to facilitate compliance with this requirement.
12. Canopies
Rigid, permanent canopies that provide shelter for uses such as gasoline stations,
automotive service stations, drive-up banks and similar uses shall conform to the
requirements herein:
a. All light fixtures mounted on or recessed into the lower surface of canopies
shall be fully shielded and utilize flat lenses.
b. All lighting mounted under the canopy, including but not limited to light
fixtures mounted on the lower surface or recessed into the lower surface of the
canopy and any lighting within signage or illuminated panels, shall not exceed
the permitted footcandle coverage as specified for canopies in subsection I.9,
above.
XXVIII-17
13. Outdoor Sports Fields
Outdoor sports fields shall be exempt from the maximums of this section. Lighting
installed for outdoor sports fields shall, however, meet the following minimum
standards:
a. Each light fixture shall have internal and/or external glare control louvers and
shall be installed so as to minimize uplighting and off-site light trespass;
b. Each light fixture shall be installed and maintained with aiming angles that
permit no greater than five (5) percent of the light emitted by each fixture to
project above horizontal
c. Off-site spill shall be controlled consistent with the regulations of Subsection
I.9 of this Section;
d. Lighting plans for outdoor sports fields shall be certified by a registered
Professional Engineer of the State of Illinois; and
e. Lighting shall be designed in accordance with the Illuminating Engineering
Society of North Ame1ica (IESNA) standards for minimum illuminance for the
intended activity on the field.
f. Lighting used for sporting events shall be extinguished within the shortest
reasonable time upon completion of scheduled sporting activities.
14. Exposed Neon Lighting
Exposed neon lighting (for illumination purposes) shall be permitted only in the B-2,
B-3, B-4, M-1, M-2 and PD Districts.
15. Signage Lighting
Signs that are externally-illuminated must utilize a full cutoff lighting fixture. Externalillumination
fixtures on signs exceeding eight (8) feet in height shall be down-tilted
from the top of the sign. Up-tilted lighting for uses other than signs less than eight feet
in height, decorative lighting, and flag lighting is not permitted.
16. Off-Premise Sign Lighting
All off-premise signs may be externally-illuminated by full cutoff light fixtures and
shall be down-tilted from the top of the sign. Lighting used for off-premise signs shall
not exceed 30 foot-candles when measured along a horizontal plane extended from the
bottom of the sign frame. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2004-92, November 15, 2004)
17. Laser Lighting, Search Lights and Brilliant Lighting
The use of laser source light or any similar high intensity light for outdoor advertising
or entertainment, when projected above the horizontal, is prohibited. The operation of
searchlights for advertising purposes is prohibited.
XXVIII-18
18. Wallpack Lighting
All wallpack lighting shall utilize full cutoff luminaires. Shields on the wallpack
lighting must be permanently affixed to the fixture.
19. Required Cut-off Angle
All exterior lighting must be IESNA (Illuminating Engineering Society of North
America) rated cut-off or full cut-off for use on the site, except as expressly permitted
herein. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
20. Parking Garages
Parking areas within wholly or partially enclosed parking garages shall be exempt from
the provisions of this section; however, rooftop parking decks and other garage parking
areas not covered by a roof shall comply with the requirements herein.
XXVIII-19
SECTION XXIX. PLAN COMMISSION; AMENDMENTS
A. PLAN COMMISSION ESTABLISHED
There is hereby created, in accordance with applicable State statutes, the City Plan
Commission which shall consist of eleven (11) residents of the City appointed by the
Mayor with the consent of the Council for terms of three (3) years, and until their respective
successors are appointed and qualified .. Members will serve without compensation.
8. OFFICERS AND BY-LAWS
The Commission shall biennially elect from its membership a Chair, Vice-Chair, Secretary,
and such other officers as it shall require for the conduct of business; and shall adopt bylaws
regulating the time, place, and manner of holding and conducting its meetings.
C. STAFF TO THE COMMISSION
The Zoning Administrator and his/her designee(s) shall be staff to the Plan Commission.
D. COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
The Commission shall from time to time review and hold hearings on the City of Decatur
Comprehensive Plan, soliciting and receiving public input, and recommending to Council
such changes, including adoption of a new or amended plan, as may be in the best interest
of the City.
E. RECORDS
The Commission shall keep written records of all its transactions and meetings, whether
regular or special.
F. AUTHENTICATION OF RECORDS
The records, reports, maps, plats, plans, exhibits, and all other documents and materials of
the Commission or filed with it shall be deemed to be sufficiently authenticated when
certified by the signature of the Chair and attested by the Secretary.
G. AMENDMENTS TO ZONING CODE AND ZONING MAP
1. The Council may, from time to time, on its own motion or on petition, amend,
supplement or change by ordinance the regulations and districts herein or
subsequently established, but no such amendments shall be made without a public
hearing before the City Plan Commission and its report to the Council. Notice of
the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be given as required by law.
2. In the case of written protest against any proposed amendment, under the conditions
specified in Division 13 of the Illinois Complied Statutes (65 ILCS 5/11-13-14),
the amendment shall not be passed except by a favorable vote of two-thirds of the
City Council.
XXIX-1
H. POSTING OF SIGN
1. In addition to other forms of notice which may be from time to time required or
directed to be given of the pendency of a hearing upon a petition under this section,
a temporary sign shall be posted on or at the premises which are the subject of said
petition which said sign shall be so posted continuously for a period of not less than
ten (10) days before the hearing upon said petition and shall be not less than three
square feet in size and shall state substantially as follows:
"A request for action under the City Zoning Ordinance affecting these premises is
pending. For information consult the Planning and Building Services Department,
One Gary K. Anderson Plaza."
2. Petitioners may be required to post the required sign(s) and provide proof of proper
and timely posting. In addition, petitioners may be required to post a deposit in an
amount equal to the replacement value of the sign, said deposit to be returned to the
petitioner upon City receipt of the sign in the same condition in which it was issued.
I. PETITION FOR AMENDMENTS
All petitions requesting a change, amendment, or supplement of the established zoning
districts of the City and regulations connected therewith shall be filed by the person
requesting such action and such petition shall contain the street address of the petitioner,
the lot number of any real estate owned by him/her adjacent to the area proposed to be
changed and shall also contain an accurate legal description of the district or parts of
districts proposed to be so altered. Such petition shall also recite facts indicating that the
proposed change will not be detrimental to the general public interest and the purposes of
this Ordinance and shall further disclose the purpose for which such property is sought to
be used.
J. FEES
The following fee shall be paid at the time of filing, to cover the cost of publication of
notice of hearing on said petition and other costs incidental to such hearing:
1. Rezoning from residential to more intensive use and from any classification to PD,
Planned Development District:
Size of Tract
tracts less than 5 acres
Tracts 5 acres or more but less than 10 acres
tracts 10 acres or more but less than 25
acres
tracts 25 acres or more
2. Rezoning to a more intensive use
Rate
$ 250.00
280.00
300.00
325.00
Any zoning change from a less intensive to a more intensive district, except changes
within the residential classifications:
Size of Tract Rate
XXIX-2
tracts less than 5 acres
tracts 5 acres or more
3. Rezoning to a less intensive use
$ 325.00
400.00
A fee of $150.00 shall accompany a petition for a change from a higher to a lower
classification.
4. Conditional use permits.
Fees accompanying an application for a conditional use permit shall be the same as
those in subparagraph 1 ("Rezoning from residential to more intensive use") above.
5. Non-Conforming Use Permits
Fees accompanying an application for a Non-Conforming Use Permit shall be the same
as those in subparagraph 1 ("Rezoning from residential to more intensive use") above.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-38, May 18, 2009)
6. Wind Energy System Permits.
Fees accompanying an application for a Wind Energy System permit shall be the
same as those in subparagraph 1 ("Rezoning from residential to more intensive
use") above. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-82, November 16, 2009)
7. Amending a Planned Development
A fee of $150.00 shall accompany a petition for an amendment to an approved Planned
Development. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2005-105, December 19, 2005)
K. RE-APPLICATION
In the event a petition for rezoning is denied by the Council, another petition for a change
regarding the same property or portion thereof to the same zoning district shall not be filed
within a period of one (1) year from the date of denial, unless the City Council determines
that the circumstances regarding the property in question have materially
changed in such a way as to warrant reconsideration.
XXIX-3
SECTION XXX. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
A. ORGANIZATION
1. Composition of Zoning Board of Appeals
A Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby established. Said Board shall consist of seven
(7) members appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. The term of
office of each member shall be three (3) years. Vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant. The Mayor shall have
the power to remove any member of the Board for cause, after notice and hearing. One
of the members of the Board shall elected as Chair of the Board by the other members
annually in October or at the retirement of the Chair. No member shall serve more than
two (2) terms as Chair.
2. Conduct of meetings.
Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chair and at such other times as
the Board may determine. The Chair, or in his/her absence the acting chair, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board
shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing
the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating
such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of
which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board.
8. POWER AND DUTIES
The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
I. Appeals of decisions by an Administrative Official
The Board shall hear appeals to the official actions, interpretations and orders of any
Administrative Official in the enforcement and implementation of the terms of this
Ordinance. Appeals may be granted if the Board finds that an error has been
committed.
2. Interpretation of Zoning Boundaries
The Board shall have the authority to interpret the Zoning Map in cases where actual
street layout does not agree with the street layout illustrated on the official Zoning Map.
Interpretations will be based upon consistency with the City of Decatur Comprehensive
Plan, with the City's overall interests, with the general character of the use and its
compatibility with neighboring land uses.
3. Extension of boundary lines
The Board shall have the authority to extend the boundary of a district when the
boundary line illustrated on the official Zoning Map divides into two or more parts a
lot in single ownership at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance.
XXX-1
4. Variances to parking and loading regulations
The Board may grant variances to the parking and loading regulations that appear in
Section XXIV of this Ordinance. The variance granted shall not reduce the minimum
requirement more than 50 percent, except as provided in subparagraph 5, below. The
Board will base its decision upon the Decatur Comprehensive Plan and upon the
determination that the literal enforcement of this Section would create an unnecessary
surplus of parking and loading spaces.
5. Housing for elderly families
The Board may grant variances to the parking and loading regulation that appear in
Section XXIV of this Ordinance. The variance granted may reduce the minimum
requirement by up to 75 percent, subject to final approval by the City Council. Grounds
for approval are the same as provided in subparagraph 4, above.
6. Off street parking in residential districts
The Board is authorized to permit an off-street parking area in any Residential zoning
district which serves a use located in an adjacent non-residential district. The Board
will base its decision on the City of Decatur Comprehensive Plan and upon the
determination that the off-street parking would relieve traffic congestion on the street.
The Board, in granting the application, will find that the proposed off-street parking
area meets the standards specified in Section XXIV of this Ordinance; that it will be
located within reasonable proximity to the use which it is intended to serve; and that it
will be developed in a manner which will have no adverse effect to any neighboring
residential property.
7. Height, area, and setback variances
The Board may grant variances to yard size requirements, setback requirements,
building height or bulk limitations, or lot size or coverage limitations. The Board, in
granting the variance, will base its decision upon the City of Decatur Comprehensive
Plan and will find that the variance will not create a safety hazard or exacerbate an
existing safety hazard; and that the variance if approved will cause no detriment to the
overall health, safety, or welfare of the City as a whole or to any neighboring property.
8. Barbed wire/razor wire in Office and Commercial Districts
The Board may grant a variance to permit barbed wire, razor wire, electrical fencing,
spiked railing or any guard or barricade to which there is attached any pointed
instrument, device or thing of any kind or description, designed, intended or liable to
injure any person coming on contact therewith within the 0-1, B-1 and B-2 Districts
except in lots adjacent to designated urban conidors. (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-
38, May 18, 2009)
9. Electronic Message Unit Signs (Amended, Ordinance No. 2011-02)
The Board may grant variances to the required setback for an electronic message unit
sign. The variance granted for the setback shall not reduce the minimum requirement
by more than 50 percent. If a variance is granted, the electronic message unit shall
only operate between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11 :00 p.m. Before approving any
XXX-2
request for a variance, the Board shall consider: the effect of the variance on the City
of Decatur Comprehensive Plan; whether the variance will create a safety hazard or
exacerbate an existing safety hazard; and, whether the variance will be detrimental to
the overall health, safety and welfare of the City as a whole, or any neighboring
property.
10. Small Wireless Facilities
The Board may grant variances to the height for a new or replacement pole in excess
of the height limitations on which a small wireless facility is proposed for collocation
as set forth in Section 4. Paragraph H. Height Limitations of Chapter 41.2 Small
Wireless Facilities of the City Code of the City of Decatur. The Board, in granting the
variance, will base its decision upon the City of Decatur Comprehensive Plan and will
find that the variance will not create a safety hazard or exacerbate an existing safety
hazard; and that the variance if approved will cause no detriment to the overall health,
safety, or welfare of the City as a whole or to any neighboring property. (Amended,
Ordinance No. 2018-40, September 4, 2018)
C. PROCEDURE
1. Variances-generally
V aiiances shall be granted by the Board when:
a. The variance requested is found to be in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of the City of Decatur Comprehensive Plan and with the regulations of
this Ordinance;
b. The Board finds the existence of practical difficulties or a non-economic
hardship which render the strict implementation of the provisions of this
Ordinance impracticable; and
c. The requested variance will not alter the essential character of the locality or
have a negative impact on smrounding properties.
2. Determination of practical difficulties and particular hardships
In determining whether a petition for variance meets the standards of practical
difficulties or particular hardship as articulated in subparagraph 1, above, the Board
shall require evidence that:
a. Strict application of the zoning standards as herein enumerated lead to an
unnecessary non-economic hardship or practical difficulty which prevents the
reasonable use of the property for the uses allowed within the zoning district;
and/or
b. The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances not of his/her own
making.
3. Impact on the surrounding area
XXX-3
The variance, if granted, must not alter the essential character of the locality or
otherwise negatively impact surrounding properties. In making this determination, the
Board shall determine that the requested variance.
a. Will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent properties;
b. Will not unreasonably diminish the values of adjacent property;
c. Will not unreasonably increase congestion in the public streets or otherwise
endanger public safety;
d. Is in harmony with the intent of the zoning district in which it is located and is
in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance.
4. Nothing herein permits, or shall be construed to permit the Board to authorize the
use of land in any district for other than a permitted use of that district.
5. Petitions-generally
Petitions to the Board for exceptions or vanat10ns or appeals, as authorized in
Subsection C hereof, may be made by any person or by any officer, department, board
or bureau of the City affected by any decision of the Building Official. The appeal
shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the Board by general rule, by
filing with the Planning Division a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The
Planning Division shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers constituting the
record from which the action appealed is taken.
6. Fees
The following fees shall apply to all petitions for variances and appeals:
a. For properties located within the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-5 districts: $150.00
b. For properties located within all other districts: $250.00
c. Whenever work has commenced prior to receiving all necessary permits on a
project that requires a variance, the above fees shall be doubled.
7. Appeal stays all proceedings; exception.
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless
the Building Official certifies to the Board, after notice of appeal shall have been filed
with him/her, that, by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in his/her
opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not
be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board or
by a court of record.
8. Conduct of hearing.
The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the petition or appeal and give
due notice of the time, place and purpose thereof, and shall decide the appeal within a
reasonable time. An affirmative vote of four members of the Board shall be necessary
to take any action authorized in Subsection C, above.
9. Posting of signs
XXX-4
a. In addition to other forms of notice which may be from time to time required or
directed to be given of the pendency of a hearing upon a petition under this
Section, a temporary sign shall be posted on or at the premises which are subject.
of said petition which said sign shall be so posted continuously for a period of
not less than ten (10) days before the hearing upon said petition, and shall be
not less than three (3) square feet in size, and shall state as follows:
"A request for action under the City Zoning Ordinance affecting these premises
is pending. For information consult the Planning and Building Services
Department, One Gary K. Anderson Plaza."
b. Petitioners may be required to post the required sign(s) and provide proof of
proper and timely posting. In addition, petitioners may be required to post a
deposit in an amount equal to the replacement value of the sign, said deposit to
be returned to the petitioner upon City receipt of the sign in the same condition
in which it was issued.
10. Quorum
Five (5) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business as
described in this Section. All decisions of the Board will be considered final, and may
not be appealed to City Council.
11. Reapplication
Once a decision has been rendered by the Zoning Board of Appeals, no application for
the same action upon the same premises shall be heard within one year after said
decision.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2002-72, August 19, 2002)
XXX-5
SECTION XXXI. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
A. WHEN REQUIRED
Certificates of occupancy shall be required for any of the following:
1. Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or structurally altered.
2. Change in use of existing building to a use of a different classification.
3. Change in the use of land to a use of a different classification.
4. Any change in the use of a non-conforming use. No such occupancy, use or change
of use shall take place until a certificate of occupancy therefore shall have been
issued by the Building Inspector.
B. FOR BUILDINGS
A certificate of occupancy for a new building or the alteration of an existing building shall
be applied for coincident with the application of a building permit. The certificate shall be
issued within three (3) days after the request for same shall have been made in writing to
the Building Official following the erection or alteration of such building or part thereof
shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. Pending
the issuance of a regular certificate, the Building Official may issue a temporary certificate
of occupancy for a period not exceeding six (6) months, during the completion of
alterations or during partial occupancy of a building pending its completion. Such
temporary certificates shall not be construed in any way as altering the respective rights,
duties or obligations of the owners or of the City relating to the use or occupancy of the
premises or any other matter covered by this Ordinance, and such temporary certificate
shall not be issued, except under such restrictions and provisions as will adequately insure
the safety of the occupants.
C. APPLICATIONS
Applications for certificates of occupancy shall state that the building or proposed use of a
building, complies with all the building and health laws and ordinances and with the
provisions of these regulations. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office
of the Building Official and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a
proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected.
D. NON-CONFORMING USES
In the event that the adoption of this Ordinance causes a non-conformity of land or
buildings, the property owner, owners, or lessee thereof shall apply to the Building Official
for a certificate of occupancy. It shall be the duty of the Building Official to issue a
certificate of occupancy for a lawful non-conforming use, but failure to apply for such
certificate of occupancy for a non-conforming use, or refusal of the Building Inspector to
issue a certificate of occupancy for such non-conforming use shall not be evidence that
said non-conforming use was either illegal or did not lawfully exist at the
effective date of this Ordinance.
XXXI-1
SECTION XXXll. SITE AND BUILDING PLANS
A. PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the purpose and intent of this Section that site and building plans be complete in their
preparation, thoroughly reviewed by City Staff to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare, and properly stored and maintained. Council recognizes the critical importance
of the Building Official in protecting the public interest. It is the intent of Council that the
Building Official will have all information necessary prior to the approval of plans.
B. SITE PLANS REQUIRED
1. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by accurate site plans,
drawn to scale, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon,
the exact sizes and locations on the lot of the buildings and accessory buildings then
existing and the lines within which the proposed building and structure shall be
erected or altered, the existing and intended use of each building or part of building,
the number of families or housekeeping units the building is designed to
accommodate, and such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring
lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this
Ordinance. A record of the original copy of such applications and plats shall be
kept in the office of the Building Official and the duplicate copy shall be kept at the
building at all times during construction.
2. The City may adopt specific standards for site plans that conform to the regulations
of this Ordinance. Said standards may include requirements not elsewhere required
by this Ordinance, so long as they do not conflict with or are not in conformance
with the requirements of this Ordinance.
C. SURVEY BY REGISTERED SURVEYOR
All dimensions shown on these plans relating to the location and size of the lot to be built
upon shall be based on an actual survey by a registered surveyor and the lot shall be staked
out on the ground before construction is started. This requirement for a survey may be
waived by the Building Official, provided all corner pins or monuments of the lot
are pre-existing and are available for his inspection.
XXXII-1
SECTION XXXlll. INTERPRETATION, PURPOSE AND CONFLICT
A. PURPOSE AND INTENT
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance, they shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience,
comfort, prosperity, or general welfare. It is not intended by this Ordinance to interfere
with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between pmties.
It is also the intent of this Section that the specific provisions of Section IV shall guide the
interpretation of this Ordinance, and that City staff, the Board of Appeals and the Plan
Commission shall take guidance from these sections.
B. CONFLICTS
1. Where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or
premises or upon height of buildings or requires larger open spaces than are
imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations or by easements,
covenants, or agreements the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern.
2. Whenever there is an actual or apparent conflict between two or more regulations
within this Ordinance, the more restrictive shall apply.
XXXIII-1
SECTION XXXIV. FENCES (Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-38)
A. PERMIT REQUIRED
1. Regulation
Fences, unless otherwise specified by ordinance, shall conform to the requirements
of this section. No fences not meeting the requirements described herein shall be
permitted.
2. Permit Required.
Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful to erect, construct,
reconstruct, enlarge, or structurally modify a fence without first obtaining a
building permit.
Fences installed for protection of a construction or demolition site (as specified in
Chapter 33 of the International Building Code) are exempt from permit
requirements but must be removed upon completion of the project.
B. GENERALLY
1. Lawfully constructed fences within the City limits of the City of Decatur which
were in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance existing on the effective date of this
Ordinance and subsequent amendments that do not conform to development
regulations of the City of Decatur as codified herein, are hereby declared to be nonconforming.
2. No fence in the B-3, M-3 and PD zoning districts shall be permitted unless
approved by City Council.
3. No fence in any zoning district shall be constructed at a height greater than three
and one-half (3 Yi) feet above the established street grade within the vision
clearance triangle nor shall any fence limit the clear sight of vehicular traffic.
4. Fences installed for protection of a construction or demolition site (as specified in
Chapter 33 of the International Building Code) are exempt from permit
requirements but must be removed upon completion of the project.
5. The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant variances for fences in accordance with
Section XXX.B. of this Zoning Ordinance.
XXXIV-1
C. FENCES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
1. Regulations in this subsection shall apply to the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-5, R-6, and PMR
zoning districts.
2. Barbed wire, razor wire, electrical fencing, spiked railing or any guard or barricade
to which there is attached any pointed instrument, device or thing of any kind or
description, designed, intended or liable to injure any person coming on contact
therewith shall be prohibited.
3. Fences may be located on the property line provided that any post or other
stabilizing apparatus shall be located within the property lines of the owner of the
fence and shall have the finished side facing outward towards the public.
4. No fence exceeding four (4) feet in height, measured from surrounding grade to the
highest point on the fence, shall be constructed or erected in the front yard,
including any front yard beyond the required front yard setback.
5. The location of the front door or entrance of a home or main structure sha11
determine the front yard for purposes of constructing or erecting a fence in a
residential district.
6. No fence exceeding six (6) feet in height, measured from surrounding grade to the
highest point on the fence, shall be constructed or erected in any rear or side yard.
Excepting side or rear yards adjacent to an R-6, 0-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, M-1, M-2, M-
3, PD, and PMR Districts which may be built to a height up to eight (8) feet.
D. FENCES IN OFFICE AND COMMERICAL DISTRICTS
1. Regulations in this subsection shall apply to the 0-1, B-1, B-2 and B-4 zoning
districts.
2. Fences may be located on the property line provided that any post or other
stabilizing apparatus shall be located within the property lines of the owner of the
fence and shall have the finished side facing outward towards the public.
3. A fifteen (15) foot front yard setback shall be required for all fences in this
subsection except those fences located in the B-4 District.
4. The location of the front door or main entrance of a business or main structure shall
determine the front yard for purposes of constructing or erecting a fence in an office
or commercial district. Any remaining front yards, now classified as a side or rear
yard for purposes of erecting a fence, which are located across the street from a
residential district or use, there sha11 be a required evergreen landscaping screen.
This evergreen landscaping screen shall be six (6) feet in height at time of planting
and shall be located between the fence and the property line.
XXXIV-2
E. FENCES IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
1. Regulations in this subsection shall apply to the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts.
2. Barbed wire, razor wire, electrical fencing, spiked railing or any guard or barricade
to which there is attached any pointed instrument, device or thing of any kind or
description, designed, intended or liable to injure any person coming on contact
therewith shall only be permitted in the M-1 and M-2 Districts except in lots
adjacent to designated urban c01Tidors.
3. Barbed wire, razor wire, electrical fencing, spiked railing or any guard or barricade
to which there is attached any pointed instrument, device or thing of any kind or
description, designed, intended or liable to injure any person coming on contact
therewith shall only be permitted at an elevation no less than six (6) feet above
grade thereof nearest such device and must be extended inward towards the
property enclosed.
4. Fences may be located on the property line provided that any post or other
stabilizing apparatus shall be located within the property lines of the owner of the
fence and shall have the finished side facing outward towards the public.
5. A fifteen (15) foot front yard setback shall be required for all fences in this
subsection.
6. The location of the front door or main entrance of a business or main structure shall
determine the front yard for purposes of constructing or erecting a fence in an
industrial district. Any remaining front yards, now classified as a side or rear yard
for purposes of erecting a fence, which are located across the street from a
residential district or use, there shall be a required evergreen landscaping screen.
This evergreen landscaping screen shall be six (6) feet in height at time of planting
and shall be located between the fence and the property line.
XXXIV-3
SECTION XXXV. WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2009-82)
A. GENERALLY
A Wind Energy System may be installed as an accessory structure according to
an approved plan as provided below in order to accomplish its purposes to
appropriately and efficiently provide energy within any zoning district.
All Wind Energy Systems, unless otherwise specified by ordinance, shall
conform to the requirements of this Section. Wind Energy Systems not meeting
the requirements mentioned herein shall not be permitted. Except as otherwise
provided herein, it shall be unlawful to erect, construct, reconstruct, enlarge, or
structurally modify a Wind Energy System without first obtaining a Wind
Energy System Permit from City Council.
All Wind Energy Systems shall conform to all applicable rules and regulations
including but not limited to the Federal Aviation Administration and the
National Electrical Code.
B. SITE REQUIREMENTS
1. Lot Size.
a. No minimum lot size required for wind energy systems.
2. Tower Height.
The tower shall be measured from the ground to the top of the tower, excluding
the wind turbine generator and blades.
a. Maximum allowable tower height for any Single and Two-Family uses
within the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-5, R-6 and PMR Districts shall not exceed a
height of one hundred (100) feet.
b. Maximum allowable tower height for any Multi-Family and NonResidential
uses within the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-5, R-6 and PMR Districts,
shall be based on site specifications and the ability to meet all
requirements set forth in this Section.
c. Maximum allowable tower height for uses in all other districts shall be
based on site specifications and the ability to meet all requirements set
forth in this Section.
3. Setbacks.
A Wind Energy System shall be set back a distance equal to or greater than its
extended height, measured from the center of its base, to the nearest
XXXV-1
point on each property line, or a distance at which sound from the system does
not exceed thirty (30dB) decibels at the nearest point on each property line,
whichever distance is greater.
4. Noise.
a. It shall be a violation of this Section for noise generated by the
operation of a Wind Energy System to exceed a noise level of thirty
(30dB) decibels as measured at any point along the property line.
5. Location.
a. No Wind Energy Systems shall be erected within the front yard of any
use.
b. No part of a Wind Energy System (including blades) shall be located
within or over any utility, water, sewer, or other type of easement.
c. No part of a Wind Energy System (including blades) shall be located
within any required setbacks.
6. Multiple Wind Energy Systems.
a. Multiple Wind Energy Systems may be allowed if they meet all
regulations as required herein. The Wind Energy System must also
maintain a setback from each other equal to the extended height of the
structure.
7. Rooftop Wind Energy Systems.
a. Wind Energy Systems designed to be installed on top of structures, must
meet all regulations as required herein.
8. Force Wind Standards.
a. The Wind Energy System must be engineered to withstand wind forces
of up to 110 miles per hour.
9. Redundant Braking Systems.
a. All Wind Energy Systems shall be equipped with a redundant braking
system. This includes both aerodynamic over speed controls (includes
variable pitch, tip, and other similar systems) and mechanical brakes.
Mechanical brakes shall be operated in a fail-safe mode. Stall regulation
shall not be considered a sufficient braking system for over speed
protection.
10. Removal of abandoned Wind Energy Systems.
a. Within 180 days of notice that a Wind Energy System is inoperable the
owner or occupant shall restore the Wind Energy System to full operating
condition. It shall be a violation of this Section for any owner or
occupant to fail to fully dismantle and remove a Wind Energy System
that has been inoperable in excess of 180 days. The City of Decatur shall
be authorized to remove
any Wind Energy System that has been inoperable in excess of 180 days,
at the owner's and/or occupier's expense and the costs of removal shall
XXXV-2
be a lien against the property. Removal of the Wind Energy System shall
include removal of: the turbines, any above ground improvements,
fencing, all foundations, pads, underground electrical wires, or any other
components associated with the wind energy system's operations, all of
which shall be to a depth of ten ( 10) feet.
11. Signage.
a. Commercial marking, messages, banners or advertising of any kind on a
Wind Energy System shall be prohibited.
b. One (1) sign, no less than four (4) square feet and no greater than (6)
square feet in area, shall be posted at the base of the tower. The sign
shall include a notice of no trespassing, a warning of high voltage, and
the phone number of the property owner/operator to call in case of
emergency.
12. Tower Access.
a. The tower should not be accessible for unassisted climbing. This can be
prevented by not providing rungs for the first twelve (12) feet, covering
the climbing apparatus, enclosing the base of the structure with a six (6)
foot fence, or by any other approved preventative measures. It shall be
a violation of this Section for any unattended Wind Energy System to be
accessible for unassisted climbing.
13. Color.
a. The Wind Energy Systems shall be of a neutral color, such as white or
light grey, and the surface shall be non-reflective.
14. Lighting.
a. No lights shall be installed on any part of the Wind Energy System,
unless required to meet FAA regulations.
15. Soil Studies.
a. Provide proof that the site's soil conditions meet the minimum standards
as specified by the tower turbine manufacturer.
b. Formal site soil analyses are not necessary or required for residential
scale turbines if they are designed to withstand worst case scenario soil
conditions.
c. For turbines greater than twenty (20kW) kilowatts, a Structural
Engineer's seal will be required as well as a full soil analysis of the site.
16. Liability Insurance.
a. Proof of liability insurance for a duration of not less than 24 months from
the estimated completion date of construction of the Wind Energy
System, covering loss or damage to persons or
XXXV-3
property occasioned by failure of the facility, shall be provided, and
updated proof shall be provided annually thereafter.
17. Local Historic Districts, Local Landmarks, and National Historic Districts.
a. Wind Energy Systems located within the Local Historic Districts or on
the site of a Local Landmark may be installed as long as the applicant
receives a Certificate of Appropriateness from the Historical and
Architectural Sites Commission prior to submitting an application to the
Plan Commission and City Council.
b. Wind Energy Systems located within a National Historic District or on
the site of a National Landmark must receive a recommendation from the
Historical and Architectural Sites Commission prior to submitting an
application to the Plan Commission and City Council.
c. Wind Energy Systems within five-hundred (500) feet of a Local Historic
District or Landmark or a National Historic District or Landmark must
receive a recommendation from the Historical and Architectural Sites
Commission prior to submitting an application to the Plan Commission
and City Council.
C. APPLICATION
The owner or owners of the Wind Energy System and/or tract of land must
submit to the Plan Commission a plan for the use of a wind energy system for
the purpose of meeting the requirements set forth in this Section. Said plan may
be accompanied by evidence concerning the compatibility of the project and its
effects on surrounding properties and other physical conditions. The application
shall be submitted along with the following information:
1. A site plan showing the following information:
a. Existing and proposed contours, at a minimum of two (2) foot intervals.
b. Location, setbacks and exterior dimensions of all structures.
c. Location and size of all easements.
d. Location of any overhead lines.
e. Areas subject to flooding.
f. Any and all other pertinent information regarding the installation,
construction and operation of the wind energy system.
2. Approval letters from all utility companies.
3. Proof of notice to all property owners within a 250 foot radius of every lot
line of the property on which the wind energy system is to be erected.
4. Manufacturer's engineering specifications of the tower, wind energy system
and foundation.
XXXV-4
5. Plans of the proposed tower and foundation shall be signed and sealed by a
Structural Engineer licensed in the State of Illinois for turbines greater than
twenty (20kW) kilowatts.
6. Detailed drawing of electrical components as supplied by the manufacturer
and installation details which conform to the National Electrical Code
7. A plan for decommissioning and reclaiming the wind energy system, and a
bond for doing so in an amount not less than one half the cost of constructing
the wind energy system is required EXCEPT when the following two (2)
conditions are met:
a. The Wind Energy system shall be used in conjunction with a residential
use, not to include mixed use; AND
b. The Wind Energy System is less than twenty (20kW) kilowatts.
(Amended, Ordinance 2012-46; July 16, 2012)
8. Any and all other pertinent information regarding the installation,
construction and operation of the wind energy system.
D. REVIEW AND APPROVAL
1. Technical Review Committee.
The Technical Review Committee (TRC) shall review the site plan at a date
scheduled by the Secretary of the TRC. The applicant and his/her design
professionals may participate in this meeting. Based upon the information
provided by the applicant, the TRC may recommend approval, conditional
approval, or denial to the Plan Commission. The recommendation of the TRC
will be compiled into draft conditions of approval. If the TRC determines that
more information is needed before the application can be approved, they may
place the application on hold, in which case the TRC will advise the applicant as
to the contents which will be required before approval can be recommended.
Applications placed on hold will be rescheduled to the next meeting of the TRC
unless the applicant requests more time.
2. Plan Commission Review.
After the Wind Energy System Permit application and site plan have been filed,
said application, site plan, and draft conditions of approval will be considered
by the Plan Commission at a public hearing. The Plan Commission will review
the application, site plan, and draft conditions of approval and will make findings
concerning the consistency of the application with the comprehensive plan, and
with the zoning ordinance and other land development regulations if appropriate;
and, based upon these findings, will recommend to the City Council that the
project be approved, approved with conditions, or denied.
3. Council Action.
XXXV-5
City Council will review the recommended findings of the Plan Commission
along with the application, site plan, and draft conditions of approval, and the
project may be approved, approved with conditions, or denied. The City Council
may by ordinance grant a Wind Energy System Permit. The Council may
impose appropriate conditions and safeguards to conserve and protect property
values.
E. CONSTRUCTION
1. All construction shall be in conformance with the final Wind Energy System
site plan as approved by the City Council.
F. DELAY IN CONSTRUCTION
In the event that construction of the project has not begun within two (2) years
of the date of approval by City Council, the approved site plan becomes null and
void and a new site plan must be submitted for full review and approval.
G. AMENDMENTS TO COMPLETED PROJECTS
All changes must be approved via the same process as required for new
construction.
H. VIOLATIONS
It shall be a violation of this Section for any owner or occupant constructing a
Wind Energy System to fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of this
Section. Violations shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed Five Hundred
Dollars ($500.00) per day, with each day or part of a day a violation is found to
exist constituting a separate offense. In addition to any other remedies provided
under this Section, the City of Decatur shall be entitled to recover all costs and
expenses related to the dismantling and removal of any inoperable wind energy
system from the owner or occupant constructing the same, and shall be entitled
to record a lien against the property for said costs and expenses.
XXXV-6
SECTION XXXVI. ENFORCEMENT, LEGAL PROCEDURE, AND
PENALTIES
A. AUTHORITY OF PLANNING AND BUILDING SERVICES
DIRECTOR.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to enforce this Ordinance.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2010-34, May 17, 2010)
B. VIOLATIONS, PENAL TIES
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this ordinance shall
upon conviction be fined not less than One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) nor more than
Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted
to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Amended, Ordinance No. 2013-03, January 7, 2013)
C. UNLAWFUL CONSTRUCTION, ETC.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired,
converted or maintained or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this
Ordinance, the City may, in addition to other remedies, institute any appropriate action or
proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, maintenance, or use, to restrain, correct, or
abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land or to
prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
XXXVI-1
SECTION XXXVll. VALIDITY
Should any section, clause, or provision of this Ordinance be declared by a court to be
invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or in part, other
than the part so declared to be invalid.
XXXVII-1
SECTION XXXVlll. WHEN EFFECTIVE
. This Ordinance is hereby declared to be urgent and necessary for the immediate
preservation of the public peace, health, and safety, and shall be in full force and effect
from and after its due passage, approval and recording and publication as provided by law.
XXXVIII-1