
Frankfort, IL Code of Ordinances


VILLAGE OF FRANKFORT, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2019 S-25 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19; and
State legislation current through
Illinois Legislative Service, 2018 Acts, Pamphlet No. 7



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter 



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      11.   VILLAGE STANDARDS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Definitions



   10.03   Section headings



   10.04   Rules of construction



   10.05   Official time



   10.06   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal



   10.07   Reference to other sections



   10.08   Conflicting provisions



   10.09   Amendments to code



   10.10   Severability



   10.11   Reference to public office or officer



   10.12   Errors and omissions



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Ordinances saved



   10.16   Technical codes



   10.17   Historical and statutory references



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification by and for the Village of Frankfort shall be
designated as the Code of the Village of Frankfort and may be so cited.



§ 10.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this code the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANOTHER.  When used to designate the owner of property which is the
subject of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other
owner of property.



   BOARD OF TRUSTEES or VILLAGE BOARD.  The Board of Trustees of the
Village of Frankfort.



   COUNTY. Will County, Illinois.



   COUNTY BOARD.  The County Board of Will County, Illinois. (ILCS Ch. 5,
Act 70, § 1.07)



   COURT.  Any court of competent jurisdiction.



   DECREE.  Synonymous with JUDGMENT.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.24)



   ELECTORS.  Persons qualified to vote for elective officers at
municipal elections.  (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-1-2)



   EXECUTIVE OFFICER.  Words used for an executive or ministerial officer
may include any deputy or other person performing the duties of such officer,
either generally or in special cases.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.08)



   FISCAL YEAR.  Budget year of May 1 through April 30 of each year.



   HERETOFORE or HEREAFTER.  HERETOFORE means any time previous to the
day on which the ordinance, resolution, or statute takes effect; HEREAFTER
means at any time after that date.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.17)



   HIGHWAY,ROAD, or STREET.  May include any road laid out by authority
of the United States, or of this state, or of any town or county of this
state, and all bridges thereupon.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.16)



   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR.  Includes all persons, whether acting by
themselves, or as a servant, agent, or employee.



   LAND or REAL ESTATE.  Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal
nature.



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



   MAYOR.  Village President.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10)



   MUNICIPALorMUNICIPALITY.  The Village of Frankfort, Illinois. 



   OATH.  Includes affirmation, and SWEAR includes affirm. (ILCS Ch. 5,
Act 70, § 1.12)



   OWNER.  When applied to property, includes any record fee title owner,
part owner, joint owner, purchaser and seller under a contract and/or deed,
or tenant in common of the whole or part of the property, and includes any
beneficiary of a land trust which owns property.



   PARKWAY.  That portion of the street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



   PERSON.  Any legal person; includes associations, partnerships,
corporations, joint ventures, and bodies politic and corporate as well as
individuals.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.05)



   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes all property except real.



   POLICE OFFICERS.  Police officers employed and in the service of the
village.  POLICE FORCE  shall be construed to include such persons in the
employ of a village as members of the Department of Police, who are or shall
hereafter be appointed and sworn as police officers.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70,
§ 1.20)



   PREMISES.  As applied to property, includes land and buildings.



   PRESIDENT. Mayor or Village President.



   PROPERTY.  Includes real, personal, mixed estates, and other interests.



   PUBLIC AUTHORITY.  Includes school districts; units of legal
government; the village, county, state, or federal governments, officers and
agencies thereof, or any commissions or committees thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school
yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for
the sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.



   REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.



   REGISTERED MAIL.  Includes certified United States mail and CERTIFIED
MAIL includes registered United States mail.



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   SPECIAL DISTRICTS.  The meaning established in Article VII of the
Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970. (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.29)



   STATE.  The state of Illinois.



   TENANT or OCCUPANT.  As applied to premises, includes any person
holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any
part of the premises, alone or with others.



   THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  The village code hereby
adopted, and as hereinafter modified by amendment, revision, and by the
adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections. 



   UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT.  The meaning established in Section l of
Article VII of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970. (ILCS Ch.
5, Act 70, § 1.28)



   WEEK.  Seven consecutive days.



   WHOEVER.  Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners;
principals, agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.



   WRITTEN or IN WRITING.  Includes printing, electronic, and any other
mode of representing words and letters; but when the written signature of any
person is required by law for any official or public writing or bond,
required by law, it shall be (1) the proper handwriting of that person, or in
case he is unable to write, his proper mark, or (2) an electronic signature
as defined in the Electronic Commerce Security Act, by his duly authorized
facsimile signature under the Illinois Uniform Facsimile Signature of Public
Officials Act.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.15)



   YEAR.  A calendar year unless otherwise expressed; and the word YEAR
alone is equivalent to the expression “Year of Our Lord.” (ILCS Ch. 5,
Act 70, § 1.10)



§ 10.03  SECTION HEADINGS.



   Headings and captions used in this code are employed for reference
purposes only, and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.04  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed
according to the rules of grammar and common usage.  Words and phrases that
have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative or
judicial definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.



   (B)   As used in this code, unless the context otherwise requires,
the following rules will be followed.



      (1)   The singular shall include the plural, and the plural
shall include the singular.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.03)



      (2)   Words of one gender shall include the other genders.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.04)



      (3)   Words in the present tense shall include the future.
(ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.02)



   (C)   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless
the last day is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any
statute now or hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also be
excluded.  If the day succeeding Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday is also a
holiday or a Saturday or Sunday, then the succeeding day shall also be
excluded.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.11)



   (D)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as
well be done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.



   (E)   Words purporting to give joint authority to three or more
municipal officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to
a majority of the officers or persons.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.09)



   (F)   These rules of construction shall not apply to any provision
of this code which shall contain any express provision excluding that
construction, or when the subject matter or context of this code may be
repugnant thereto.



   (G)   All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions shall
be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the
President and Board of Trustees may be fully carried out.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act
70, § 1.01)



   (H)   The provisions of any ordinance, so far as they are the same
as those of any prior ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of the
prior provisions, and not as a new enactment.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 2)



§ 10.05  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time for the village shall be as set by federal law.



§ 10.06  REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.



   (A)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the
ordinance originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving clause
therein.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 3)



   (B)   The reenactment, amendment, or repeal of an ordinance does not
do any of the following, except as provided in division (C) of this section.



      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior
action taken thereunder.



      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege,
obligation, or liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded, or incurred
thereunder.



      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal.



      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in
respect of any privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment.  The investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted,
continued, or enforced, and the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment imposed,
as if the ordinance had not been repealed or amended.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 85,
§ 2)



   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is
reduced by a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty,
forfeiture, or punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according
to the ordinance as amended.  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 70, § 4)



§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation
of a section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be
construed to mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections
included in the reference.



   (B)   References in this code to action taken or authorized under
designated sections of this code include, in every case, action taken or
authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by
this code.



   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section
hereof, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision and the
context clearly indicates that the reference to the section as amended or
revised was not intended.



§ 10.08  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of these
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail.  If the conflicting
provisions bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as
to be consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the questions of the
subject matter taken as a whole.



§ 10.09  AMENDMENTS TO CODE.



   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal, or
in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system of this code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of
repealed chapters, sections, and subsections, or any part thereof, by
subsequent ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the code by
the omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent
ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall
be prima facie evidence of subsequent ordinances until this code of
ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a
new code of ordinances by the Board of Trustees.



§ 10.10  SEVERABILITY.



   If any word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection, section,
article or chapter of this code of ordinances is found and determined to be
invalid or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction such finding
shall not affect any other words, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs,
subsections, sections, articles or chapters of this code which can be given
effect without the invalid provisions.



§ 10.11  REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICE OR OFFICER.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the village exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.  Such
references shall also include the designee or agent of any such officer or
office, unless the law or the context clearly requires otherwise.



§ 10.12  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
word or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the
intention of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no
meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or
words was clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be
corrected, and the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will
conform with the manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same
effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally
published.  No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code of ordinances.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature (including, but not
limited to tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating
to boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances
granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and
ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of
warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming, or vacating
streets, alleys, or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond
ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the
transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the village; and all special
ordinances) as well as any other ordinances pertaining to subjects not
enumerated and embraced in this code of ordinances, shall remain in full
force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.



§ 10.15  ORDINANCES SAVED.



   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
Board of Trustees or a certain village officer or employee to make additional
regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all
regulations of a similar nature serving that purpose effected prior to the
codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are
saved.



§ 10.16  TECHNICAL CODES.



   Whenever any technical codes are incorporated herein by reference, any
subsequent amendments or revisions to such technical codes shall
automatically become a part of this code and shall be made available for
public inspection by the village.  Further, to the extent of any conflict
between the technical provisions of this code and any technical codes adopted
by reference, the most restrictive provision shall prevail.



§ 10.17  HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending
ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section. 
Example:  (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed l-l-70; Am. Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section is derived from or is similar to the
statute.  Example:  (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140, § 1 et seq.) (Ord. 10, passed
1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-85). 



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section, this indicates that the
reader should refer to that statute for further information.  Example:



   § 38.04  PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



      The village shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.



   Statutory reference:



      For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see
ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140, § 1 et seq.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this code or other ordinance of this
village for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall be
fined not less than $500 for each and every violation thereof, and every day
the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.



Statutory reference:



   Limitations on penalties, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1



   Authority to imprison for certain ordinance violations, see ILCS Ch.
65, Act 5, § 1-2-1.1



CHAPTER 11:  VILLAGE STANDARDS



Section



   11.01   Official map adopted by reference



§ 11.01 OFFICIAL MAP ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   The map for the village is hereby adopted by reference thereto
and incorporated herein and shall be designated as the official map of the
village, which said map shall consist of the whole area included within the
official Comprehensive Plan of the village and all of the contiguous
unincorporated area within 1½ miles from the corporate limits of the village.



   (B)   All ordinances previously adopted and from time to time
amended by the corporate authorities of the village which relate to among
other things size of streets, alleys, public ways, parks, playgrounds, school
sites and other public grounds, and ways for public service facilities; and
the kind and quality of maintenance which shall be used in construction of
the streets and alleys; and the kind and quality of materials as public
facilities as may be consistent with the industry standards and standards for
drainage of sanitary sewers and treatment of sewage, including but not
limited to those portions of the following ordinances which specifically
relate to the aforementioned provisions are hereby incorporated herein:



      (1)   Standard details; grading, drainage, streets, utilities,
see Ordinance 523 and its amendments.



      (2)   Adoption of codes, see Ordinance 541 and its amendments.



      (3)   Official zoning ordinance, see Chapter 156.



      (4)   General development plan, see Ordinance 920 and its
amendments.



      (5)   Land subdivision regulations, see Chapter 155.



      (6)   Flood plain ordinance, see Chapter 152.



   (C)   The official map of the village or true and exact copies
thereof shall be placed on file with the Clerk of the village and shall be
available at all times during business hours for public inspection.



(Ord. 1054, passed 2-16-80)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   TRUSTEE-VILLAGE FORM



      31.   BOARD OF TRUSTEES



      32.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS



      33.   TAXATION



      34.   PERSONNEL POLICIES



      35.   ANNEXATION AGREEMENTS



      36.   COMPLIANCE TICKETS



CHAPTER 30:  TRUSTEE-VILLAGE FORM



Section



   30.01   Form of government



   30.02   Government officers



§ 30.01 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.



   The form of government of Frankfort is that of a village with such
powers available to it as provided by law.



§ 30.02 GOVERNING OFFICERS.



   The village is hereby governed by an elected President of the Board of
Trustees, and by six elected Trustees who collectively are called the Board
of Trustees.



CHAPTER 31:  BOARD OF TRUSTEES



Section



Meetings



   31.01   Meetings



   31.02   Village President and Trustees serving as ex officio members
of committees



Village Officials



   31.10   Terms of newly elected officials



   31.11   Compensation of village officers



MEETINGS



§ 31.01  MEETINGS.



   (A)   The first and third Monday of each month commencing at the
hour of 7:30 p.m. is hereby designated as the regular time for the meetings
of the Board of Trustees of the village.  Said regular meetings referred to
in this section shall be held in the designated Village Board room or other
designated location.



(Ord. 434, passed 6-5-50)



   (B)   Special meetings. 



      (1)   Special meetings may be called at any time by the
President or two Trustee members upon giving not less than 24 hours notice,
unless bona fide emergency exists.



      (2)   In the event there shall be a quorum present at any
regular or special meeting of the Board of Trustees, then the member or
members present at said meeting may adjourn the meeting to a future date and
fix the date and hour of said adjourned meeting.  No notice of said
adjourned meeting shall be necessary if such meeting is reconvened within 24
hours or if no changes to agenda were made.



(Ord. 569, passed  1-17-66)



§ 31.02  VILLAGE PRESIDENT AND TRUSTEES SERVING AS EX OFFICIO MEMBERS OF
COMMITTEES.



   The Village President and each Trustee of the village is designated and
shall serve as an ex officio member of each of the village’s advisory
committees as from time to time enumerated in § 32.075 and if in attendance,
shall be counted for purposes of establishing the committee’s quorum and
have the right to vote on matters coming before it.



(Ord. 3145, passed 4-16-18)



VILLAGE OFFICIALS



§ 31.10  TERMS OF NEWLY ELECTED OFFICIALS.



   The terms of municipal officials elected at the consolidated election
conducted on the first Tuesday in April of odd numbered years shall commence
at the first regular or special meeting of the corporate authorities of the
village, whichever such meeting occurs first, in the month of May immediately
following such consolidated election, at which meeting said newly elected
municipal officials shall be inaugurated and seated.



(Ord. 1060, passed 4-6-81)



§ 31.11  COMPENSATION OF VILLAGE OFFICERS.



   (A)   President.  The salary of the Village President shall be
$11,000 per year payable monthly.



   (B)   Clerk.  The salary of the Village Clerk shall be $4,500 per
year payable monthly.



   (C)   Trustee.  The salary of each trustee shall be $4,500 per year
payable monthly.



   (D)   Liquor Commissioner.  The salary of the Liquor Commissioner
shall be $2,650 per year payable semi-annually.



(Ord. 1397, passed 12-8-92; Am. Ord. 1428, passed 8-16-93; Am. Ord. 1479,
passed 11-7-94; Am. Ord. 2315, passed 8-21-06)



CHAPTER 32:  DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS



Section




Board of Local Improvements




   32.001   Establishment



   32.002   Powers and duties



Emergency Services and Disaster Agency



   32.015   Establishment



   32.016   Membership



   32.017   Coordinator



   32.018   Functions and duties



   32.019   Oath



   32.020   Mobile support team



   32.021   Mutual aid agreements



   32.022   Local agency to cooperate with state during emergency



   32.023   Compensation



   32.024   Reimbursement by state to village for expenditures



   32.025   Purchase of contracts; procurement of services, supplies,
and equipment



   32.026   Designation of office space



   32.027   Levy of tax



Zoning Board of Appeals



   32.040   Compensation for attendance at meetings



Board of Fire and Police Commissioners



   32.060   Creation



   32.061   Appointment of Board members



   32.062   Quorum



   32.063   Qualification; oath; bond; removal



   32.064   Police Department; appointment of members; certificates of
appointment



   32.065   Annual report; budget request



   32.066   Secretary of Board; duties; seal of board



   32.067   Rooms and funds for operation of board



   32.068   Compensation of Secretary and members of board



   32.069   Powers and duties



Advisory Committees



   32.075   Advisory committees



   32.076   Advisory committees may change as necessary



   32.077   Application



   32.078   Appointment



   32.079   Term



Police Department



   32.105   Deputy Chief of Police



   32.106 - 32.120   Reserved



   32.121   Hiring standard for part-time police officers



   32.122 - 31.199   Reserved



Cross-reference:



   Board of Trustees for Police Pension Fund, see §§ 34.15 through 34.21



BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS



§ 32.001  ESTABLISHMENT.



   A board of local improvements is created for the village to be composed
of the Village President and all members of the Board of Trustees of the
village.  The Village President shall be the President of the Board of Local
Improvements.



(Ord. 1065, passed 9-21-81)



§ 32.002  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Board of Local Improvements shall have all powers and duties
expressly or impliedly conferred under ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 9-2-1 et seq.
and as hereafter from time to time amended.



(Ord. 1065, passed 9-21-81)



EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY



§ 32.015  ESTABLISHMENT.



   There is created the Village Emergency Services and Disaster Agency
(ESDA) to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting
from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or
from natural or manmade disaster, in accordance with “The Illinois
Emergency Services and Disaster Act of 1975.”



(Ord. 908, passed 2-16-76)



§ 32.016  MEMBERSHIP.



   The ESDA shall consist of the Coordinator and such additional members
as may be selected by the Coordinator.



(Ord. 908, passed 2-16-76)



§ 32.017  COORDINATOR.



   (A)   The Coordinator of the Village ESDA shall be appointed by the
President and Board of Trustees and shall serve until removed by same.



   (B)   The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration, training and operation of the ESDA, subject to
the direction and control of the President and Board of Trustees as provided
by statute.



   (C)   In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability
to serve as the Coordinator, the Village President or any person designated
by him, shall be and act as Coordinator until a new appointment is made as
provided in the subchapter.



(Ord. 908, passed 2-16-76)



§ 32.018  FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES.



   The Village ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within the village
as shall be prescribed in and by the State ESDA plan and program prepared by
the Governor, and such order, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by
the Governor, and in addition shall perform such duties out of the corporate
limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other
political subdivision, municipality or quasi-municipality entered into as
provided by “The State ESDA Act of 1975.”



(Ord. 908, passed 2-16-76)



§ 32.019  OATH.



   Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Village ESDA
organization shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the
following oath, which shall be filed with the Coordinator:



   “I,                 , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I
will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Illinois, and the territory, institutions, and facilities thereof, both
public and private, against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take
this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose or evasion;
and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am
about to enter.  And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate,
nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of the
State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with
the Village ESDA organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the
government of the United States or of this State by force or violence.”



(Ord. 908, passed 2-16-76)



§ 32.020  MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM.



   (A)   All or any members of the Village ESDA organization may be
designated as members of a mobile support team created by the director of the
State ESDA as provided by law.



   (B)   The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by
the Coordinator of the Village ESDA organization.



   (C)   Any member of a mobile support team who is a village employee
or officer while serving on call to duty by the Governor, or the State
Director, shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights
and immunities incident to such employment of office.  Any such member who
is not a paid officer or employee of the village, while so serving, shall
receive from the state reasonable compensation as provided by law.



(Ord. 908, passed 2-16-76)



§ 32.021  MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.



   The Coordinator of ESDA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other
cities or political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall be
effective until it has been approved by the President and Board of Trustees
and by the Director of State ESDA.



(Ord. 908, passed 2-16-76)



§ 32.022  LOCAL AGENCY TO COOPERATE WITH STATE DURING EMERGENCY.



   If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event
of actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the
state of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile
action, or from man-made or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the
Village ESDA to cooperate fully with the State ESDA and with the Governor in
the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.



(Ord. 908, passed 2-16-76)



§ 32.023  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the village,
if called for training by the State Director of ESDA, shall receive for the
time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the
position held; members who are not such village employees or officers shall
receive for such training time such compensation as may be established by the
President and Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 908, passed 2-16-76)



§ 32.024  REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE TO VILLAGE FOR EXPENDITURES.



   The State Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund,
any reimbursement by the state to the village for expenses incident to
training members of the ESDA as prescribed by the State Director of ESDA,
compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team
while serving outside the village in response to a call by the Governor or
State Director of ESDA, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made
by the state incident to ESDA activities as provided by law.



(Ord. 908, passed 2-16-76)



§ 32.025  PURCHASE OF CONTRACTS; PROCUREMENT OF SERVICES, SUPPLIES, AND
EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   The President and Board of Trustees may, on recommendation of
the Village Coordinator of ESDA, authorize any purchase of contracts
necessary to place the village in a position to combat effectively any
disaster resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or
missile, and to protect property, and provide emergency assistance to victims
in the case of such disaster, or from man- made or natural disaster.



   (B)   In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the Village
Coordinator of ESDA is authorized, on behalf of the village, to procure such
services, supplies, equipment, or material as may be necessary for such
purposes, in view of the emergency without regard to the statutory procedures
or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to village contracts or
obligations, as authorized by “The State ESDA Act of 1975,” provided that
if the President and Board of Trustees meet at such time they shall act
subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body.



(Ord. 908, passed 2-16-76)



§ 32.026  DESIGNATION OF OFFICE SPACE.



   The President and Board of Trustees is authorized to designate space in
a village building, or elsewhere, as may be provided for the Village ESDA as
its office.



(Ord. 908, passed 2-16-76)



§ 32.027  LEVY OF TAX.



   The President and Board of Trustees may make an appropriation for ESDA
purposes in the manner provided by law, and may levy in addition for ESDA
purposes only, a tax not to exceed $.05 per $100 of the assessed value of all
taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by the “The
State ESDA Act of 1975"; however, that amount collectable under such levy
shall in no event exceed $.25 per capita.



(Ord. 908, passed 2-16-76)



ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS



§ 32.040  COMPENSATION FOR ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.



   (A)   Each member of the Zoning Board of Appeals and the Plan
Commission of the village shall receive $35 as compensation for each regular
meeting attended by said member.  Each member is allowed to be absent for
two meetings during each year for which compensation may be paid.



   (B)   The Chairman of the Board of Zoning Appeals and the Plan
Commission of the village shall receive $50 as compensation for each regular
meeting attended by said Chairman.  Each Chairman is allowed to be absent
for two meetings during each year for which compensation may be paid.



(Ord. 1055, passed 2-16-81; Am. Ord. 1253, passed 1-30-89)



BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS



§ 32.060  CREATION.



   (A)   There is hereby created a Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners, (hereafter “Board”), consisting of three members whose
terms of office shall be three years and until their respective successors
are appointed to this Board and have qualified, except that the terms of the
first three members appointed shall be [as described]: one of the members
shall be appointed to serve until the end of the then current municipal year,
(for convenience, sometimes referred to as Commissioner 1); another to serve
until the end of the municipal fiscal year next ensuing, (for convenience,
sometimes referred to as Commissioner 2); and the third to serve until the
end of the municipal fiscal year second next ensuing (for convenience,
sometimes referred to as Commissioner 3).



   (B)   The Board members shall elect a Chairperson to serve during
each municipal fiscal year. Vacancies on the Board shall be filled in the
same manner as the original appointment of the member whose office is vacant.



(Ord. 1343, passed 4-1-91)



§ 32.061  APPOINTMENT OF BOARD MEMBERS.



   Members of the Board shall be appointed by the Village President with
the advice and consent of the Village Board, provided that no appointment
shall be made by the President within 30 days before the expiration of
his/her term of office.



(Ord. 1343, passed 4-1-91)



§ 32.062  QUORUM.



   A majority of the Board constitutes a quorum for the conduct of all
business.



(Ord. 1343, passed 4-1-91)



§ 32.063  QUALIFICATION; OATH; BOND; REMOVAL.



   (A)   The members of the Board shall be considered officers of the
municipality, and each member shall file with the Village Clerk an oath and a
fidelity bond in the sum of $10,000.



   (B)   No person holding an office under a municipality shall be a
member of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners or the Secretary
thereof. The acceptance of any such office by a member of the Board shall be
treated as a resignation of his/her office as a member of the Board or the
Secretary thereof. No person shall be appointed a member of the Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners who is related, either by blood or marriage up to
the degree of first cousin, to any elected official of the village. No more
than two members of the Board shall belong to the same political party
existing in the municipality at the time of the appointments and as defined
in the Illinois Election Code (ILCS Ch. 10, Act 5, §§ 10-2 et seq.).  If
only one or no political party exists in the municipality at the time of the
appointments, then state or national political party affiliations shall be
considered in making such appointments. Party affiliation shall be determined
by affidavit of the person appointed as a member of the Board.



   (C)   Board members shall not be subject to removal, except for
cause, upon written charges, and after an opportunity to be heard within 30
days in his/her or their own defense, before a regular meeting of the Village
Board. A majority vote of the elected members of the Village Board shall be
required to remove any member from office.



(Ord. 1343, passed 4-1-91)



§ 32.064  POLICE DEPARTMENT; APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; CERTIFICATES OF
APPOINTMENT.



   (A)   The Board shall appoint all officers and members of the Police
Department except the Chief of Police. Unless otherwise provided, the Chief
of Police shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice and
consent of the Village Board and removed as provided by law.



   (B)   The sole authority to issue certificates of appointment shall
be vested in the Board and all certificates of appointment issued to any
officer or member of the Police Department shall be signed by the Chairperson
and Secretary respectively of the Board upon appointment of such officer or
member of the Police Department.



(Ord. 1343, passed 4-1-91)



§ 32.065  ANNUAL REPORT; BUDGET REQUEST.



   On or about January 30 of each year, the Board shall submit to the
Village President a report of its activities commencing from the date of its
last report, and of the rules in force and the practical effect thereof. In
this report the Board may make suggestions which the Board believes would
result in greater efficiency in the Police Department. In addition and
concurrently the Board shall submit its annual budget request to operate and
conduct the Board’s business for the following fiscal year to the Village
President.



(Ord. 1343, passed 4-1-91)



§ 32.066  SECRETARY OF BOARD; DUTIES; SEAL OF BOARD.



   The Board may employ a Secretary, or may designate one of its own
members to act as Secretary. The Secretary shall:



   (A)   Keep the minutes of the Board’s proceedings;



   (B)   Be the custodian of all records pertaining to the business of
the Board;



   (C)   Keep a record of all examinations held;



   (D)   Perform all other duties the Board prescribes; and



   (E)   Be custodian of the seal of the Board, if one is adopted, and
the Board is hereby authorized to adopt an official seal and to prescribe the
form thereof by resolution of the Board.



(Ord. 1343, passed 4-1-91)



§ 32.067  ROOMS AND FUNDS FOR OPERATION OF BOARD.



   The corporate authorities of the village shall provide suitable rooms
for the Board and shall allow reasonable use of public buildings for holding
examinations by the Board and shall further provide adequate funds in the
annual appropriation ordinance for the operation of the Board.



(Ord. 1343, passed 4-1-91)



§ 32.068  COMPENSATION OF SECRETARY AND MEMBERS OF BOARD.



   (A)   The compensation for the members of the Board shall be $30 for
each meeting attended. Each member is allowed to be absent from two meetings
during each fiscal year, for which compensation shall be paid.



   (B)   Compensation shall be payable semi-annually through the end of
October and April of each fiscal year.



(Ord. 1343, passed 4-1-91; Am. Ord. 1819, passed 8-7-00)



§ 32.069  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Board shall conduct itself and possess such rights, authority,
powers, obligations and duties as may from time to time be granted it by law
including as set forth in Article 10, Division 2.1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 10-2.1-1 et seq.) as from time to time amended.



(Ord. 1343, passed 4-1-91)



ADVISORY COMMITTEES



§ 32.075  ADVISORY COMMITTEES.



   Current advisory committees consist of the following:



   (A)   Community Services Committee.



   (B)   Departmental Operations Committee.



   (C)   Economic Development Committee.



   (D)   1890s Theme Committee.



   (E)   Financial Affairs Committee.



   (F)   Land Use and Policy Committee.



   (G)   911 Committee.



   (H)   Traffic Advisory Committee.



   (I)   Tree Board.



(Ord. 3144, passed 4-16-18)



§ 32.076  ADVISORY COMMITTEES MAY CHANGE AS NECESSARY.



   Current committee names and structure may be changed, eliminated or new
committees created by the village from time to time as necessary to aid in
efficient village operations.



(Ord. 3144, passed 4-16-18)



§ 32.077  APPLICATION.



   Each year, prior to May 1, the Village President and Board of Trustees
will publicly announce and solicit citizen participation for its advisory
committees through an application process.



(Ord. 3144, passed 4-16-18)



§ 32.078  APPOINTMENT.



   Each year, at a Village Board meeting prior to May 1, the Village
President, with the advice and consent of the Village Board of Trustees, will
appoint residents to serve on its advisory committees.



(Ord. 3144, passed 4-16-18)



§ 32.079  TERM.



   Village residents appointed to an advisory committee will generally
serve for one year, unless otherwise noted, with terms from May 1 until April
30 of the following year.



(Ord. 3144, passed 4-16-18)



POLICE DEPARTMENT



§ 32.105  DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE.



   (A)   Creation of position.  The village creates and establishes
the position of Deputy Police Chief of the Village Police Department.  The
Village Police Chief is authorized to appoint a Deputy Chief.  In the event
the Police Department has 25 or more full-time officers, the Police Chief is
authorized to appoint a second Deputy Chief.



   (B)   Deputy Chief exempt rank position.  The Deputy Chief position
shall be an exempt rank immediately below that of Chief.  The Deputy Chief
may be appointed from any rank of sworn, full-time officers of the
village’s Police Department, but must have at least five years of full-time
service as a police officer in that department.  A Deputy Chief shall serve
at the discretion of the Chief and, if removed from the position, shall
revert to the rank currently held, without regard as to whether a vacancy
exists in that rank.  A Deputy Chief of Police, having been appointed from
any rank of sworn full-time officers of the village’s Police Department,
shall be permitted, regardless of rank, to take promotional exams and be
promoted to a higher classified rank than the Deputy Chief currently holds,
without having to resign as Deputy Chief of Police.



   (C)   Termination of position of Commander.  The exempt rank
position of Commander of the Police Department is terminated and
eliminated.  The persons currently holding this position shall revert to the
rank they hold which is the rank of Sergeant without regard as to whether a
vacancy exists in that rank.



(Ord. 2774, passed 5-21-12)



§§ 32.106 - 32.120  RESERVED.



§ 32.121  HIRING STANDARD FOR PART-TIME POLICE OFFICERS.



   (A)   Hiring standards.  The village adopts as its hiring standards
for the position of part-time police officer those “eligibility for hiring
standards” for the position of full-time police officer, as from time to
time adopted or amended by the Village Fire and Police Commission:



      (1)   Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of
sound health and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.



      (2)   Be at least 21 years of age.



      (3)   Pass a medical examination.



      (4)   Meet the minimum education requirement as established
for a full-time officer by the Fire and Police Commission, i.e. a high school
diploma, GED certificate, Associate’s Degree, and the like.



      (5)   Possess a valid State of Illinois diver’s license.



      (6)   Possess no prior felony convictions.



      (7)   Any individual who has served in the U.S. Military must
have been honorably discharged.



   (B)   Duties.  A part-time police officer shall have all the
responsibilities of a full-time police officer and such specific duties as
defined in the Polices and General Orders of the Village of Frankfort Police
Department; however, the number of hours a part-time officer may work within
a calendar year is restricted.  Part-time police officers shall not be
assigned to supervise or direct full-time police officers.  Part-time police
officers shall be trained in accordance with the Illinois Police Training Act
(ILCS Ch. 50, Act 705, §§ 1 et seq.) and the rules and requirements of the
Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board.



   (C)   That the aforesaid hiring standards, particularly with respect
to part-time police officers employed by the Village of Frankfort, Will and
Cook Counties, Illinois, shall be submitted to the Illinois Law Enforcement
Training Standards Board, as required by statute.



   (D)   Discipline.  Part-time officers shall be under the
disciplinary jurisdiction of the Chief of Police.  Part-time police officers
serve at the discretion of the village authorities, shall not have any
property rights in the employment, and may be removed at any time. 
Part-time police officers shall comply with all applicable rules and General
Orders and Policies issued by the Police Department.



(Ord. 2690, passed 1-24-11; Am. Ord. 2797, passed 8-20-12)



§§ 32.122 - 31.199  RESERVED.



CHAPTER 33:  TAXATION



Section



General Provisions



   33.001   Municipal use tax



   33.002   Municipal service occupation tax



   33.003   Municipal retailers’ occupation tax



   33.004   Municipal leasing occupation tax



   33.005   Automobile renting use tax



   33.006   Municipal automobile renting occupation tax



   33.007   Non-home rule municipal retailers’ occupation tax and
non-home rule municipal service occupation tax




Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax




   33.020   Tax imposed



   33.021   Illinois Department of revenue to administer




Hotel/Motel Accommodations Tax




   33.040   Title



   33.041   Definitions and construction



   33.042   Tax imposed



   33.043   Tax borne by lessee



   33.044   Collection



   33.045   Payment and penalty for no payment



   33.046   Records



   33.047   Suspension or revocation of licenses



   33.048   Proceeds




Municipal Utility Tax




   33.060   Imposition of electricity tax



   33.061   Imposition of municipal gas tax



 



   33.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 33.001  MUNICIPAL USE TAX.



   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with provisions of ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-6 upon the privilege of using in the municipality any
item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside the state at
retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an agency of
state government.  The tax shall be at a rate of 1% of the selling price of
such tangible property with selling price to have the meaning as defined in
the Use Tax Act, approved July 14, 1955.



   (B)   Such tax shall be collected by the State Department of Revenue
for all municipalities imposing the tax and shall be paid before the title or
certificate of registration for the personal property is issued.



(Ord. 878, passed 10-21-74)



§ 33.002  MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX.



   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this
municipality in the business of making sales of service at the rate of 1% of
the cost price of all tangible personal property transferred by said service
people either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of
real estate as an incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the
provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-5.



   (B)   Every supplier or serviceperson required to account for a
municipal service occupation tax for the benefit of this village shall file,
on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the State
Department of Revenue required by Section Nine of the “Service Occupation
Tax Act,” approved July 10, 1961, as amended.



   (C)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the
State Department of Revenue the mount of tax hereby imposed.



(Ord. 629, passed 8-18-69)



§ 33.003  MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX.



   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of selling tangible personal property at retail in this village at
the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of
such business while this section is in effect, in accordance with the
provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.



   (B)   Every such person engaged in such business in the village
shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to
the State Department or Revenue required by Section Three of “An Act in
Relation to a Tax upon Persons to a Tax upon Persons Engaged in the Business
of Selling Tangible Personal Property to Purchasers for Use or Consumption”
approved June 28, 1933, as amended.



   (C)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the
State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of
the receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding
month.



(Ord. 628, passed 8-18-69)



§ 33.004  MUNICIPAL LEASING OCCUPATION TAX.



   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of renting or leasing tangible personal property to the users
thereof at the rate of .5% of the gross receipts from such renting or leasing
made in the course of such business while this section is in effect, in
accordance with the provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-6.



   (B)   Every person engaged in such business in the village shall
file with the State Department of Revenue the return in the manner as
required by Section Five of the “Leasing Occupation Tax Act” as adopted
by the 74th General Assembly.



   (C)   At the time such return is filed, there shall be paid to the
State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of
the receipts from renting or leasing tangible personal property during the
preceding month.



(Ord. 561, passed 9-7-65)



§ 33.005  AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX.



   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in this
village an automobile which is rented from a renter outside the state and
which is titled or registered with an agency of this state’s government in
this village at the rate of 1% of the rental price of such an automobile
while this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-8.



   (B)   Every such person engaged in such business in the village
shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to
the State Department of Revenue required by Sections Two and Three of “An
Act in Relation to a Tax upon Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling
Tangible Personal Property to Purchasers for Use or Consumption” approved
June 29, 1933, as amended.



   (C)   The tax provided for in this section shall be collected from
the persons whose state address for titling or registration purposes is given
as being in this village.



   (D)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the
State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of
renting of automobiles during the preceding month.



(Ord. 1070, passed 1-4-82)



§ 33.006  MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX.



   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of renting automobiles in this village at the rate of 1% of the
gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act
5, § 8-11-7.



   (B)   Every such person engaged in such business in the village
shall file on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to
the State Department of Revenue required by Sections Two and Three of “An
Act in Relation to a Tax upon Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling
Tangible Personal Property to Purchasers for Use or Consumption” approved
June 29, 1933, as amended.



   (C)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the
State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of
the renting of automobiles during the preceding month.



(Ord. 1069, passed 1-4-82)



§ 33.007  NON-HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX AND NON- HOME
RULE MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX.



   (A)   (1)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in
the business of selling tangible personal property, other than an item of
tangible personal property which is titled and registered by any agency of
this state’s government,  at retail in this municipality at the rate of 1%
of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business
while this section is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons
engaged in this municipality in the business of making sales of service, at
the rate of 1% of the selling price of all tangible personal property
transferred by such serviceman either in the form of tangible personal
property or in the form of real estate as an incident to a sale of service.
This “Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax” and this
“Non- Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax” shall not be applicable
to the sale of food for human consumption that is to be consumed off the
premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and
food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and
non- prescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances, and insulin, rine
testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics.



      (2)   The imposition of these non-home rule taxes is in
accordance with and subject to the provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§
8-11-1.1, 8-11-1.2, 8-11-1.3 and 8-11-1.4.



   (B)   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue
shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this
section.



(Ord. 3186, passed 12-17-18)



SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX



§ 33.020  TAX IMPOSED.



   The village imposes a simplified municipal telecommunications tax upon
the act or privilege of originating in the village or receiving in the
village intrastate or interstate telecommunications by a person under the
provisions of the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act (ILCS Ch.
35, Act 636, §§ 5-1 et seq.), at the rate of 6% of the gross charges for
such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer.



(Ord. 3095, passed 6-19-17)



§ 33.021  ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE TO ADMINISTER.



   The simplified municipal telecommunications tax hereby imposed shall be
collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the state. The
Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power to administer and
enforce the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 3095, passed 6-19-17)



HOTEL/MOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS TAX



§ 33.040  TITLE.



   Pursuant to the ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-3-14, as amended, this
subchapter shall be known and cited as the “Hotel Accommodations Tax
Ordinance” and the tax herein imposed shall be known and cited as the
“Hotel Accommodations Tax.”



(Ord. 2066, passed 4-19-04)



§ 33.041  DEFINITIONS AND CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this subchapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS.  A room or rooms in any building or
structure located in the village and kept, used or maintained as or
advertised or held out to the public to be an inn, motel, hotel, apartment
hotel, lodging house, romantic getaway, dormitory or place, where sleeping,
rooming, conference or exhibition accommodations are furnished for lease or
rent, whether with or without meals, in which ten or more such accommodations
are used or maintained for guests, lodgers or roomers. HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS
does not include an accommodation which a person occupies, or has the right
to occupy, as his or her domicile and permanent residence.



      PERSON.  Any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor,
conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, partnership,
joint venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign
corporation, association, syndicate, society, or any group of individuals
acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, for profit,
nonprofit or otherwise. Whenever the term PERSON is used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to corporations shall
include the officers thereof, and as applied to any other entity, the owners
of part-owners thereof.



      TREASURER. The Treasurer of the Village of Frankfort.



      VILLAGE.  The Village of Frankfort.



   (B)   Construction.  In this subchapter, unless the text otherwise
requires, words in the singular number include the plural and in the plural
include the singular; words of the masculine gender include the feminine and
the neuter; and when the sense so indicates, words in the neuter gender may
refer to any gender.



(Ord. 2066, passed 4-19-04)



§ 33.042  TAX IMPOSED.



   There is hereby imposed and shall accrue, as set forth in § 33.045,
and be collected a tax, as herein provided, upon the rental or leasing of any
hotel accommodations at the rate of 2% of the gross rental or leasing charge.



(Ord. 2066, passed 4-19-04)



§ 33.043  TAX BORNE BY LESSEE.



   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax shall
be borne by the hotel owner, manager or operator of such hotel
accommodations. The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any and all
other taxes. The hotel owner, manager, or operator may reimburse themselves
for their tax liability for such tax by charging the lessee or tenant of such
hotel accommodations by separately stating such tax as an additional charge
on the lessee’s or tenant’s statement of charges. It shall be the duty of
every owner, manager or operator of hotel accommodations to secure said tax
from the lessee or tenant of said hotel accommodations and pay over to the
Treasurer said tax under rules and regulations prescribed by the Treasurer
and as otherwise provided by this subchapter.



(Ord. 2066, passed 4-19-04)



§ 33.044  COLLECTION.



   The tax herein levied shall be secured by the hotel owner, manager or
operator from the lessee or tenant when collecting the price, charge or rent
to which it applies. Every lessee or tenant shall be given a bill, invoice,
receipt or other statement or memorandum of the price, charge or rent payable
upon which the hotel accommodations tax shall be stated, charged and shown
separately. The hotel accommodations tax shall be paid to the Treasurer or
the authorized representative of this office on a monthly basis. The tax
shall be due on or before the fifteenth day of the succeeding calendar month.



(Ord. 2066, passed 4-19-04)



§ 33.045  PAYMENT AND PENALTY FOR NO PAYMENT.



   (A)   Every owner, manager or operator of hotel accommodations shall
file a sworn tax return on a monthly basis with the Treasurer showing tax
receipts received with respect to hotel accommodation space rented or leased
during the preceding monthly period, upon forms prescribed by the Treasurer.
At the time of filing said tax return, the owner, manager or operator of
hotel accommodations shall pay to the Treasurer all taxes due for the period
to which the tax return applies.



   (B)   If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at
the rate of 2% per month on the amount of tax which remains unpaid shall be
added and collected. Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as herein
provided, upon the request of the Treasurer, the corporation counsel shall
bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax in
behalf of the village in any court of competent jurisdiction with the cost of
such enforcement to be borne by the owner of the hotel accommodations.



(Ord. 2066, passed 4-19-04)  Penalty, see § 33.999



§ 33.046  RECORDS.



   Every owner, manager or operator of hotel accomodations shall keep
books and records showing the prices, rents or charges made or charged, and
occupancies taxable under this subsection. The Treasurer, or his or her
designate, shall at all reasonable times have full access to said books and
records.



(Ord. 2066, passed 4-19-04)  Penalty, see § 33.999



§ 33.047  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES.



   If the president, after hearing held by or for him or her, shall find
that any person has willfully avoided payment of the tax imposed by this
subchapter, he or she may suspend or revoke all village  licenses held by
said tax evader. The owner, manager or operator of the hotel accommodations
shall have an opportunity to be heard and such hearing shall not be held less
than five days after notice of the time and place of the hearing, addressed
to the owner, manager or operator at his or her last known place of business.
The suspension or revocation of any license shall not release or discharge
the owner, manager or operator of hotel accommodations from civil liability
for the payment of the tax nor for prosecution of such offense.



(Ord. 2066, passed 4-19-04)



§ 33.048  PROCEEDS.



   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this
subchapter, including penalties, shall be distributed within 30 days after
the fifteenth day of the calendar month as follows:



   (A)   One percent of the gross rental or lease charges collected
shall be paid to the Chicago Southland Convention and Visitors Bureau for the
sole purpose of promoting tourism and conventions.



   (B)   The excess over the 1% of the gross rental or lease charges
collected shall be retained by the Village to defray the costs of
administering and processing the imposition and collection of the tax.



   (C)   In the event the village increases the tax collected pursuant
to § 33.042 hereof, the Bureau shall only be entitled to 1% of the gross
rental or lease charges collected.



(Ord. 2066, passed 4-19-04)



MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX



§ 33.060  IMPOSITION OF ELECTRICITY TAX.



   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of the tax imposed by this section,
the following terms shall be defined as follows:



      PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited
liability company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political
subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver,
trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by any order of court.



      PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. Any person
having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other
affiliate, an office, generation  facility, distribution facility,
transmission facility, sales office or other place of business, or any
employee, agent, or other representative operating within this state under
the authority of the person or its subsidiary or other affiliate,
irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other
representative is located in this state permanently or temporarily, or
whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is licensed or qualified
to do business in this state.



      PURCHASE AT RETAIL. Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser
for purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include
the use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5,
§ 8-11-2, directly in the generation, production, transmission, delivery, or
sale of electricity.



      PURCHASER. Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate
limits of the village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.



   (B)   Municipal utility tax imposed on use or consumption of
electricity.



      (1)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2, the village
imposes a tax upon the privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired
in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of
the village at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each
purchaser:



         (a)   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month: $0.00610 per kilowatt-hour;



         (b)   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month: $0.00400 per kilowatt-hour;



         (c)   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month: $0.00360 per kilowatt-hour;



         (d)   For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month: $0.00350 per kilowatt-hour;



         (e)   For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month: $0.00340 per kilowatt-hour;



         (f)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month: $0.00320 per kilowatt-hour;



         (g)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month: $0.00315 per kilowatt-hour;



         (h)   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month: $0.00310 per kilowatt-hour;



         (i)   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or
consumed in a month: $0.00305 per kilowatt-hour;



         (j)   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of
20,000,000 kilowatt-hours in a month: $0.00300 per kilowatt-hour.



      (2)   This tax is in addition to all other taxes, fees, and
other revenue measures imposed by the village, the State of Illinois, or any
other political subdivision of the state.



      (3)   This tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or
consumption of electricity by purchasers beginning with the first bill issued
on or after September 1, 2017.



      (4)   The use or consumption of electricity within the village
by units of local government or school districts shall be exempt from the tax
imposed under this section.



      (5)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the
tax shall not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection
of the tax would violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States or
the Constitution of the State of Illinois.



   (C)   Collection of electricity tax.



      (1)   Subject to the provision of division (E) of this
section, the tax imposed by this section shall be collected from purchasers
by the person maintaining a place of business in this state who delivers
electricity to such purchasers. This tax shall constitute a debt of the
purchaser to the person that delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is
recoverable at the same time and in the same manner as the original charge
for delivering the electricity.



      (2)   Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this
section, and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the
village by the person delivering the electricity, provided, however, that the
person delivering electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to
deliveries of electricity, the charges for which are written off as
uncollectible, and provided further that if such charges are thereafter
collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax.



      (3)   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax
from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the
electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add
to such gross charge an amount equal to 3% of the tax they collect to
reimburse them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing
customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data
to the village upon request. For the purposes of this section, any partial
payment of a billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall
be deemed to be for the delivery of electricity.



   (D)   Tax remittance and return.



      (1)   Every person maintaining a place of business in this
state who delivers electricity to a purchaser in accordance with the section
shall, on a monthly basis, file a return in a form prescribed by the Village
Treasurer. The return and accompanying remittance shall be due on or before
the last day of the month following the month during which the tax is
collected or is required to be collected under divisions (B) and (C) of this
section.



      (2)   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect
the tax from the purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under
division (E) of this section, then the purchaser shall file a return in a
form prescribed by the Village Treasurer and pay the tax directly to the
Village Treasurer on or before the last day of the month following the month
during which the electricity is used or consumed.



   (E)   Resales.



      (1)   Electricity that is delivered to a person in the village
shall be considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the
person receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the
Village Treasurer and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the
electricity, and certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or
partially nontaxable as a sale for resale.



      (2)   If a person who receives electricity in the village
claims to be an authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply
to the Village Treasurer for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts
showing why it is not liable for the tax imposed by this section on any
purchases of electricity and shall furnish such additional information as the
Village Treasurer may reasonably require.



      (3)   Upon approval of the application, the Village Treasurer
shall assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to
the applicant.



      (4)   The Village Treasurer may cancel the resale number of
any person if the person fails to pay any tax payable under this section for
electricity used or consumed by the person, or if the number was either:



         (a)   Obtained through misrepresentation; or



         (b)   No longer necessary because the person has
discontinued making resales.



      (5)   If a reseller had acquired electricity partly for use or
consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by
this section directly to the Village Treasurer pursuant to division (D)(2) of
this section on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes,
and shall collect the tax pursuant to division (D) and remit the tax pursuant
to division (D)(1) of this section to the Village Treasurer on the amount of
electricity delivered by the reseller to the purchaser.



      (6)   Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having
an active resale number and complying with all other conditions in this
section, shall be excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any
portion of the electricity delivered to the reseller, provided that the
person reports the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and
such other information that the Village Treasurer may reasonably require.



   (F)   Books and records. Every person maintaining a place of
business in this state who delivers electricity to a purchaser and every
taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by this section, shall keep and
maintain accurate books and records of its business or activity, including
contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that gave rise,
or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this section. Those books
and records shall be subject to and available for inspection at all times
during business hours of the day.



   (G)   Credits and refunds. Notwithstanding any other provision of
this section, in order to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting to the
village, no person shall be entitled to a refund or, or credit for, a tax
imposed under this section unless the person files a claim for refund or
credit within one year after the date on which the tax was paid or remitted.



   (H)   Penalty. Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes
a fraudulent return, or who willfully violates any other provision of this
section, is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 and in addition, shall be liable
in a civil action for the amount of tax due.



   (I)   Further remedies. Nothing in this section shall be construed
as limiting any additional or further remedies that the village may have for
enforcement of this section.



(Ord. 3096, passed 6-19-17)



§ 33.061  IMPOSITION OF MUNICIPAL GAS TAX.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of the municipal gas tax imposed
by this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows:



      GROSS RECEIPTS. The consideration received for distributing,
supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption and not for
resale, and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in
money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit
services and property of every kind and material and for all services
rendered therewith, and shall be determined without any deduction on account
of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of
materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever;
provided, however that GROSS RECEIPTS shall not include any amounts
specifically excluded from the definition of gross receipts ILCS Ch. 65, Act
5, § 8-11-2(d). The term GROSS RECEIPTS shall not include that portion of
the consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling
gas to units of local government or school districts within the corporate
limits of the village.



      PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited
liability company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political
subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver,
trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court.



      TAXPAYER. Person engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use or consumption within the
corporate limits of the village and not for resale.



   (B)   Municipal gas tax imposed.



      (1)   Pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2, the village
imposes a tax on all persons engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use or consumption within the
corporate limits of the village and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of the
gross receipts therefrom.



      (2)   No tax is imposed by this section with respect to any
transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such
business may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States,
be made subject to taxation by the State of Illinois or any political
subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of
distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas be subject to taxation
under the provisions of this section for such transactions as are or may
become subject to taxation under the provisions of the “Municipal
Retailers' Occupation Tax Act” authorized by Section 8-1-1-1 of the
Illinois Municipal Code.



      (3)   Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money,
or value of products or services furnished to this municipality by the
taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public
places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of
poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the
taxpayer's business.



   (C)   Implementation.



      (1)   On or before the last day of October 2017, each taxpayer
shall make a return to the Village Treasurer for the month of September,
stating;



         (a)   Its name;



         (b)   Its principal place of business;



         (c)   Its gross receipts during the month upon basis of
which the tax is imposed;



         (d)   The amount of tax; and



         (e)   Any other reasonable and related information as
the corporate authorities may require.



      (2)   On or before the last day of every month thereafter,
each taxpayer shall make a like return to the Village Treasurer for a
corresponding one month period.



      (3)   The taxpayer making the return provided for in this
section shall, at the time of making such return, pay to the Village
Treasurer, the amount of tax imposed; provided that in connection with any
return the taxpayer may, if the taxpayer so elects, report and pay an amount
based upon the total billings of business subject to the tax during the
period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously
billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences
between such billings and the taxable gross receipts.



   (D)   Errors. If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid
which was not due under the provisions of this section, whether as the result
of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited
against any tax due, or to become due, under this section from the taxpayer
who made the erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid
more than three years prior to the filing of a claim therefore shall be so
credited.



   (E)   Actions to recover. No action to recover any amount of tax due
under the provisions of this section shall be commenced more than three years
after the due date of such amount.



   (F)   Penalty. Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes
a fraudulent return, or who willfully violates any other provision of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 and in addition shall be liable
in a civil action for the amount of tax due.



(Ord. 3096, passed 6-19-17)



§ 33.999  PENALTY.



   Any person found guilty for violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting, or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the
enforcement of any of the provisions of §§ 33.040 through 33.048, except
when otherwise specifically provided, upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine or not less than $50 nor more than $300 for the first
offense and not less than $200 nor more than $500 for the second and each
subsequent offense in any 180-day period, provided, however, that all actions
seeking the imposition of fines only shall be filed as quasi-criminal actions
subject to the provisions of the Illinois Civil Practice Act (ILCS Ch. 735,
Act 5, §§ 1-101 et seq.). Repeated offenses in excess of three within any
180-day period may also be punishable as a misdemeanor by incarceration for a
term not to exceed six months under the procedure set forth in ILCS Ch. 65,
Act 5, § 1-2-1.1, and under the provisions of the Illinois Code of Criminal
Procedure (ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 100-1 et seq.). A separate and distinct
offense shall be regarded as committed each day upon which each person shall
continue any such violations.



(Ord. 2066, passed 4-19-04)



CHAPTER 34:  PERSONNEL POLICIES



Section



General Provisions



   34.01   State Municipal Retirement Fund; participation by village



   34.02   Policy for vehicle safety belt use by employees of the
village



   34.03   Travel, meal and lodging expenses



State Officials and Employees Ethics Act



   34.05   Adoption of Act



Police Pension Fund



   34.15   Creation of Fund



   34.16   Board of Trustees of the Pension Fund



   34.17   Meetings



   34.18   Powers and duties



   34.19   Compensation



   34.20   Costs



   34.21   Intent



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 34.01    STATE MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND; PARTICIPATION BY VILLAGE.



   The village does hereby elect to participate in the Illinois Municipal
Retirement Fund, effective January 1, 1974, and the Police Pension Fund,
adopted March, 1991.



(Ord. 812, passed 3-19-73)



§ 34.02  POLICY FOR VEHICLE SAFETY BELT USE BY EMPLOYEES OF THE VILLAGE.



   (A)   Purpose.  The village wants to reduce the potential for
serious injuries for its employees as a result of motor vehicle collisions.
Safety belts are an effective life saving and injury reducing device for all
types of motor vehicle accidents. When safety belts are used, the chances of
serious injury or death are reduced 50% to 65%. Furthermore, safety belts
assist law enforcement personnel in maintaining proper control of their
vehicles during pursuit or other emergency high speed conditions. By this
policy, the village hopes to reduce human pain and suffering, set an example
for its citizens, and reduce the burden on society caused by motor vehicle
accidents.



   (B)   Policy.  While operating or riding in the front seat of a
municipal or private vehicle on official business for the village, all
employees shall use a safety belt restraining system in the manner prescribed
by the manufacturer, in compliance with the Illinois Vehicle Code, Chapter
95½, Section 12-603.1.  This policy shall not apply to the following:



      (1)   Persons unable to use the safety belt system of a
vehicle for physical reasons, as evidenced by a physician’s statement.



      (2)   Persons occupying a seating position or a vehicle not
equipped with a safety belt assembly.



      (3)   Persons operating a motor vehicle in reverse.



      (4)   Persons operating a motor vehicle with a model year
prior to 1965.



      (5)   Persons operating a motor vehicle within confined areas
such as the maintenance garage.



      (6)   Persons operating a motor vehicle less than 500 feet
from job site to job site.



      (7)   Persons operating a motor vehicle not exceeding 10 mph
for tasks such as mowing.



(Ord. 1369, passed 1-20-92)



§ 34.03  TRAVEL, MEAL AND LODGING EXPENSES.



   (A)   Definitions. The following definitions shall be defined as
written for this section unless context indicates or requires a different
meaning:



      ENTERTAINMENT. Includes, but is not limited to, shows,
amusements, theaters, circuses, sporting events, or any other place of public
or private entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of the
program or event.



      PUBLIC BUSINESS. Expenses incurred in the performance of a public
purpose which is required or useful for the benefit of the village to carry
out the responsibilities of village business.



      TRAVEL. Any expenditure directly incident to official travel by
employees and officers of the village or by wards or charges of the village
involving reimbursement to travelers or direct payment to private agencies
providing transportation or related services.



   (B)   (1)   The village shall only reimburse or authorize for
payment for travel, meal, and lodging expenses incurred by its employees and
officers up to the maximum allowable amount of $1,750 per occurrence.



      (2)   Alcohol is specifically excluded from reimbursement.



   (C)   No reimbursement of travel, meal or lodging expenses incurred
by a village employee or officer shall be authorized unless the “travel,
meal, and lodging expense reimbursement request form,” attached hereto and
made a part hereof, has been submitted and approved. All documents and
information submitted with the form shall be subject to disclosure under the
Freedom of Information Act (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140, §§ 1 et seq.).



   (D)   Expenses for travel, meals, and lodging of:



      (1)   Any officer or employee that exceeds the maximum
reimbursement allowed under the regulations adopted under division (C) of
this section; or



      (2)   Any member of the corporate authorities of the village
may only be approved by roll call vote at an open meeting of the corporate
authorities of the village. However, in the event of an emergency or other
extraordinary circumstances, the corporate authorities may approve more than
the maximum allowable expenses set forth above.



   (E)   The village shall not reimburse any elected official,
employee, or officer for any activities which would be considered
entertainment. Activities which would otherwise be considered entertainment,
but which are excluded from the prohibition on reimbursement due to being
ancillary to the purpose of the program or event, may be reimbursed in
accordance with the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 3077, passed 2-21-17)



STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT



§ 34.05  ADOPTION OF ACT.



   (A)   The regulations of ILCS Ch. 5, Act  430, § 5-15 and  ILCS
Ch. 5, Act  430, §§ 10-10 through 10-40 of the State Officials and
Employees Ethics Act, ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 1-1 et seq., (hereinafter
referred to as the “Act” in this section) are hereby adopted by reference
and made applicable to the officers and employees of the village to the
extent required by ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5.



   (B)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be
solicited or accepted under the Act, by any officer or any employee of the
village, is hereby prohibited.



   (C)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or
made to an officer or employee of the village under the Act, is hereby
prohibited.



   (D)   The participation in political activities prohibited under the
Act, by any officer or employee of the village, is hereby prohibited.  Such
participation also includes prohibiting the distribution of the village
newsletter publication within 30 days of a local election.



   (E)   For purposes of this section, the terms “officer” and
“employee” shall be defined as set forth in ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, §
70-5(c).



   (F)   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same
as those penalties set forth in ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 50-5 for similar
violations of the Act.



   (G)   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any
existing ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of village
officers and employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or
policies are less restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of
this section shall prevail in accordance with the provisions of ILCS Ch. 5,
Act 430, § 70-5(a).



   (H)   Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the
effective date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by
reference and shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering
and making of gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any
amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities
shall not be incorporated into this section by reference without formal
action by the corporate authorities of the village.



   (I)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act
unconstitutional in its entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of
the date that the Illinois Supreme Court’s decision becomes final and not
subject to any further appeals or rehearings. This section shall be deemed
repealed without further action by the Corporate Authorities of the village
if the Act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois Supreme Court.



   (J)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the
Act, or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the
Act as adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect;
however, that part of this section relating to the part of the Act found
unconstitutional shall be deemed repealed without further action by the
Corporate Authorities of the village.



(Ord. 2077, passed 5-17-04; Am. Ord. 2262, passed 1-9-06)



BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE POLICE PENSION FUND



§ 34.15  CREATION OF FUND.



   There is hereby created and established as required by law the Village
of Frankfort Police Pension Fund to be administered and operated in
conformance with Article 3 of the Illinois Pension Code (Illinois Revised
Statutes Ch. 108½ Par. 3-101 et. seq.) as from time to time amended.



(Ord. 1342, passed 3-4-91)



§ 34.16  BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE PENSION FUND.



   (A)   A Board of five members, a majority of whom shall be residents
of the village, shall constitute a Board of Trustees of the Police Pension
Fund to administer the Pension Fund and to designate the beneficiaries
thereof. The Board shall be known as the “Board of Trustees of the
Frankfort Police Pension Fund” or “Pension Board.”



   (B)   Two members of the Pension Board shall be appointed by the
President of the Board of Trustees. The third and fourth members of the
Pension Board shall be elected from the active participants of this Pension
Fund by such active participants. The fifth member of the Pension Board shall
be elected by and from among the beneficiaries of the fund.



   (C)   One of the Pension Board members appointed by the Village
President shall serve for one year beginning on the second Tuesday of May,
1991. The other appointed Pension Board member shall serve for two years
beginning on the same date.  The successors of the appointed members of the
Board shall serve for two  years each or until their successors are
appointed and qualified.



   (D)   The election provided for in this section for elected Pension
Board members shall be held biennially on the third Monday in April at such
place or places in the village and under the Australian ballot system and
such other regulations as shall be prescribed by the appointed members of the
Pension Board.



   (E)   The active participants in the Pension Fund shall be entitled
to vote only for the active participant members of the Pension Board. All
Pension Fund beneficiaries of legal age may vote only for the Pension Board
member chosen from among the beneficiaries.  No person shall be entitled to
cast more than one ballot at such election. The term of the elected members
shall be two years, beginning on the second Tuesday of May, 1991.



   (F)   Upon the death, resignation or inability to act of any elected
Pension Board member, his or her successor shall be elected for the unexpired
term at a special election, to be called by the Pension Board and conducted
in the same manner as the regular biennial election.



(Ord. 1342, passed 3-4-91)



§ 34.17  MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Pension Board shall hold annually regular quarterly
meetings in July, October, January and April, and special meetings as called
by the Pension Board President.



   (B)   At the regular July meeting, the Pension Board shall select
from its members a President, Vice- President, Secretary, and Assistant
Secretary to serve for one year and until their respective successors are
elected and qualified.



   (C)   The Vice-President shall perform the duties of President
during any vacancy in that office, or during the President’s absence from
the village, or if he or she is by reason of illness or other causes unable
to perform the duties of the office. The Assistant Secretary shall act for
the Secretary whenever necessary to discharge the functions of such office.



(Ord. 1342, passed 3-4-91)



§ 34.18  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Pension Board shall have all applicable rights, powers, obligations
and duties as from time to time granted by law including as set forth in
Article 3 of the Illinois Pension Code (ILCS Ch. 40, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et
seq.) as from time to time amended.



(Ord. 1342, passed 3-4-91)



§ 34.19  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Pension Board shall neither receive nor have any right
to receive any salary from the pension fund for services performed as
trustees in that office.



(Ord. 1342, passed 3-4-91)



§ 34.20  COSTS.



   The cost of providing the pension benefits required to be paid by the
village under the provision of the Illinois Pension Code and this subchapter
shall be financed by the levy of a tax pursuant to the provision of Section
3-125 of the Illinois Pension Code.



(Ord. 1342, passed 3-4-91)



§ 34.21  INTENT.



   It is the intention of the corporate authorities of the village that
the provisions of this subchapter shall in all respects comply with and be
consistent with the provisions of the Illinois Pension Code, and this
subchapter shall be construed so as to give it that effect.



(Ord. 1342, passed 3-4-91)



CHAPTER 35:  ANNEXATION AGREEMENTS



Section



   35.01   Agreements to be accompanied by petition upon submission to
village



   35.02   Preliminary filing fee



   35.03   Owner to pay cost of publication of notices, related expenses



   35.04   Professional assistance; reimbursement for expenditures



   35.05   Additional fees and expenses



   35.06   Annexation to the Frankfort Fire Protection District



§ 35.01  AGREEMENTS TO BE ACCOMPANIED BY PETITION UPON SUBMISSION TO
VILLAGE.



   All annexation agreements submitted to the village pursuant to the
provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-15.1-1 et seq. for consideration
and hearing thereon shall be accompanied by a petition requesting the
municipal authorities to conduct the appropriate hearing or hearings thereon
and to publish notice of such hearings, such application or petition to be
signed by the record fee title owner of the real estate being the subject
matter of such proposed annexation agreement or the duly authorized agent of
such owner.



(Ord. 853, passed 2-4-74)



§ 35.02  PRELIMINARY FILING FEE.



   All such applications or petitions for consideration of said annexation
agreements shall be accompanied with a preliminary filing fee in the amount
as set by the Board of Trustees if the hearing before the corporate
authorities is to be conducted on the same evening which is a regular meeting
date of the Village Board of Trustees.  In the event the hearing on such
proposed agreement is to be held before the corporate authorities at any time
other than a regular meeting date, then the petition or application shall be
accompanied with a preliminary filing fee as set by the Board of Trustees. 
The Village Board of Trustees at its sole discretion, shall determine the
date on which it shall conduct a hearing upon the proposed annexation
agreement.



(Ord. 853, passed 2-4-74)



§ 35.03  OWNER TO PAY COST OF PUBLICATION OF NOTICES, RELATED EXPENSES.



   In addition to the fees in § 35.02, the record fee title owner of the
subject lands shall pay unto the village the cost of publication of all
notices required by statute and related expenses incurred by the village with
regard to the pre-annexation agreement.



(Ord. 853, passed 2-4-74)



§ 35.04  PROFESSIONAL ASSISTANCE; REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENDITURES.



   In the event the Village Board of Trustees in its sole discretion
determines that it requires special assistance in order to insure a full and
fair evaluation of any such proposed annexation agreements, the Village Board
of Trustees may obtain such professional assistance from any qualified
individual or association and may incur expenses in respect thereof.  The
Village Board of Trustees shall be reimbursed for any such expenditures for
professional assistance by the individual, group or business entity seeking
approval of a proposed annexation agreement, and any such individual, group
or business entity shall, prior to being granted the first hearing, public or
otherwise, before the Plan Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals or corporate
authorities, on their proposed annexation agreement, execute to the village a
binding commitment to reimburse the village for all expenditures in any
amount incurred by the village in obtaining such professional consultation
and advice.



(Ord. 853, passed 2-4-74)



§ 35.05  ADDITIONAL FEES AND EXPENSES.



   The fees and expenses required by any other ordinance of the village,
both now in force or hereinafter adopted, shall not be affected hereby, it
being the express intention that the fees and expenses herein provided be in
addition to and not in lieu of such fees and expenses provided for in other
ordinances.



(Ord. 853, passed 2-4-74)



§ 35.06  ANNEXATION TO THE FRANKFORT FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT.



   The owner/developer of any parcel of property annexing into the village
shall petition the Frankfort Fire Protection District for annexation into its
district within 60 days of the execution of the annexation to the village,
provided the subject parcel is not located in any other fire protection
district.



(Ord. 1792, passed 4-3-00)



CHAPTER 36:  ADMINISTRATIVE COMPLIANCE TICKETS



Sections



   36.01   Definitions



   36.02   Issuance of tickets



   36.03   Procedure



   36.04   Notice to person receiving a compliance ticket



   36.05   Failure to comply with the compliance ticket



§ 36.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMPLIANCE TICKETS (“CT”).  A ticket issue to a presumed
first-time offender alleging a single violation of one of the following
Village of Frankfort Code of Ordinances or a violation for marijuana and/or
drug paraphernalia.



      (1)   Chapter 119, § 119.08(B) Sale, Give, Delivery of
Tobacco to Minors; § 119.10 Purchase Possession of Tobacco by Minor;



      (2)   Chapter 131 Offenses Pertaining to Property; § 131.02
Theft, § 131.16 Retail Theft, § 131.30 Criminal Damage Property, where the
retail value of the goods or cost to repair is less than $150.00;



      (3)   The following Sections of Chapter 132 Offenses Against
Public Order and Safety; § 132.01 Disorderly Conduct; § 132.05 Loud or
Unnecessary Noises; §§ 132.20, 132.21, 132.23, Curfew for Minors; Chapter
136, Drug Offenses § 136.06 (less than 10 grams), § 136.07 Drug
Paraphernalia, § 136.20 Look-Alike Drugs (less than 10 grams);



      (4)   Animals; § 92.03 Disturbing the Peace, § 92.06 Running
at Large, § 92.08 Animal Excrement, § 92.20 Nuisance;



      (5)   Chapter 113 Intoxicating Liquor: § 113.59
Possession/Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages.



   FIRST TIME OFFENDERS.  A person who has not been previously charged
and convicted, plead guilty to, placed on court supervision for, or been
issued a CT or received a similar disposition for any similar offense being
ticketed or for any Class A misdemeanors or felony with the exception of
marijuana or drug paraphernalia violations.



(Ord. 2890, passed 1-21-14; Am. Ord. 3005, passed 12-21-15; Am. Ord. 3056,
passed 9-19-16)



§ 36.02  ISSUANCE OF TICKETS.



   Any Village of Frankfort police officer or duly authorized person may
issue a CT for alleged offenses by a person eligible for a CT under this code.



(Ord. 2890, passed 1-21-14; Am. Ord. 3005, passed 12-21-15; Am. Ord. 3056,
passed 9-19-16)



§ 36.03  PROCEDURE.



   Any person accused of violating an offense subject to compliance
ticket, and who is eligible for a CT, may initially be issued a CT in lieu of
arrest or other village initiated penalty as provided in this chapter.



   (A)   In the event the violator is accused of Chapters 131, 136 or
§ 119.12, offenses of this code and receives a CT, the violator may pay a
compliance fee of $150 to the village within ten days of the issuance of the
CT as a settlement and compromise of the claim against the violator. The
violator shall have until the close of business on the tenth day to satisfy
and pay the village the compliance fee. In addition, for applicable
violations under Chapter 131, the violator shall also immediately return to
the victim the items claimed to be subject to a theft in their same condition
as immediately before the incident, and/or fully pay all costs for any damage
or repair to the victim and within the ten days show proof of compliance of
this requirement to the Frankfort Police Chief or designee.



   (B)   In the event the violator is accused of violating Chapter 113,
§ 119.10, or Chapter 132 of this code and receives a CT, the violator may
pay an administrative fee of $100 to the village within ten days of the
issuance of the CT as a settlement and compromise of the claim against the
violator, except the fee for violation of §§ 92.03, 92.06, 92.08, 92.20,
132.20, 132.21, and 132.23 shall be $50. The violator shall have until the
close of business on the fourteenth day to satisfy said compliance fee.



(Ord. 2890, passed 1-21-14; Am. Ord. 3005, passed 12-21-15; Am. Ord. 3056,
passed 9-19-16)



§ 36.04  NOTICE TO PERSON RECEIVING A COMPLIANCE TICKET.



   Each CT shall notify the alleged violator that: 1) No court appearance
is required and that it is solely their decision to elect to have this
alleged violation resolved under the terms of the compliance ticket process
or to have the matter charged and adjudicated in a court of law; 2) by paying
the CT, they acknowledge and admit their wrongdoing, waive their right to
have a court hearing to decide their innocence or guilt and set the penalty,
if guilty, and further agree to the appropriateness of the CT and its
process; 3) Acknowledge they still may have remaining legal responsibilities
to the claimed victim; 4) They can choose to elect not to pay the compliance
fee assessed by the CT within ten days of its issuance. In that event, the
village can then file a complaint against the alleged violator in the Circuit
Court and serve them with a copy of the court complaint and notice of a date
and time to appear in Court.



(Ord. 2890, passed 1-21-14; Am. Ord. 3005, passed 12-21-15; Am. Ord. 3056,
passed 9-19-16)



§ 36.05  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH THE COMPLIANCE TICKET.



   If any person fails to timely and fully comply with the provisions of
the CT within ten days from its issuance, the village shall note it on its
records and then may proceed against the alleged violator by filing a
complaint in the Circuit Court of Will County, Illinois and serving the
alleged violator with a copy of the complaint and a notice to appear in court
as provided by law or via debt collection services.



(Ord. 2890, passed 1-21-14; Am. Ord. 3005, passed 12-21-15; Am. Ord. 3056,
passed 9-19-16)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   SOLID WASTE COLLECTION



      51.   WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS



      52.   CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY



      53.   PUBLIC UTILITIES



CHAPTER 50:  SOLID WASTE COLLECTION



Section



General Provisions



   50.01   Purpose



   50.02   Definitions



   50.03   Accumulation of uncollected refuse prohibited



   50.04   Containers required



   50.05   Location of containers for collection



   50.06   Weekly collection by village



   50.07   Dumpsters and trash handling in industrial, commercial and
business districts



Yard Waste Program



   50.15   Definitions



   50.16   Mixing of yard waste prohibited



   50.17   Packing of yard waste



   50.18   Sale and distribution of official yard waste bags



Recycling Program



   50.25   Definition



   50.26   Recycling program



   50.27   Separation of recyclables; placement and time for
recyclables removal



   50.28   Mandatory recycling



   50.29   Recycling containers



   50.30   Recycling service charges



   50.31   Collection by unauthorized persons



   50.32   Unattended donation/collection boxes



Rates and Charges



   50.40   Solid waste removal service charges



 



   50.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 50.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter shall be to regulate and control the
accumulation, removal, and disposal of refuse and to eliminate unhealthy,
unsanitary, and unsightly conditions in the village.



(Ord. 869, passed 7-15-74)



§ 50.02  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   REFUSE.  Includes garbage, such as all animal debris, fruit, or
vegetable matter and all other substances capable of decay, fermentation or
putrefaction, paper, waste paper, rags, floor sweepings, tin cans, glass
ware, crockery, bottles, ashes, cinders, clinkers, and other household
waste,  and the remodeling of old or construction of new buildings.  The
recital of illustrative inclusions under the above definition are by way of
example rather than limitations.



(Ord. 869, passed 7-15-74)



§ 50.03  ACCUMULATION OF UNCOLLECTED REFUSE PROHIBITED.



   No occupant, person, owner, owner's agent, or tenant of any private, or
public premise shall permit refuse to accumulate on such premises, except in
covered containers, or as provided hereinafter; and all such refuse should be
removed once every seven days or more if necessary to protect the health of
the inhabitants of the village.



(Ord. 869, passed 7-15-74)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.04  CONTAINERS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every occupant, person, owner, owner's agent, or tenant, in
possession of any house, building, flat, or apartment in the village shall at
all times maintain in good order and repair a container or containers for
garbage and refuse. Foul-smelling, leaking, or defective receptacles should
be cleaned, repaired, or replaced as directed by the appropriate
representative of the village.  A container shall be a can of galvanized
iron or non-corrodible material, rodent proof, watertight, and of the type
commonly sold as a garbage can, of a suitable gauge and construction to
insure durability, and of a capacity of not less than 10 gallons or more than
30 gallons.



   (B)   All household garbage or refuse shall be contained in plastic
garbage bags sealed tightly with no tears or openings.  Such garbage or
refuse shall be drained and wrapped in paper to facilitate collection, and
prevent freezing especially during the winter months.



   (C)   All commercial, industrial, apartment buildings, religious,
political, social, and nonprofit organizations' refuse shall be stored in
durable, rust-resistant, nonabsorbent, totally enclosed metal containers.



(Ord. 869, passed 7-15-74)



§ 50.05  LOCATION OF CONTAINERS FOR COLLECTION.



   It shall be the duty of every occupant, person, owner, owner's agent,
or tenant in possession of any house, building, flat, or apartment,
industrial, commercial, religious, political, social, and nonprofit
organizations in the village to place garbage or refuse containers within
five feet of the curb line.



(Ord. 869, passed 7-15-74)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.06  WEEKLY COLLECTION BY VILLAGE.



   Every occupant, person, owner, or person in possession of private or
commercial premises in the village shall be required to have accumulations of
refuse removed and disposed of at least once a week.  The village shall
provide for such weekly refuse removal services.  No refuse, which is to be
deposited for collection at any curb, shall be so placed before 6:00 p.m. on
the day prior to the collection day, and no container shall so remain at the
curb or alley after 10:00 p.m. on the day of collection.



(Ord. 869, passed 7-15-74)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.07  DUMPSTERS AND TRASH HANDLING IN INDUSTRIAL, COMMERCIAL AND
BUSINESS DISTRICTS.



   Except containers fully enclosed within a building, all new garbage
refuse containers in a commercial, industrial or business area shall be
stored in a fully enclosed and screened structure, concealed from the view of
any public street or abutting property owner and consisting of the following:



   (A)   Refuse containers shall be enclosed.  One side shall provide
an access gate to allow for trash removal. Additionally, a self-closing,
three-foot access gate or equivalent shall be provided for manual access to
the refuse container.



   (B)   The enclosure shall be solid faced and constructed of wood,
masonry or similar materials that are aesthetically pleasant in appearance. 
Chain link or similar types fencing shall not be used for this enclosure. 
Enclosure materials should be constructed of the same material as the main
building structure.



   (C)   Any masonry structure built or used for the screening of
dumpsters or trash containers shall be constructed on a concrete base.



   (D)   Any fence or wall required under this section shall have a
height no less than five feet, and no more than six feet.



   (E)   A building permit is required to construct any enclosure. The
village shall review and approve the plans and issue a permit for the
construction of this enclosure.



   (F)   It is useful, necessary, and advantageous for the village to
set forth hours from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. for the collection of refuse in
the industrial, commercial and business districts by private firms that have
contracted with the business owners for such services.



(Ord. 1505, passed 4-3-95; Am. Ord. 2264, passed 1-23-06)



YARD WASTE PROGRAM



§ 50.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PERSON.  Includes individuals, partnerships and corporations.



   YARD WASTE.  Includes grass, grass clippings, shrubbery, bush and
shrub branches, leaves, trees, wood chips, plants, bushes, tree limbs or
branches and any and all types of other similar materials or parts thereof.



(Ord. 1300, passed 6-18-90)



§ 50.16  MIXING OF YARD WASTE PROHIBITED.



   No person shall mix yard waste that is intended for municipal
collection or disposal at a landfill with any other waste.



(Ord. 1300, passed 6-18-90)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.17  PACKING OF YARD WASTE.



   No person shall put yard waste into any container intended for
municipal collection or disposal at a landfill unless said container is a
biodegradable paper bag authorized and approved by the village that bears the
official village of Frankfort “Frankfort Yard Waste Program” label.



(Ord. 1300, passed 6-18-90)  Penalty, see § 50.99



2007 S-13



§ 50.18  SALE AND DISTRIBUTION OF OFFICIAL YARD WASTE BAGS.



   Official yard waste bags shall be made available for public purchase at
the village hall in addition to other locations as from time to time
authorized by the Village Administrator.  These bags shall be sold under the
authority and at a cost to be determined by the village.  The cost shall
include the cost for the bag as well as collection and disposal of the yard
waste.



(Ord. 1300, passed 6-18-90)



RECYCLING PROGRAM



§ 50.25  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   RECYCLABLES.  Material having an economic value in the secondary
materials market, acceptable for collection by the village's recycling
contractor, which currently includes: steel, tin and aluminum beverage cans;
amber, green and clear glass containers; PET #1 and #2 plastic containers;
newsprint and such other materials which from time to time [may] be
designated by the President and Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 1371, passed 3-16-92)



§ 50.26  RECYCLING PROGRAM.



   There is hereby established a “residential recycling program”
requiring residents of the village to separate recyclables from garbage and
rubbish.



(Ord. 1371, passed 3-16-92)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.27  SEPARATION OF RECYCLABLES; PLACEMENT AND TIME FOR RECYCLABLES
REMOVAL.



   (A)   All products the village designates as recyclable shall be
separated from all other refuse. Occupants of single-family and duplex units
shall place recyclables in village-approved and issued containers, which
shall be collected by the village's curbside recycling contractor.



   (B)   Recyclables shall be placed in recycling containers at
curbside at times designated by the village of Frankfort. Occupants of
multi-family residential units shall transport or cause to be transported
such recyclable materials to designated drop-off sites.



(Ord. 1371, passed 3-16-92)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.28  MANDATORY RECYCLING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place for collection, removal or
disposal, any residential or household solid waste, refuse or garbage which
also contains recyclable materials.



(Ord. 1371, passed 3-16-92)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.29  RECYCLING CONTAINERS.



   (A)   The village shall provide each residential single-family and
duplex units with one curbside recycling container for their use. The
container shall remain the property of the village and shall be returned to
the village when a person no longer resides in the corporate limits of the
village. To return a recycling container, the resident is responsible to
contact the village offices and the container will be collected by the
village.



   (B)   In the event that a container is lost or stolen it shall be
replaced with a container provided by the village which shall also remain the
property of the village.  The cost of such replacement container shall be
the responsibility of the resident and such cost shall be added to the next
appropriate invoice for full payment.



   (C)   Recyclable materials shall only be placed in village-approved
recycling containers, no other containers shall be used or permitted.
Additional containers for recycling use may be purchased from the village at
a cost equal to the cost of purchase as paid by the village.



(Ord. 1371, passed 3-16-92)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.30  RECYCLING SERVICE CHARGES.



   The resident/occupant for each single family, duplex family,
multi-family, designated commercial business, or any other customer to which
service is rendered by the Village of Frankfort's scavenger services
agreement shall pay the residential collection rate per month as established
in the village's scavenger services agreement for the collection of
recyclables (hereafter referred to as "recycling charge"). The recycling
charge shall be billed to the resident/occupant with their monthly village
utility bill and shall be due and payable concurrent with said utility bill.
It shall be a violation to this section not to pay the recycling charge when
due. In addition to any other fine or penalty, which may be imposed for
nonpayment of the recycling charge, interest shall accrue on the unpaid
balance at the rate of 10% per annum.



(Ord. 1371, passed 3-16-92; Am. Ord. 3094, passed 6-19-17)



§ 50.31  COLLECTION BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS.



   From time of placement of recyclables at the curb for collection in
accordance with the terms hereof, the recyclables shall be and become the
property of the village's curbside recycling contractor. It shall be a
violation of this section for any person not authorized by the village to
collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such recyclable
items. Any and each such collection in violation hereof from one or more
locations shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable
hereinafter provided.



(Ord. 1371, passed 3-16-92)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.32  UNATTENDED DONATION/COLLECTION BOXES.



   (A)   General provisions.



      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to promote
the health, safety, and/or welfare of the public by providing minimum
blight-related performance standards for the operation of unattended
donation/collection boxes (UDCBs). This includes establishing criteria to
ensure that material is not allowed to accumulate outside of the UDCBs, the
UDCBs remain free of blight, UDCBs are maintained in sanitary conditions, and
residents and/or users are fully informed of those who operate the UDCBs so
that they can be contacted if there are any blight-related questions or
concerns.



      (2)   Conflicting provisions. Where a conflict exists between
the regulations or requirements in this chapter and applicable regulations or
requirements contained in other chapters of the Village of Frankfort Code of
Ordinances, the applicable regulations or requirements of this chapter shall
prevail.



      (3)   Violation. Failure to comply with any of the provisions
of this chapter is declared to be prima facie evidence of an existing
violation, a continuing blight and a declared public nuisance and shall be
abated by the Building Official in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Any person in violation will be subject to administrative penalties,
citations, civil action and/or other legal remedies.



      (4)   Responsibility. The parcel owner and the UDCB Operator
("Operator") have joint and several liability for blight-related conditions
and/or compliance with this chapter, including fees, administrative
citations, civil actions, and/or legal remedies relating to a UDCB. The
parcel owner remains liable for any violation of duties imposed by this
chapter even if the parcel owner has, by agreement, imposed on the operator
the duty of complying with the provisions of this chapter.



      (5)   Definitions. The following terms shall be defined as
written unless context indicates or requires a different meaning:



         ACCESSORY ACTIVITY. An activity that is incidental to, and
customarily associated with, a specified principal activity.



         AGENT. A person who is authorized by the parcel owner to
act on their behalf in filling out all required forms of the parcel pursuant
to this chapter. A person who is given general authorization to act on the
behalf of a parcel owner for various activities and transactions in regards
to a property may be considered an agent.



         BLIGHT or NUISANCE. A UDCB that is dilapidated, physically
deteriorating, unsafe, unsanitary, marked with graffiti or generally unkempt
as to constitute a threat or nuisance to the public.



         BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Building Inspector and his or her
successor in title and his or her designees.



         DONATED/COLLECTED MATERIAL. Salvageable personal property,
such as clothing, shoes, books and household items that are collected for
periodic transport off-site for processing or redistribution or both.



         PARCEL OWNER or PROPERTY OWNER. The owner of real property
on which a UDCB is or is proposed to be placed.



         PRINCIPAL ACTIVITY. An activity that fulfills a primary
function of an establishment, institution, household, or other entity.



         PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A main building that is occupied a
principal activity.



         UDCB OPERATOR or OPERATOR. A person or entity who utilizes
or maintains a UDCB to solicit donations/collections of salvageable personal
property.



         UDCB PERMIT. The Village of Frankfort's annually renewable
permit required to place, operate, maintain, or allow a UDCB within the
Frankfort village limits.



         UNATTENDED DONATION/COLLECTION BOXES or UDCBs. Unstaffed
drop-off boxes, containers, receptacles, or similar facility that accepts
textiles, shoes, books and/or other salvageable personal property items to be
used by the operator for distribution, resale, or recycling, but shall not
include furniture or other items too large to be contained within the UDCB.
This term does not include any collection bin that is owned by the property
owner and is used in connection with, or is an accessory to, the principal
business of that property.



         UNPERMITTED UDCB. A UDCB established either without a UDCB
permit or with a UDCB permit that was issued in error or on the basis of
incorrect or incomplete information supplied, or in violation of any law,
ordinance, rule, or regulation.



         VILLAGE. The Village of Frankfort, Will County, Illinois.



   (B)   UDCB permit requirement and process.



      (1)   Permit required for UDCBs.



         (a)   It is unlawful to place, operate, maintain or
allow a UDCB on any real property unless the parcel owner/agent and/or
operator first obtain an UDCB permit from the village. A separate UDCB permit
is required for each UDCB.



         (b)   The UDCB permit applicant shall be the UDCB
operator and the permit may not be transferred, conveyed or otherwise
assigned to another person or entity.



         (c)   Decisions regarding UDCB permit applications shall
be made by the building official and the building official shall be
considered the investigating official acting for the Village Administrator.



      (2)   Application requirements. The UDCB permit application
shall be made on a form provided by the Village. All applications shall be
valid for one calendar year, filed with the Building Department and shall
include:



         (a)   A signed agreement as provided by the village
stating that the operator will abide by all the processes and requirements
described in this chapter and an expedited code enforcement process;



         (b)   A non-refundable application fee in the amount of
$100;



         (c)   A signed authorization from the parcel owner/agent
to allow placement of the UDCB on a form provided by the village;



         (d)   A signed acknowledgment of responsibility from the
parcel owner/agent and the operator for joint and several liability for
violations of conditions or regulations, and/or blight relating to the UDCB
on a form provided by the village;



         (e)   Proof of general liability insurance of at least
$1,000,000 covering the applicant's UDCB and naming the village and the
parcel owner as additional insureds;



         (f)   For nonprofit operators, evidence that the
nonprofit has been registered as a non-profit organization with the State of
Illinois;



         (g)   The name, address, email, website (if available)
and telephone number of the UDCB operator and parcel owner, including 24-hour
contact information;



         (h)   A vicinity map showing:



            1.   The proposed location of the UDCB; and



            2.   The distance between the site and all
existing UDCBs within 1,000 feet of the proposed UDCB location;



         (i)   Photographs of the location and adjacent
properties;



         (j)   A site plan containing:



            1.   Location and dimensions of all parcel
boundaries;



            2.   Location of all buildings;



            3.   Proposed UDCB location;



            4.   Distance between the proposed UDCB and parcel
lines buildings; and



            5.   Location and dimension of all existing and
proposed driveways, garages, carports, parking spaces, maneuvering aisles,
pavement and striping/marking;



         (k)   Elevations showing the appearance, materials, and
dimensions of the UDCB, including the information required in this chapter to
be placed on the UDCB and notice sign;



         (l)   A description and/or diagram of the proposed
locking mechanism of the UDCB;



         (m)   A maintenance plan (including graffiti removal,
pick-up schedule, and litter and trash removal on and around the UDCB) that
is sufficient to prevent/eliminate blight-related conditions; and



      (3)   UDCB permit expiration and renewal.



         (a)   Unless renewed as described in division (b),
below, each UDCB permit shall expire and become null and void on December 31
of the year of issuance.



         (b)   A UDCB operator may apply for a permit for the
subsequent calendar year by submitting an application to the Building
Department by December 1 of the current year. The UDCB permit renewal
application shall be made on a form provided by the village. All applications
shall be filed with the Building Department and shall include:



            1.   A signed agreement stating that the operator
will abide by all the processes and requirements described in this chapter
and an expedited code enforcement process;



            2.   Photographs of the existing UDCB;



            3.   A non-refundable$100 application fee;



            4.   A signed authorization from the parcel
owner/agent to allow placement of the UDCB;



            5.   A signed acknowledgment of responsibility
from the parcel owner/agent and the operator for joint and several liability
for violations of conditions or regulations, and/or blight relating to the
UDCB;



            6.   Proof of general liability insurance of at
least $1,000,000 covering the applicant's UDCB and naming the Village of
Frankfort and the parcel owner as additional insureds;



            7.   For nonprofit operators, evidence that the
nonprofit has been registered as a nonprofit organization with the state;



            8.   Name and telephone number of any entity that
may share or profit from items collected via the UDCB;



            9.   The name, address, email, website (if
available) and telephone number of the UDCB operator and parcel owner,
including 24-hour contact information; and



            10.   Any other reasonable information regarding
time, place, and manner of UDCB operation, placement, and/or maintenance that
the building official requires to evaluate the proposal consistent with the
requirements of this chapter.



         (c)   The Building Official shall either approve or deny
the renewal of a UDCB permit within 30 calendar days of receipt of the
complete renewal application and payment of the renewal fee.



         (d)   The Building Official shall approve the renewal of
a UDCB permit if he or she finds that no circumstances existed during the
term of the UDCB permit or existed at any time during the review of the
application for renewal that are inconsistent with any criteria required for
approval of a new UDCB permit as specified in § 50.32(B)(4) or that would
justify the revocation of the UDCB Permit as specified in § 50.32(D)(1)(g).



         (e)   See § 50.32(B)(6) for the appeal and petition
processes for UDCB permit decisions, including decisions regarding renewal.



      (4)   Requirements for the approval and renewal of a UDCB
permit. The Building Official shall not issue a UDCB permit or renewal unless
each of the following is true:



         (a)   The applicant has submitted a complete and
accurate application accompanied by the applicable fee;



         (b)   There are no open citations, unpaid fines or
unresolved violations or complaints related to any UDCB managed by the
proposed operator;



         (c)   Any verified blight on the subject property has
been abated and any case of a complaint to the village regarding blighted
conditions on the subject property has been closed; and



         (d)   The proposal is consistent with all the
requirements of this chapter.



         (e)   For renewals, the site does not have a history of
being an attractive nuisance even if incidents of blight were abated. For the
purpose of this division, “history of attractive nuisance” means the UDCB
received three administrative citations in the previous 12 months.



      (5)   Time limit for final decision. The Building Official
shall provide a written decision regarding the placement of a UDCB within 30
calendar days of the submission of a complete application for a UDCB permit.



      (6)   Appeal and petition processes.



         (a)   1.   Within ten calendar days after the date of
a decision by the Building Official on an application for a UDCB permit or a
renewal of such, an appeal from said decision must be filed by the applicant
or any other interested party. The appeal shall be submitted to Building
Department at Village Hall. In the event the last date of appeal falls on a
weekend or holiday when village offices are closed, the next date such
offices are open for business shall be the last date of appeal. Such appeal
shall be made on a form prescribed by the village and shall be filed with the
Building Department. The appeal application must be complete and shall state
specifically wherein it is claimed there was an error or abuse of discretion
by the Building Official or wherein his or her decision is not supported by
the evidence in the record. The appeal itself must raise each and every issue
that is contested, along with all the arguments and evidence in the record,
which supports the basis of the appeal.



            2.   If a hearing is held on the appeal, then
during such hearing, the appellant will be limited to issues and/or evidence
previously raised in the appeal itself. The appellant shall not be permitted
to present any other issues and/or oral, written and/or documentary evidence
during the appeal process.



            3.   In considering the appeal, the Village
Administrator shall determine whether the proposal conforms to the
requirements of this chapter, and may grant or deny a permit or require such
changes in the proposed use or impose such reasonable conditions of approval
as are in its judgment necessary to ensure conformity to said criteria. The
written decision of the Village Administrator shall be final and shall be
made within 60 calendar days of the submission of the appeal.



         (b)   1.   The applicant seeking placement of a UDCB
which would be affected by this chapter and who contends that the ordinance
as applied to him or her would be unlawful under and/or conflict with
Federal, state, or local law or regulation, must submit a petition to the
Village Administrator requesting relief from the ordinance. Petitions must be
on the appeal form provided by the village and submitted to Village Hall. The
petition shall identify the name and address of the applicant and property
owner, the affected application number, and shall state specifically and
completely how the ordinance as applied to him or her would be unlawful under
and/or in conflict with Federal, state, or local law or regulation. Failure
to raise each and every issue that is contested in the petition and provide
appropriate supporting evidence will be grounds to deny the petition.



            2.   If a hearing is held on the petition, then
during such hearing, the petitioner will be limited to issues and/or evidence
previously raised in the petition itself. The petitioner shall not be
permitted to present any other issues and/or oral, written and/or documentary
evidence during the petition process.



            3.   Within 60 calendar days of receipt of the
completed petition, the Village Administrator, or designee, shall mail to the
applicant a written determination accepting or rejecting the petition. The
written decision of the Village Administrator is final. The Village
Administrator will utilize reasonable time, place and manner criteria to
determine if the petition should be granted or denied consistent with this
chapter. If the petition is granted, the village may impose reasonable time,
place and manner-related conditions on the UDCB consistent with this chapter.



   (C)   Standards and requirements.



      (1)   Location. No more than one UDCB is permitted per parcel.



         (a)   UDCB's placed on separate, adjacent parcels, must
be placed at least 500 feet away from the nearest UDCB.



         (b)   UDCBs are only allowed to be located in the
following zones, which are designated in the zoning maps described in the
Village of Frankfort Zoning Ordinance:



            1.   B-1;



            2.   B-2; and



            3.   B-3.



         (c)   No UDCBs are permitted in any (AG), (E-R), (R) or
(H) zones unless placed on a governmentally owned or tax exempt property.



         (d)   A UDCB is only permitted on a lot that also
contains a principal building that contains at least one operating business.



         (e)   UDCBs will be placed on the parcel in a location
where normal deliveries are received.



         (f)   UDCBs are prohibited within any of the following
locations:



            1.   The public right-of-way;



            2.   Twenty-five feet from any property line; or



            3.   Landscaping.



         (g)   UDCBs cannot block or impede access to:



            1.   Parking or driveways;



            2.   Pedestrian routes;



            3.   Emergency vehicle routes;



            4.   Building ingress and egress;



            5.   Required handicapped accessibility routes;



            6.   Required easements;



            7.   Trash enclosure areas or access to trash
bins/trash enclosures; or



            8.   Lot ingress and egress.



         (h)   UDCBs cannot impede the functioning of exhaust,
ventilation, or fire extinguishing



systems.



         (i)   The donation/collection area must be visible from
the principal building and be no more than ten feet from a continually
operating light source.



      (2)   Physical attributes.



         (a)   UDCBs shall:



            1.   Be fabricated of steel;



            2.   Be of the same color scheme as the adjacent
parcel building;



            3.   Be placed on ground that is paved with cement
or asphalt;



            4.   Have a collection opening that has a
tamper-resistant locking mechanism;



            5.   Not be more than 84 inches high, 72 inches
wide and 72 inches deep;



            6.   Not be electrically or hydraulically powered
or otherwise mechanized;



            7.   Not include any extra "attention getting"
devices or products prohibited in the Village of Frankfort sign ordinance;



            8.   Not be a fixture of the site or considered an
improvement to real property; and



            9.   Have the following information conspicuously
displayed on at least two-inch type visible from the front on the UDCB:



               A.   The name, address, 24-hour telephone
number, and, if available, the internet web address, and email address of the
owner and operator of the UDCB and the parcel owner/agent;



               B.   Address and parcel number of the site;



               C.   Instructions on the process to register
a complaint regarding the UDCB to the village code enforcement division, in
substantially the following form: “To register a complaint regarding this
UDBC, contact the Village of Frankfort at (815)469-2177 or
http://www.villageoffrankfort.com/contact with the permit number and location
of the UDCB detailing the complaint.”



               D.   The type of material that may be
deposited;



               E.   A notice stating that no material shall
be left outside the UDCB;



               F.   The pickup schedule for the UDCB;



               G.   A village provided sticker that
identifies the box as being properly permitted by the village;



               H.   If the UDCB is owned by a nonprofit
organization:



                  i.   A statement describing the
charitable cause that will benefit from the donations;



                  ii.   The Federal tax identification
number of the nonprofit organization operating the UDCB; and



                  iii.   The statement “This
collection box is owned and operated by a nonprofit organization.”



               I.   If the UDCB is owned by a for-profit
entity:



                  i.   “This donation is not tax
deductible;” and



                  ii.   “This collection box is owned
and operated by a for-profit organization.”



         (b)   The parcel containing the UDCB shall display an
additional standalone sign with text in at least two-inch typeface stating
that no material shall be left outside the UDCB. This sign shall be installed
at a visually conspicuous location within a radius of 20 feet from the UDCB.



      (3)   Maintenance.



         (a)   No blight shall be within 20 feet of the UDCB
including, but not limited to donation/collection overflow, litter, debris,
and dumped material.



         (b)   UDCBs shall be maintained and in good working
order. Items to be repaired, removed, and/or abated include, but are not
limited to graffiti, removed or damaged signs and notifications, peeling
paint, rust, and broken collection operating mechanisms.



         (c)   UDCBs shall be serviced not less than weekly
between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays and 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on
weekends. This servicing includes the removal of donated/collected material
and abatement of the blight described this section.



         (d)   The operator shall maintain an active email
address and a 24-hour telephone service with recording capability for the
public to register complaints.



         (e)   UDCBs cannot be used for the collection of solid
waste and/or any hazardous materials.



      (4)   Liability. Applicants and/or owner(s) Agent shall
maintain a minimum general liability insurance of $2,000,000 for the duration
of the operation of a UDCB at each site, to cover any claims or losses due to
the placement, operation, or maintenance of the UDCB and naming the Village
of Frankfort as additional insured.



   (D)   Code enforcement.



      (1)   Compliance process.



         (a)   Whenever the Building Official determines that a
UDCB with a valid permit does not conform to any requirement in this chapter
he/she shall promptly notify the parcel owner/agent and UDCB operator through
electronic mail of the violation. The violation must be abated and proof of
such submitted to the village within three business days after receipt of
such notification.



         (b)   If an unpermitted UDCB is not within a permissible
geographic area according to division (C)(1), then both the UDCB and any
blight within 20 feet of the UDCB shall be removed within 72 hours after the
parcel owner/agent and UDCB operator is notified of the violation.



         (c)   If an unpermitted UDCB is within a permissible
geographic area according to division (C)(1) then any blight within 20 feet
of the site shall be removed and the parcel owner/agent and/or operator shall
either:



            1.   Apply for all UDCB permits required by this
chapter; or



            2.   Remove the UDCB. This requirement shall be
met within 72 hours after the parcel owner/agent and/or UDCB operators are
notified of the violation.



         (d)   Each day, after the three business day cure
period, that a violation of a requirement of this chapter is not abated
constitutes a new and separate offense.



         (e)   The operation or maintenance of an unpermitted
UDCB may be abated or summarily abated by the village in any manner by this
code or otherwise by law for the abatement of public nuisances. All expenses
incurred by the village in connection with any action to abate a public
nuisance will be chargeable to the persons creating, causing, committing, or
maintaining the public nuisance and is an express condition of the permit.



         (f)   The village shall issue administration citations
against a parcel owner and/or operator who fails to timely resolve a
violation or verified compliance is not sent to the village showing the
resolution of the violation relating to a UDCB after notice. The village
shall issue administrative citations as follows:



            1.   Not more than $150 for the first citation
after the 72-hour abatement period;



            2.   Not more than $250 for the second citation
after the 72-hour abatement period; and



            3.   Not more than $500 for the third and each
subsequent citation after the 72-hour abatement period.



         (g)   The daily administrative citations described in
division (B)(1) shall continue until either the violation is abated or the
UDCB is removed. Removal of the UDCB shall be at the expense of the parcel
owner and/or operator. Any UDCBs removed shall also have any of its UDCB
permits revoked.



         (h)   The property owner and operator are jointly and
severally liable and responsible for all fees, administrative citations, and
compliance with the regulations.



         (i)   A party aggrieved by a final administrative
decision of the village, after an appeal has been made pursuant to division
(B)(6), may seek judicial review of the administrative decision pursuant to
the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure within the time frame pursuant to those
code sections.



         (j)   All notices for unpermitted UDCBs shall be in
writing and personally delivered to the parcel owner/agent and UDCB operator
or by depositing such notice in the United States mail, postage paid, and
addressed to the parcel owner/agent at the owner(s) last known address as it
appears on the last Will County equalized assessments roll, as well as placed
on the UDCB itself. If the village cannot reasonably determine the name
and/or address of the unpermitted UDCB operators, placing the written notice
on the UDCB itself constitutes sufficient notice. All notices regarding
permitted UDCBs shall be through electronic mail.



         (k)   Administrative citations established in this
chapter are in addition to any other administrative or legal remedy which may
be pursued by the village to address violations identified in this chapter.



   (E)   Noticing procedure for removal. Notice required for removal.



      (1)   Any UDCB scheduled to be removed by either the village
or the operator shall clearly display a notice on the UDCB with at least
four-inch type visible from the front on the UDCB that states the following
text in capital letters: “THIS BOX WILL BE REMOVED BY” followed by the
date the UDCB is scheduled for removal. The entity who is removing the UDCB
is responsible for placement of the notice on the UDCB.



      (2)   For UDCBs required to be removed by the village due to
an abatement order, the notice shall be posted immediately after the village
notifies the operator and/or parcel owner that the facility is required to be
removed.



      (3)   Notice that a UDCB will be removed by the owner or
operator shall be posted at least 14 calendar days prior to the removal of
the facility.



(Ord. 3086, passed 4-24-17)  Penalty, see § 50.99



RATES AND CHARGES



§ 50.40  SOLID WASTE REMOVAL SERVICE CHARGES.



   The resident/occupant for each single family; duplex family;
multi-family; designated commercial business; or any other customer to which
service is rendered by the village's scavenger services agreement shall pay
the residential collection rate per month as established in the village's
scavenger services agreement for collection and disposal of solid waste
(hereafter referred to as “garbage charge”). The garbage charge shall be
billed to the resident/occupant with their monthly village utility bill and
shall be due and payable concurrent with said utility bill. It shall be a
violation to this section not to pay the garbage charge when due. In addition
to any other fine or penalty, which may be imposed for nonpayment of the
recycling charge, interest shall accrue on the unpaid balance at the rate of
10% per annum.



(Ord. 1382, passed 6-15-92; Am. Ord. 3094, passed 6-19-17)  Penalty, see §
50.99



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§ 50.01
through 50.06, or piling, placing, or sweeping refuse, as above defined, upon
any sidewalks, parkway, street, alley, or curb contrary to the manner above
described shall be fined not less than $20 nor more than $750 for each
offense.



(Ord. 869, passed 7-15-74)



   (B)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of §§ 50.15
through 50.18 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750.



(Ord. 1300, passed 6-18-90)



   (C)   (1)   Any person convicted of a violation of §§ 50.25
through 50.31 is guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined not less than
$50 nor more than $750.



      (2)   The penalties prescribed in this division are in
addition to, and not in lieu of, any other rights, remedies and penalties
which the Village may otherwise seek to impose and may be available at law or
in equity.



(Ord. 1371, passed 3-16-92)



   (D)   Any person convicted of a violation of § 50.40 is guilty of a
petty offense and shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750, with
each day such offense occurs constituting a separate offense.  This penalty
is not in lieu of any other rights, remedies and penalties which the village
may otherwise seek to impose and may be available at law, or in equity.



(Ord. 1382, passed 6-15-92)



(Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02)



   (E)   In addition to the suspension or revocation provided for
herein, any business or person found to have violated any provision of §
50.32 shall be fined not less than $250 for the first offense and not less
than $500 for each subsequent offense. 



(Ord. 2697, passed 2-22-11)



CHAPTER 51:  WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS



Section



Waterworks System



   51.001   Connection to metered water service required



   51.002   Responsibilities of property owners



   51.003   Protection of Waterworks from damage



   51.004   Requirements for utilizing the Village Public Utility System



Building Water Mains and Connections



   51.015   Permit required for uncovering public water main



   51.016   Barricades and lights to guard excavations; restoration of
property



   51.017   Connection to Water System required before issuance of
building permit



   51.018   Construction, operation and maintenance of private wells



   51.019   Water meter required



Waterworks System Administration and Charges



   51.025   Powers and authority of inspectors



   51.026   Waterworks service charges



   51.027   Billing



   51.028   Termination of service



   51.029   Notice; lien for delinquent bills



   51.030   Appeals



   51.031   Revenues



   51.032   Accounts



   51.033   Violations



Water Shortages



   51.040   Restrictions on water use



   51.041   Notice



   51.042   Exceptions



   51.043   Enforcement



Cross-Connection Control



   51.050   Installation of approved backflow prevention device



   51.051   Private, auxiliary or emergency water supplies; method of
connection and use to be approved



   51.052   Surveys and investigations



   51.053   Right of entry



   51.054   Discontinuance of water service to property in violation



   51.055   Responsibility for cost of clean-up after contamination



   51.056   Regulations incorporated by reference



Sewer System



   51.060   Definitions



   51.061   Use of public sewer required



   51.062   Compliance with federal state and local standards



   51.063   Protection of sewage works from damage



   51.064   Depositing of objectionable waste prohibited



   51.065   Unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet



   51.066   Discharge of waste into sewer constructed as part of U.S.
Route 45 improvement prohibited



   51.067   Discharge of waste into sewer constructed as part of U.S.
Route 30 improvements prohibited.



Private Sewage System



   51.075   Private sewage disposal



   51.076   Connection required to public sewer system when available



Building Sewers and Connections



   51.085   Property owners responsible for connections



   51.086   Permit required for uncovering public sewer



   51.087   Barricades and lights to guard excavations



   51.088   Sewer connection not to overload sewer system



   51.089   Building sewer required; exceptions



   51.090   Construction of building sewer to conform to plumbing code
and other applicable rules and regulations



   51.091   Requirements for sewer connections



   51.092   Applicant for permit required to notify when connection
ready for inspection



Use of Public Sewers



   51.100   Discharge of unpolluted drainage water into sanitary sewer
prohibited



   51.101   Prohibited discharges



   51.102   Village to remedy prohibited discharge



   51.103   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors



   51.104   Preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities



   51.105   Control manhole; measurements, tests and analyses



   51.106   Proof of compliance required



   51.107   Special agreements for treatment permitted



Sewer System Administration and Charges



   51.115   Powers and authority of inspectors



   51.116   Wastewater service charges



   51.117   Measurement of flow



   51.118   Billing



   51.119   Termination of service



   51.120   Notice and foreclosure of lien for delinquent bills



   51.121   Appeals



   51.122   Revenues



   51.123   Accounts



   51.124   Access to records



   51.125   Violations



Central Service Charge



   51.135   Tap-on and connection fees



   51.136   Determination of fees



   51.137   Payment



   51.138   Sources and uses of funds



 



   51.999   Penalty



WATERWORKS SYSTEM



§ 51.001  CONNECTION TO METERED WATER SERVICE REQUIRED.



   Every structure which requires the use of water and persons served by
the Village Water Supply System shall be separately and independently
connected by an approved metered water service lateral to the Village
Waterworks where the Waterworks and its water system adjoins the parcel of
land on which the structure is located or is adjacent to the street or alley
which adjoins the lot or parcel of land on which the structure is located or
the lot or parcel is within 1,000 feet of the Waterworks.



(Ord. 1311, passed 7-16-90)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.002  RESPONSIBILITIES OF PROPERTY OWNERS.



   (A)   Property owners shall be responsible for the repair,
maintenance, and cost thereof for any water service line greater than
one-inch diameter from their building to the point of connection of the
public water main.



   (B)   Property owners shall be responsible for making the connection
to the public water main from their building.



(Ord. 1311, passed 7-16-90; Am. Ord. 1570, passed 5-6-96 )  Penalty, see §
51.999



§ 51.003  PROTECTION OF WATERWORKS FROM DAMAGE.



   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is a part of the Waterworks. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct.



(Ord. 1311, passed 7-16-90)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.004  REQUIREMENTS FOR UTILIZING THE VILLAGE PUBLIC UTILITY SYSTEM.



   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (B) and (C) herein, no
property shall interconnect, tap on to or in any manner utilize the Village
Utility System, unless the property is annexed to and within the corporate
limits of the village.



   (B)   The Board of Trustees may allow property outside of the
corporate limits of the village to interconnect, tap and otherwise utilize
the Village Utility System if each of the following conditions are met:



      (1)   The property cannot be annexed to the village because it
is not, nor with reasonable efforts could it be, contiguous to the village;



      (2)   The property owner(s), elector(s) and all other
necessary parties have executed an irrevocable petition to annex the property
to the village, which runs with the land and binds all successors;
specifically allows the village to annex the property without further notice,
authorization or petition upon it becoming contiguous to the village; and
this petition is recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds where
the property is located;



      (3)   The village determines it is in the best interest of the
village to annex the property upon it becoming contiguous;



      (4)   The property owners have entered into a pre-annexation
agreement acceptable to and approved by the corporate authorities of the
village, which, among other things, provides the property is subject to and
will be planned, designed, zoned, developed and constructed under, in
conformance and subject to all ordinances, codes, requirements, standards and
regulations of the village;



      (5)   The Village Utility System has capacity and facilities
sufficient to serve the property;



      (6)   The property owner has paid the village all applicable
fees and costs.



   (C)   Property owned by governmental entities and/or taxing bodies
is exempt from the provisions of this section.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall require the village to improve,
expand or extend its Utility System to serve any property.



   (E)   Property covered by intergovernmental agreement between the
village and other municipalities is exempt from the provisions of this
section.



   (F)   Recognizing the Village Utility System currently serves
property located outside of the village's corporate limits, this section
shall not apply to those unincorporated properties currently interconnected
to and utilizing the Village Utility System so long as the existing zoning
and current actual use of the those properties as of the effective date of
this section is not amended or in any way altered or changed.



   (G)   The owner of the property has the burden to establish by a
preponderance of the evidence the property's zoning and use as of the
effective date of this section.



(Ord. 2570, passed 3-16-09)



BUILDING WATER MAINS AND CONNECTIONS



§ 51.015  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR UNCOVERING PUBLIC WATER MAIN.



   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public water main or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the village.



(Ord. 1311, passed 7-16-90)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.016  BARRICADES AND LIGHTS TO GUARD EXCAVATIONS; RESTORATION OF
PROPERTY.



   (A)   All excavations for building water line installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard.



   (B)   Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the village.



(Ord. 1311, passed 7-16-90)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.017  CONNECTION TO WATER SYSTEM REQUIRED BEFORE ISSUANCE OF BUILDING
PERMIT.



   (A)   The village shall not issue any building permit for any lot or
parcel of land situated within the corporate limits of the village where
Waterworks is available as provided in § 51.01, unless the building plans
and specifications show connection to the Waterworks in compliance with §§
51.001 through 51.033.



   (B)   The applicant for the building water permit shall notify the
village when the building water line is ready for inspection and connection
to the public water main.  The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the Director of Public Works or his representative.



(Ord. 1311, passed 7-16-90)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.018  CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE WELLS.



   (A)   Permitted non-potable sprinkling wells.  Subject to
regulations from time to time adopted by the village, private non-potable
sprinkling wells may be drilled and operated on and for the exclusive use
upon a single zoning lot or tract under unified ownership for the exclusive
purpose of providing non- potable sprinkling water for landscape vegetation
such as grass, trees, shrubs and flowers planted and growing upon a lot or
parcel, which landscape is not for sale or resale.



   (B)   Regulations. The village, from time to time, may adopt, amend
and promulgate regulations governing the drilling, use and operation of the
sprinkling wells permitted under this section which may include, among other
things, permit fees, applications, well standards, water use restrictions
and/or prohibitions, revocation or denial of permits, inspections and
abandonment. Concurrent with this section and incorporated in this section,
the village adopts and promulgates the Regulations for Private Water Wells,
which are available for public inspection at the office of the Village Clerk.
Any revisions to the regulations are incorporated in this section.



   (C)   Existing wells.  Any existing well which was constructed
pursuant to applicable laws and regulations prior to the effective date of
this section may continue to exist for the purposes authorized in this
section, if such well, in every respect, conforms to the terms of this
section and other applicable ordinances, statutes and regulations. Existing
wells shall be subject to an initial and annual inspection.



(Ord. 1396, passed 10-19-92; Am. Ord. 1506, passed 4-3-95)  Penalty, see §
151.999



§ 51.019  WATER METER REQUIRED.



   (A)   In order to measure the volume of water used by the customers
on the Village Waterworks System, each user shall be required to provide a
span in the water line immediately as it enters the structure to provide
space for the village to install a water meter. This inside water meter shall
be deemed the master meter for all billing purposes.



   (B)   (1)   To efficiently read the water meters for billing
purposes, each user shall be required to provide a ½-inch plastic or conduit
line from the inside meter location to and through the exterior wall at a
location near the area of the gas and/or electric meters for the purpose of
running the remote meter wire. The village shall install an outside radio
read-type meter reading device on each structure prior to occupancy.



      (2)   The cost of the radio read-type meter reading device is
to be paid at the time of building permit issuance and shall be equal to the
cost paid by the village for the actual meter.



   (C)   All existing users of the Village Waterworks System as of May
1, 2000, who do not have an outside radio read-type meter reading device on
their property may, at the discretion of the Utility Department, be required
to have one installed by the village prior to within 120 days written notice
from the village that the outside radio read-type meter device is required.
In such cases, the actual costs associated with the installation of the
outside radio read-type meter reading device, which may require a new meter,
shall be borne entirely by Frankfort Utility.



   (D)   Failure of the users of the Village Waterworks System to have
an outside radio read-type meter reading device installed upon written notice
by the village and in accordance with division (C) of this section, shall
result in a surcharge of $10 per billing period being added to the bill,
until such time as the outside radio read-type meter reading device is
installed.



(Ord. 1311, passed 7-16-90; Am. Ord. 1793, passed 4-3-00)  Penalty, see §
51.999



WATERWORKS ADMINISTRATION AND CHARGES



§ 51.025  POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works and any duly authorized employees
of the village, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, and repair of water meters in accordance with the provisions of
§§ 51.001 through 51.033.



   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties
referred to in division (A), the Director of Public Works or any duly
authorized employees of the village shall observe all safety rules applicable
to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held
harmless for injury or death to the village employees and the village shall
indemnify the company against liability claims and demands for personal
injury or property damage asserted against the company.



   (C)   The Director of Public Works and any duly authorized employees
of the village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all private properties through which the village holds a
duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the
Waterworks lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any,
on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.



(Ord. 1311, passed 7-16-90)



§ 51.026  WATERWORKS SERVICE CHARGES.



 


UTILITY RATE (COMBINED WATER/SEWER RATES) PER 1,000 GALLONS OF WATER USED ON
A MONTHLY BASIS




Existing Rates

 

Proposed Rate Increases



 
 
April 1, 2016
 
May 1, 2016
 
May 1, 2017
 
Sept. 1, 2017
 
May 1, 2018
 
Sept. 1, 2018
 
May 1, 2019
 
May 1, 2020
 
May 1, 2021


Water
 

$3.79

 

$3.90

 

2% increase, plus CPI

 

N/a

 

2% increase, plus CPI

 

N/a

 

2% increase, plus CPI

 

2% increase, plus CPI

 

2% increase, plus CPI



Sewer
 

$4.29

 

$4.85

 

2% increase, plus CPI

 

Increase of $1.59

 

2% increase, plus CPI

 

Increase of $1.59

 

2% increase, plus CPI

 

2% increase, plus CPI

 

2% increase, plus CPI



Notes:


1.   The most recent Illinois Extension Limitation factor (CPI increase)
as determined by the Will County Clerk’s Office per the regulations set
forth in the property tax extension limitation law of division, 5 ILCS Ch.
35, Act 200, §§18-182 and 18-185.



2.   Formula is: Previous Rate + 2% + CPI = New Base Rate.




 



(Ord. 1311, passed 7-16-90; Am. Ord. 1476, passed 9-19-94; Am. Ord. 1570,
passed 5-6-96; Am. Ord. 1680, passed  1-20-98; Am. Ord. 1860, passed 6-4-01;
Am. Ord. 2005, passed 8-4-03; Am. Ord. 2676, passed 10-4-10; Am. Ord. 3011,
passed 2-16-16; Am. Ord. 3093, passed 6-19-17)



§ 51.027  BILLING.



   (A)   Rates or charges for service shall be billed and be payable
monthly. The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the
service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to such
premises and the service is furnished to the premises by the village only
upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the
services are jointly and severally liable therefore to the village.



   (B)   All water bills are due and payable within 20 calendar days
after being sent out. A penalty of 10% shall be added to all bills not paid
on the 21st day.



(Ord. 1311, passed 7-16-90)



§ 51.028  TERMINATION OF WATER SERVICE.



   (A)   If charges for utility services are not paid in full within 45
calendar days from the date of billing or if the utility customer is in
violation of any village regulation or applicable ordinance relating to water
services, the village utility customer shall be notified of the village's
intent to terminate water service prior to any such termination.



   (B)   The pre-termination notice required herein shall contain the
following:



      (1)   The code provision or ordinance being violated and how
such violation can be corrected, if applicable;



      (2)   The number of days the account is in arrears;



      (3)   The balance due, including late charges as of the notice
date;



      (4)   That the utility customer may contact a representative
of the village and request an informal hearing to resolve disputes as to the
correctness of bills, arrears and/or violations of applicable provisions of
this code or other ordinances of the village prior to termination of services.



      (5)   The name, business address and telephone number of the
village representative to contact to schedule such informal hearing.



      (6)   That unless the customer contacts the appropriate
village representative in writing within ten days of receipt of the
pre-termination notice requesting an informal hearing on the correctness of
the utility bill his or her water service will be terminated.



      (7)   The date on or after which termination will be effected.



   (C)   An informal hearing shall be held, upon written request of the
utility customer, within ten days after written request is made to the
Village Administrator or his or her designee, sometimes collectively referred
to as “Village Representative.”  The purpose of the informal hearing is
to allow the utility customer an opportunity to present information regarding
the correctness of that customer's utility bill.



   (D)   If the Village Representative finds merit to the customer's
contentions on the utility bill's correctness, no action shall be take to
terminate service and the user's bill shall be adjusted accordingly by the
Village Representative with such adjusted bill to be paid by the utility
customer within seven days of notification of the Village Representative's
determination.



   (E)   In the event a notice of disconnection hearing is requested by
a residential utility customer wherein the customer established that he or
she or a member of his or her immediate family residing with the customer has
a pre-existing life threatening medical condition certified in writing by a
medical doctor licensed by the state and/or the customer establishes that he
or she is financially unable to pay the utility charge in full or part, the
Village Representative may allow service continuance so long as the utility
customer makes satisfactory financial arrangements to pay past and future
utility charges.



   (F)   If the Village Representative finds no merit to the customer's
contentions on the utility bill's correctness, he or she shall communicate
this decision to the utility customer within ten days after the informal
hearing.  The utility customer shall further be notified that termination of
service will be effected if all utility bills are not paid in full or
violations corrected within seven days after receipt of such decision without
further notice.



   (G)   If service is terminated as herein provided, no utility
service shall be reinstated until such time as all violations are corrected
and/or all outstanding utility bills are paid in full in addition to the
payment of a $45 reinstatement fee.



   (H)   All utility customers shall timely pay the undisputed portion
of the utility bill.



   (I)   For the purposes of this section, any notice regarding
disconnection of service shall be given to the utility customer in the
account name and address indicated in the village utility customer records. 
Any notices required by this section to the utility customer may be given by
certified mail, return receipt requested sufficient postage prepaid or by
leaving a copy of the notice personally with the utility customer, or by
leaving a copy of the notice at the utility customer's billing address with
some person over 13 years of age at such address and mailing a copy of the
notice by U.S. mail addressed to the utility customer at the billing
address.  For the purpose of this section, notice transmitted through United
States mail shall be deemed received by the utility customer on the date
shown by the post office stamp cancellation mark stamped on the envelope.



(Ord. 1311, passed 7-16-90; Am. Ord. 1330, passed 11-5-90)



§ 51.029  NOTICE; LIEN FOR DELINQUENT BILLS.



   (A)   Notice of delinquency.  Whenever a bill for water service
remains unpaid for 60 days for monthly service after it has been rendered,
the Village Attorney shall file with the County Recorder of Deeds a statement
of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of the
premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the village
claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges subsequent to the
period covered by the bill.



   (B)   Foreclosure of lien. Property subject to a lien for unpaid
charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the
sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the
case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by
bill-in equity in the name of the village.  The Village Attorney is hereby
authorized and directed to institute such proceedings in the name of the
village in any court having jurisdiction over such matters against any
property for which the bill has remained unpaid 60 days on a monthly bill
after it has been rendered.



   (C)   The failure of the Village Attorney to record such lien or to
mail such notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not
affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills.



   (D)   If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the
premises and the village has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the
owner of the premises if his address be known to the Treasurer, whenever such
bill remains unpaid for the period of 45 days for a monthly bill.



(Ord. 1311, passed 7-16-90)



§ 51.030  APPEALS.



   The method for computation of rates and service charges established for
user charges in § 51.26 shall be made available to a user within 10 days of
receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement over the method used
or in the computations thereof shall be remedied by the Village Board, at the
earliest regularly scheduled Board meeting, after notification of a formal
written appeal outlining the discrepancies.



(Ord. 1311, passed 7-16-90)



§ 51.031  REVENUES.



   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the Waterworks
System shall be deposited in the Waterworks Account of the Sewer and Water
General Fund.  All such revenues and moneys shall be held by the Village
Treasurer separate and apart from all other funds of the village.  The
Village Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the Waterworks System
and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of such system and
shall deposit the same in the account of the fund designated as the “Sewer
and Water General Fund of the Village of Frankfort.”  The Treasurer shall
administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by statute of
the “Revised Cities and Villages Act,” effective January, 1942.



(Ord. 1311, passed 7-16-90)



§ 51.032  ACCOUNTS.



   The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the Waterworks System,
and at regular annual intervals, shall cause to be made an audit by an
independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the Waterworks System.



(Ord. 1311, passed 7-16-90)



§ 51.033  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§ 51.001
through 51.033 shall become liable to the village by reasons of such
violation.



   (B)   Any person found to be violating any provision of §§ 51.001
through 51.033 shall be served by the village with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing not more than ten days for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The village may
revoke any permit for water as a result of any violation of any provision of
§§ 51.001 through 51.033.



(Ord. 1311, passed 7-16-90)  Penalty, see § 51.999



WATER SHORTAGES



§ 51.040 RESTRICTIONS ON WATER USE.



   The use of water within the village shall be subject to various use
restrictions established by the Village President when it has been determined
by the Village President that an adequate supply of potable water may not be
available within the village for drinking and health-related purposes, fire
protection, and other emergency uses. In making the determination that an
adequate supply of water may not be available within the village, the Village
President shall consider the amount of water consumed within the village, any
increase or decrease in the amount of water consumption, the capacity of the
pumping system used to provide water within the village, and the adequacy of
the village's supply of potable water.



(Ord. 1222, passed 6-20-88)



§ 51.041 NOTICES.



   Notice of such water use restriction shall be disseminated through
reasonable communication media throughout the village including, but not
limited to, posting notice of the same at various public buildings within the
village, including the Village Hall. Such notice shall include a description
of the restriction provisions in effect.



(Ord. 1222, passed 6-20-88)



§ 51.042  EXCEPTIONS.



   The Village President shall have the authority to permit exceptions to
the water use restrictions and to permit water usage in cases when necessary
to maintain health and sanitation, or such other appropriate circumstances as
from time to time arise.



(Ord. 1222, passed 6-20-88)



§ 51.043  ENFORCEMENT.



   All public works employees and police officers of the village shall in
connection with his duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions
of this subchapter.



(Ord. 1222, passed 6-20-88)



CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL



§ 51.050  INSTALLATION OF APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE.



   All plumbing installed within the village shall be installed in
accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.  If in
accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgement of the
Director of Public Works, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary
for the safety of the public water supply system, the Director of Public
Works will give notice to the water customer to install such an approved
device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing
Code, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and local regulations.



(Ord. 1232, passed 9-6-88)



§ 51.051  PRIVATE, AUXILIARY OR EMERGENCY WATER SUPPLIES; METHOD OF
CONNECTION AND USE TO BE APPROVED.



   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public
water supply of the village shall enter the supply or distribution system of
said municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply
and the method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved
by the Director of Public Works, and the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency.



(Ord. 1232, passed 9-6-88)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.052  SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS.



   It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works to cause surveys
and investigations to be made of commercial, industrial, and other properties
served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential
hazards to the public water supply may exist.  Such surveys and
investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated
at least every year, or as often as the Director of Public Works shall deem
necessary.  Records of such surveys shall be maintained and available for
review for a period of at least five years.



(Ord. 1232, passed 9-6-88) 



§ 51.053  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   The approved cross-connection control device inspector shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply or distribution system of the village for the purpose
of verifying the presence or absence of cross-connections, and that the
Director of Public Works or his authorized agent shall have the right to
enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the
public water supply or distribution system of the village for the purpose of
verifying information submitted by the customer regarding the required
cross-connection control inspection.  On demand the owner, lessees or
occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the Director of Public
Works any information which he may request regarding the piping system or
systems or water use on such property.  The refusal of such information,
when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the Director of Public Works,
be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in
this subchapter.



(Ord. 1232, passed 9-6-88)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.054  DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE TO PROPERTY IN VIOLATION.



   The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized and directed to
discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water
service to any property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions
of this subchapter is known to exist, and to take danger of contamination of
the public water supply distribution mains.  Water service to such property
shall not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected
in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter, and until a
reconnection fee of (substantial amount of money) is paid to the village. 
Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the Director
of Public Works is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of
the public water supply system exists.  Such action shall be followed by
written notification of the cause of disconnection.  Immediate disconnection
without notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual or anticipated
contamination or pollution of the public water supply, provided that, in the
reasonable opinion of the Director of Public Works or the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, such action is required to prevent actual or
potential contamination or pollution of the public water supply.  Neither
the Public Water Supply, the Director of Public Works or its agents or
assigns shall be liable to any customer for any injury, damages or lost
revenues which may result from termination of said customer's water supply in
accordance with the terms of this subchapter whether or not said termination
was with or without notice.



(Ord. 1232, passed 9-6-88)



§ 51.055  RESPONSIBILITY FOR COST OF CLEAN-UP AFTER CONTAMINATION.



   The consumer responsible for back-siphoned material or contamination
through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs
through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained or
repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of
clean-up of the potable water supply system.



(Ord. 1232, passed 9-6-88)



§ 51.056  REGULATIONS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.



   The regulations on cross-connection control adopted by Ordinance 1232,
passed September 6, 1988 and attached thereto shall be incorporated by
reference as part of this chapter as fully as if set out at length herein.



(Ord. 1232, passed 9-6-88)



SEWER SYSTEM



§ 51.060  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this §§ 51.060 through 51.125, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATOR.  The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.



   APPROVING AUTHORITY.  The Public Utility Department Supervisor.



   BASIC USER CHARGE.  The basic assessment levied on all users of the
public sewer system.



   BOD or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND.  The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five days at 20° C, expressed in milligrams per liter.



   BUILDING DRAIN.  That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or
other approved point of discharge, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside
the inner face of the building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER.  The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.



   CAPITAL CHARGE.  A charge levied on users in the East Hickory Creek
Service Area for acquiring of Prestwick Utilities, Inc.



   COMBINED SEWER.  A sewer which is designed and intended to receive
wastewater, storm, surface and groundwater drainage.



   CONTROL MANHOLE.  A structure located on a site from which industrial
wastes are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior
drop. The purpose of a “control manhole” is to provide access for the
village representative to sample and/or measure discharges.



   CVE.  The village.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency.



   EASEMENT.  An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned
by others.



   EFFLUENT CRITERIA.   Defined in any applicable NPDES Permit.



   FEDERAL ACT.  The Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 466 et seq.) as
amended (Pub. L. 95-217).



   FEDERAL GRANT.  The U.S. government participation in the financing of
the construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II — Grants
for Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and implementing regulations.



   FLOATABLE OIL.  Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat
if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.



   GARBAGE.  Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
food.



   GREASE TRAP SLUDGE.  The solid, lighter-than-water fraction of
wastewaters from the handling, processing, preparation, cooking, or
consumption of foods that are discharged to a pretreatment unit or device
commonly referred to as a grease trap.  The principal components of grease
trap sludge are fats, oils, and greases.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE.  Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping from the development, recovery or processing of
any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.



   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY.  An industrial user of the publicly owned
treatment works that has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work
day; or has a flow greater than 10% of the flow carried by the municipal
system receiving the waste; or has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic
amounts as defined in standards issued under section 307(a) of the Federal
Act; or is found by the permit issuant authority, in connection with the
issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly-owned treatment works receiving
the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.



   MILLIGRAMS PER LITERor mg/l.  A unit of the concentration of water or
wastewater constituent. It is 0.001 g of the constituent in 1,000 ml of
water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to
which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and
wastewater analysis.



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or
other body of surface or groundwater.



   NPDES PERMIT.  Any permit or equivalent document or requirements
issued by the Administrator, or, where appropriated by the Director, after
enactment of the Federal Clean Water Act to regulate the discharge of
pollutants pursuant to Section 402 of the Federal Act.



   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial including any
individual, firm, company, municipal, or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.



   pH.  The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA
Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.



   POPULATION EQUIVALENT.  A term used to evaluate the impact of
industrial or other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population
equivalent is 100 gallons of sewage per day, containing .17 pounds of BOD and
.19 pounds of suspended solids.



   ppm.  Parts per million by weight.



   PRETREATMENT.  The treatment of wastewaters from sources before
introduction into the wastewater treatment works.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE.  The wastes from the preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow condition normally prevailing
in public sewers, with no particle greater than ½ inch (1.27 centimeters) in
any dimension.



   PUBLIC SEWER.  A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of
the village. It shall also include sewers within or outside the village
boundaries that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the
Village Sanitary or Combined Sewer System, even though those sewers may not
have been constructed with village funds.



   REPLACEMENT.  Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of
the treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such
works were designed and constructed. The term OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
includes “replacement.”



   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both, and into which storm, surface, and groundwaters or
polluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.



   SEWAGE. Used interchangeably with “wastewater.”



   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste
liquids, including storm, surface and groundwater drainage.



   SEWERAGE. The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.



   SEWERAGE FUND.  The principal accounting designation for all revenues
received in the operation of the sewerage system.



   SLUG.  Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of low exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
24-hour concentration of lows during normal operation.



   STATE ACT.  The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.



   STATE GRANT.  The state of Illinois participation in the financing of
the construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois
Anti-Pollution Bond Act and for making such grants as filed with the
Secretary of State of the state of Illinois.



   STORM SEWER. A sewer that carries storm, surface and groundwater
drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted
cooling water.



   STORMWATER RUNOFF.  That portion of the precipitation that is drained
into the sewers.



   SURCHARGE. The assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt
service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in
strength than the concentration values established in §51.116.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS or SS.  Solids that either float on the surface of,
or are in suspension in water, sewage, or industrial waste, and which are
removable by a laboratory filtration device.  Quantitative determination of
suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the
IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.



   UNPOLLUTED WATER.   Water quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.



   USEFUL LIFE.  The estimated period during which the collection system
and/or treatment works will be operated.



   USER CLASS.  The type of user “residential,”
“institutional/governmental,” commercial,” or “industrial” as
defined below:



      (1)   COMMERCIAL USER.  Transit lodging, retail and wholesale
establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise, or rendering
services.



      (2)   INDUSTRIAL USERS.  Establishments engaged in
manufacturing activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation
of materials of substance into products.



      (3)   INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL USER.  Include schools,
churches, penal institutions, and users associated with Federal, State, and
local governments.



      (4)   RESIDENTIAL USER.  All dwelling units such as houses,
mobile homes, apartments, permanent multi-family dwellings.



   WASTEWATER.  The spent water of a community. From this standpoint of
course, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions,
together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be
present.



   WASTEWATER FACILITIES.  The structures, equipment and processes
required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and
transport effluent to a watercourse.



   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS.  An arrangement of devices and structures
for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge.  Sometimes used as
synonymous with “waste treatment plant” or “wastewater treatment
plant” or “pollution control plant.”



   WATER QUALITY STANDARDS.  Defined in the Water Pollution Regulations
of Illinois.



   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90; Am. Ord. 1570, passed 5-6-96)



§ 51.061  USE OF PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED.



   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



   (B)   The owner of all the houses, building, or properties used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within
the village and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there
is now located a public sanitary sewer of the village, is hereby required at
his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect
such facilities directly to the proper public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of §§ 51.060 through 51.125 prior to occupancy.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.062  COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL STATE AND LOCAL STANDARDS.



   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except
those discharges in compliance with Federal Standards promulgated pursuant to
the Federal Act and more stringent State and local standards.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.063  PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE.



   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.064  DEPOSITING OF OBJECTIONABLE WASTE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any human or
animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.065  UNLAWFUL TO DISCHARGE TO ANY NATURAL OUTLET.



   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any sewage or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with provisions of §§ 51.060 through 51.125.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.066  DISCHARGE OF WASTE INTO SEWER CONSTRUCTED AS PART OF U.S. ROUTE
45 IMPROVEMENT PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall discharge
any sanitary waste or industrial wastewater into any storm sewer or drainage
facility constructed as part of the U.S. Route 45 improvement, the limits of
the improvement being between Colorado Avenue and south of Nebraska Street,
of which passes through the village.



   (B)   No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall discharge
any sanitary waste or industrial wastewater into any storm sewer or drainage
facility constructed as part of the U.S. Route 45 improvement, the limits
of  improvement being at the EJ & E Railroad underpass, which passes through
the village.



(Ord. 1328, passed 10-15-90; Am. Ord. 1661, passed 10-20-97; Am. Ord. 2524,
passed 10-20-08)



§ 51.067  DISCHARGE OF WASTE INTO SEWER CONSTRUCTED AS PART OF U.S. ROUTE
30 IMPROVEMENTS PROHIBITED. 



   No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall discharge any
sanitary waste or industrial wastewater into any storm sewer or drainage
facility constructed as part of the U.S. Route 30 at improvement project from
Wolf Road to IL Route 43, a portion of which passes through the Village of
Frankfort.



(Ord. 2499, passed 8-18-08; Am. Ord. 2704, passed 3-21-11)



PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEM



§ 51.075  PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.



   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the
provisions of § 51.061(B), the building sewer shall be connected to a
private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.



   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage
disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
Will County Health Department. The application for such permit shall be made
on a form furnished by the Will County Health Department, which the applicant
shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as deemed
necessary by the Will County Health Department. A permit and inspection fee
shall be paid to the Will County Health Department, 800 Exchange Avenue,
University Park, Illinois, 60466, at the time the application is filed.



   (C)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Will
County Health Department. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any
stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall
notify the Will County Health Department when the work is ready for final
inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection
shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of written notice by the Will
County Health Department.



   (D)   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the State of
Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code and with the State of
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. No permit shall be issued for any
private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption
facilities where the area of the lot is less than 150,000 square feet. No
septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.076  CONNECTION REQUIRED TO PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM WHEN AVAILABLE.



   (A)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in § 51.061(B), a
direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with §§
51.060 through 51.125, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private
sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material.



   (B)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, and at no expense to
the village or the Will County Health Department.



   (C)   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed
to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Will
County Health Department.



   (D)   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer
shall be connected to said sewer within 90 days and the private sewage
disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run
gravel or dirt.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)  Penalty, see § 51.999



BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS



§ 51.085  PROPERTY OWNERS RESPONSIBLE FOR CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   Property owners shall be responsible for making the connection
to the sewer line from their building.



   (B)   Property owners shall be responsible for the repair,
maintenance, and cost thereof of the sanitary sewer service line from their
building to the point of connection to the public sewer main.



   (C)   All costs and expense incident to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly
be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.086  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR UNCOVERING PUBLIC SEWER.



   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the village.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.087  BARRICADES AND LIGHTS TO GUARD EXCAVATIONS.



   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the
course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.088  SEWER CONNECTION NOT TO OVERLOAD SEWER SYSTEM.



   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection
shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)



§ 51.089  BUILDING SEWER REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided
for every building, except that where one building stands at the rear of
another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or
driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.



   (B)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found, on examination and test provided by the
applicant and approved by the village to meet all requirements of §§ 51.060
through 51.125.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)



§ 51.090  CONSTRUCTION OF BUILDING SEWER TO CONFORM TO PLUMBING CODE AND
OTHER APPLICABLE RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a
building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the
pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the village.



   (B)   In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof,
the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society of Testing Materials, “Water Pollution Control Federation
Manual of Practice No. 9,” and “Standard Specifications for Water and
Sewer Main Construction in Illinois,” latest edition, shall apply.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.091  REQUIREMENTS FOR SEWER CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   All sewer service mains hereafter connected into the sewer
system of the Village of Frankfort shall be set at grade of not more than 3½
feet below the exterior finished ground grade at the place where the sewer
service main enters the foundation or footing of the building which is
serviced by such sewer service main.



   (B)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.



   (C)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer
shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code, or other
applicable rules and regulations of the village, or the procedures set forth
in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials,
“Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9,” and
“Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois.”  All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved
by the village before installation.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.092  APPLICANT FOR PERMIT REQUIRED TO NOTIFY WHEN CONNECTION READY FOR
INSPECTION.



   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the village
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Director of
Public Works or his representative.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)  Penalty, see § 51.999



USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS



§ 51.100  DISCHARGE OF UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE WATER INTO SANITARY SEWER
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any
stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any
sanitary sewer.



   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or
to a natural outlet approved by the village.  Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the village to a
storm sewer or natural outlet.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)



§ 51.101  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:



      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other
flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.



      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous
solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage
treatment plant.



      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.



      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such
size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the
like, either whole or ground by garbage grinders.



   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the
following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears
likely in the opinion of the village that such wastes can harm either the
sewers sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or
constitute a nuisance. In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of
these wastes, the village will give consideration to such factors as the
quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the
sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage
treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits
established by regulatory agencies. The substances prohibited are:



      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
150° F (65° C).



      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous
materials; or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32° F (0° C) and 150° F (65° C).



      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of ¾
horsepower (0.76 HP metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the village.



      (4)    Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron
pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not.



      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper,
zinc, or similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material
received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the
limits established by the village for such materials.



      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste
or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the village as necessary after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other
public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.



      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the village in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.



      (8)   Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.5.



      (9)   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005
mg/l as Hg at any time except as permitted by the village in compliance with
applicable state and federal regulations.



      (10)   Heavy metals.  Any waste at any time containing more
than the maximum concentration in milligrams per liter of any substance shown
in the following table:



 



Arsenic (total)
 
0.50


Barium (total)
 
5.00


Cadmium (total)
 
0.30


Chromium (total triv.)
 
3.00


Chromium (total hexav.)
 
0.60


Copper (total)
 
2.00


Cyanide
 
0.50


Iron (total)
 
5.00


Lead (total)
 
0.25


Manganese (total)
 
2.00


Nickel (total)
 
2.00


Phenols
 
0.60


Selenium (total)
 
2.00


Silver (total)
 
2.00


Silver (total)
 
0.10


Zinc (total)
 
2.00




 



      (11)   Materials which exert or cause:



         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids
(such as, but not limited to, fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime
residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium
chloride and sodium sulfate);



         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited
to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);



         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the
sewage treatment works; and



         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes
constituting “slugs” as defined in § 51.060.



      (12)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90; Am. Ord. 1570, passed 5-6-96)  Penalty, see §
51.999



§ 51.102  VILLAGE TO REMEDY PROHIBITED DISCHARGE.



   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in § 51.101, or which are in
violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in 40 CFR 403, June 26,
1978 and any amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the village may
have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or
receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the village may:



      (1)   Reject the wastes;



      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for
discharge to the public sewers;



      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of
discharge;



      (4)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the
provisions of § 51.107.



   (B)   If the village permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the village, and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.103  GREASE, OIL, AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.



   (A)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the village, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors
shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the village, and
shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.



   (B)   No person may cause or allow the discharge, deposit, or
disposal of any grease trap sludge into a treatment works or into any sewer
tributary to a treatment works, except pursuant to the express authorization,
by ordinance or license, of the owner of the treatment works and the owner of
the sewer.  Nothing in this division (B) shall be construed to require
treatment works or sewer owners to establish any ordinances or programs to
provide such authorization.



   (C)   No person may cause or allow the transportation or acceptance
of grease trap sludge for rendering, storage, treatment, or disposal away
from the site where the sludge was generated, unless the sludge is
accompanied by a shipping paper containing, at a minimum, the information
prescribed in division (D) of this section.  No specific form of shipping
paper is required by this section, but a form may be prescribed pursuant to
division (F) below.



   (D)   Each shipping paper shall contain at a minimum the following
information:



      (1)   The name and telephone number of the generator of the
sludge, the street address of the grease trap, the volume of grease trap
sludge removed, the legible signature of an authorized representative of the
generator, and the date of the sludge removal.



      (2)   The name, address, and telephone number of the sludge
transporter, an acknowledgment of receipt of the sludge, the legible
signature of an authorized representative of the transporter, and the date of
sludge collection.



      (3)   The name, street address, and telephone number of the
facility receiving the sludge, an acknowledgment of such receipt, the legible
signature of an authorized representative of the receiving facility, and the
date of sludge receipt.



   (E)   The grease trap sludge generator, transporter, and management
facility operator shall each retain a copy of the shipping paper for a
minimum of two years, and shall produce such documents upon request of the
Agency, or the owner of the affected treatment works.



   (F)   The owner of a treatment works is authorized, but not
required, to establish a program to register or license the collection and
transportation of a grease trap sludge from grease traps within the owner's
jurisdiction, and to charge a fee therefor.  Further, the owner of a
treatment works is authorized, but not required, to develop and require the
use of a particular form of shipping paper for use in effecting the
requirement of division (C) of this section.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90; Am. Ord. 1570, passed 5-6-96)  Penalty, see §
51.999



§ 51.104  PRELIMINARY TREATMENT OR FLOW-EQUALIZING FACILITIES.



   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided,
they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation
by the owner at his expense.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.105  CONTROL MANHOLE; MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES.



   (A)   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole
and, when required by the village, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the village.
The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be
maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.



   (B)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics
of waters and wastes to which reference is made in §§ 51.060 through 51.125
shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of “IEPA Division
of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods,” and shall be determined at
the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control
manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the
public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling
shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of
constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards
to life, limb, and property. The particular analyses involved will determine
whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or
whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.  Normally, but not always,
BOD and suspended solids analysis are obtained from 24-hour composites of all
outfalls, whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.106  PROOF OF COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer
carrying industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and
analyses of waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with §§ 51.060
through 51.125 and any special conditions for discharge established by the
village or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge.



   (B)   The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analyses to be
performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the village, but no less
than once per year the industry must supply a complete analysis of the
constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the
federal, state, and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the
results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the village at such times
and in such a manner as is prescribed by the village.  The owner shall bear
the expense of all measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the
village. At such times as deemed necessary the village reserves the right to
take measurements and samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.107  SPECIAL AGREEMENTS FOR TREATMENT PERMITTED.



   No statement contained in this §§ 51.060 through 51.125 shall be
construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the
village and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual
strength or character may be accepted by the village for treatment, subject
to payment therefore, in accordance with §§ 51.061, 51.064 and 51.065, by
the industrial concern, provided such payments are in accordance with federal
and state guidelines for User Charge System.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)



SEWER SYSTEM ADMINISTRATION AND CHARGES



§ 51.115  POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works and other duly authorized
employees of the village, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
[IEPA], and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency [U.S. EPA], bearing
proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of §§ 51.060
through 51.125.  The Director of Public Works or his representative shall
have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical,
chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point
having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or
waterway or facilities for waste treatment.



   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties
referred to in division (A) of this section, the Director of Public Works or
duly authorized employees of the village, the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall observe
all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and
the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the village of
Frankfort employees and the village shall indemnify the company against
liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operating,
except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to
maintain conditions as required in § 51.105.



   (C)   The Director of Public Works and other duly authorized
employees of the village bearing proper credentials and identification shall
be permitted to enter all private properties through which the village holds
a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to,
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of
any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement.  All entry and
subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance
with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private
property involved.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)



§ 51.116  WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES.



   (A)   Basis for wastewater service charges. The wastewater service
charge for the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities
of the village shall consist of a basic user charge for the operation and
maintenance plus replacement, administration, and debt service requirements
of the system. The basic user charge for all customers shall be $2.68/1,000
gallons of use as recorded by the water meter of the customers of the village
wastewater system during each billing period from June 1, 2001, to April 30,
2002. The basic user charge shall be $2.82/1,000 gallons of use as recorded
by the water meter of the customers of the village wastewater system during
each billing period from May 1, 2002, to April 30, 2003. With the fiscal year
beginning May 1, 2002, and each year thereafter, the village wastewater
service charge shall be increased annually by the percentage of the most
recent Illinois Tax Extension as determined by the Will County Clerk’s
Office per the regulations set for in the Property Tax Extension Limitation
Law of Division 5, ILCS Ch. 35, Act 200, § 18-182. Furthermore, the village
shall evaluate the actual costs for operation, maintenance, and debt service
of the wastewater system to ensure the basic user charge is adequate to
satisfy all immediate and long term capital cost obligations of the system.



   (B)   East Hickory Creek Service Area.  In addition, a capital
charge shall be charged to those users of the system located within the East
Hickory Creek Service area. The East Hickory Creek Service area is defined as
those areas receiving Frankfort Waterworks Services in Richton and Monee
Townships; Sections 1, 2, 11, 12, and the East one half of Sections 3 and 10
in Green Garden Township; Sections 11, 12, 13, 14, 23, 24, 25, 26, 35, 36,
and the east one-half of Section 10 in Frankfort Township. The physical
location of the customer's water meter shall be the basis for determining if
the customer is within the East Hickory Creek Hickory Creek Service area. 
The wastewater capital charge to the East Basin customers shall be as follows:



 

Time Period
Effective date of this ordinance
 
Capital Charge per 1,000 Gallons of Usage or Fraction Thereof


(Ordinance No. 1570) through April 30, 1997
 
$1.23


May 1, 1997 through April 30, 1998
 
0.92


May 1, 1998 through April 30, 1999
 
0.62


May 1, 1999 through April 30, 2000
 
0.31


From May 1, 2000
 
The capital charge shall be eliminated



 



   (C)   Basic user charge and capital charge. 



      (1)   The basic user charge and capital charge shall be based
on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes
having the following normal domestic concentrations:



         (a)   A five day, 20° C BOD of 200 mg/l.



         (b)   A suspended solids (SS) content of 220 mg/l.



      (2)   A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters
exceed the normal domestic concentrations of BOD (200 mg/l) and SS (220
mg/l). The surcharge will be based on water usage as recorded by water meters
and/or sewage meters for all wastes which exceed the 200 mg/l and 220 mg/l
concentration for BOD and SS respectively.  Division (C)(3) below specifies
the procedure to compute a surcharge.



      (3)   (a)   Surcharge rate.  The rates of surcharges for
BOD5 and SS shall be as follows:



            1.   Per lb. of BOD:   $ .10



            2.   Per lb. of SS:      .11



         (b)   Computation of surcharge.  The concentration of
wastes used for computing surcharges shall be established by waste sampling.
Waste sampling shall be performed as often as may be deemed necessary by the
village and shall be binding as a basis for surcharges.



            1.   BOD Surcharge:



            2.   SS Surcharge:



   (D)   Minimum charges. In the event that customer's actual use is
less than 2,000 gal. in any given billing period, the customer will be
charged for 2,000 gal. of use for that period.



   (E)   Adequacy of the wastewater service charge.  The adequacy of
the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed, not less often than
annually, by certified public accountants for the village in their annual
audit report. The wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to
reflect a change in local capital costs and/or operation and maintenance
costs including replacement costs.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90; Am. Ord. 1570, passed 5-6-96; Am. Ord. 1680,
passed 1-20-98; Am. Ord. 1860, passed 6-4-01)



§ 51.117  MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.



   The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and surcharges
shall be the metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments of
one thousand gallons.



   (A)   If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers
procures any part, or all, of his water from sources other than the Public
Waterworks System, all or a part of which is discharged into the public
sewers, the person shall install and maintain, at his expense, water meters
of a type approved by the village for the purpose of determining the volume
of water obtained from these other sources.



   (B)   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged by any
user may be required by the village if these volumes cannot otherwise be
determined from the metered water consumption records.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)  Penalty, see § 51.999



§ 51.118  BILLING.



   (A)   The rates or charges for service shall be billed and be
payable monthly. The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user
of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service
to such premises and the service is furnished to the premises by the village
only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant, and user of
the services are jointly and severally liable therefor to the village.



   (B)   All sewer bills are due and payable within 20 calendar days
after being sent out. A penalty of 10% shall be added to all bills not paid
on the 21st day.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)



§ 51.119  TERMINATION OF SEWER SERVICE.



   (A)   If charges for utility services are not paid in full within 45
calendar days from the date of billing or if the utility customer is in
violation of any village regulation or applicable ordinance relating to sewer
service, the village utility customer shall be notified of the village's
intent to terminate sewer and/or water service prior to any such termination.



   (B)   The pre-termination notice required herein shall contain the
following:



      (1)   The code provision or ordinance being violated and how
such violation can be corrected, if applicable;



      (2)   The number of days the account is in arrears;



      (3)   The balance due, including late charges as of the notice
date;



      (4)   That the utility customer may contact a representative
of the village and request an informal hearing to resolve disputes as to the
correctness of bills, arrears, and/or violations of applicable provisions of
this code or other ordinances of the village prior to termination of services.



      (5)   The name, business address, and telephone number of the
village representative to contact to schedule such informal hearing.



      (6)   That unless the customer contacts the appropriate
village representative in writing within ten days of receipt of the
pre-termination notice requesting an informal hearing on the correctness of
the utility bill his or her sewer service will be terminated.



      (7)   The date on or after which termination will be effected.



   (C)   An informal hearing shall be held, upon written request of the
utility customer, within ten days after written request is made to the
Village Administrator or his or her designee, sometimes collectively referred
to as “Village Representative.”  The purpose of the informal hearing is
to allow the utility customer an opportunity to present information regarding
the correctness of that customer's utility bill.



   (D)   If the Village Representative finds merit to the customer's
contentions on the utility bill's correctness, no action shall be take to
terminate service and the user's bill shall be adjusted accordingly by the
Village Representative with such adjusted bill to be paid by the utility
customer within seven days of notification of the Village Representative's
determination.



   (E)   In the event a notice of disconnection hearing is requested by
a residential utility customer wherein the customer established that he or
she or a member of his or her immediate family residing with the customer has
a pre-existing life threatening medical condition certified in writing by a
medical doctor licensed by the state and/or the customer establishes that he
or she is financially unable to pay the utility charge in full or part, the
Village Representative may allow service continuance so long as the utility
customer makes satisfactory financial arrangements to pay past and future
utility charges.



   (F)   If the Village Representative finds no merit to the customer's
contentions on the utility bill's correctness, he or she shall communicate
this decision to the utility customer within ten days after the informal
hearing.  The utility customer shall further be notified that termination of
service will be effected if all utility bills are not paid in full or
violations corrected within seven days after receipt of such decision without
further notice.



   (G)   If service is terminated as herein provided, no utility
service shall be reinstated until such time as all violations are corrected
and/or all outstanding utility bills are paid in full in addition to the
payment of a $45 reinstatement fee.



   (H)   All utility customers shall timely pay the undisputed portion
of the utility bill.



   (I)   For the purposes of this section, any notice regarding
disconnection of service shall be given to the utility customer in the
account name and address indicated in the village utility customer records. 
Any notices required by this section to the utility customer may be given by
certified mail, return receipt requested sufficient postage prepaid or by
leaving a copy of the notice personally with the utility customer, or by
leaving a copy of the notice at the utility customer's billing address with
some person over 13 years of age at such address and mailing a copy of the
notice by U.S. mail addressed to the utility customer at the billing
address.  For the purpose of this section, notice transmitted through United
States mail shall be deemed received by the utility customer on the date
shown by the post office stamp cancellation mark stamped on the envelope.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90; Am. Ord. 1331, passed 11-5-90)



§ 51.120  NOTICE; LIEN FOR DELINQUENT BILLS.



   (A)   Notice of delinquency.  Whenever a bill for sewer service
remains unpaid for 60 days for monthly service after it has been rendered,
the Village Attorney shall file with the County Recorder of Deeds a statement
of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of the
premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the village
claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges subsequent to the
period covered by the bill.



   (B)   Foreclosure of lien. Property subject to a lien for unpaid
charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the
sale shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the
case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by
bill-in equity in the name of the village. The Village Attorney is hereby
authorized and directed to institute such proceedings in the name of the
village in any court having jurisdiction over such matters against any
property for which the bill has remained unpaid 60 days on a monthly bill
after it has been rendered.



   (C)   The failure of the Village Attorney to record such lien or to
mail such notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not
affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills.



   (D)   If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the
premises and the village has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the
owner of the premises if his address be known to the Treasurer, whenever such
bill remains unpaid for the period of 45 days for a monthly bill.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)



§ 51.121  APPEALS.



   The method for computation of rates and service charges established for
user charges in § 51.116 shall be made available to a user within 10 days of
receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement over the method used
or in the computations thereof shall be remedied by the Village Board at the
earliest regular scheduled Village Board meetings, after notification of a
formal written appeal outlining the discrepancies.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)



§ 51.122  REVENUES.



   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the sewerage
system shall be deposited in the sewerage account of the Sewer and Water
General Fund. All such revenues and moneys shall be held by the Village
Treasurer separate and apart from all other funds of the village. The Village
Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the sewerage system and all
other funds and moneys incident to the operation of such system and shall
deposit the same in the account of the fund designated as the “Sewer and
Water General Fund of the  village.”  The Treasurer shall administer such
fund in every respect in the manner provided by statute of the “Revised
Cities and Villages Act,” effective January, 1942.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)



§ 51.123  ACCOUNTS.



   (A)   The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of
accounts and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete
and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the
sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals shall cause to be made an
audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts
and disbursements of the sewerage system.



   (B)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual
audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the
wastewater facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer
service charges under the waste cost recovery system and capital amounts
required to be recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do in fact
meet these regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown
in the audit report shall include the following:



      (1)   Flow data showing total gallons received at the
wastewater plant for the current fiscal year.



      (2)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per
fiscal year.



      (3)   Debt Service for the next succeeding fiscal year.



      (4)   Number of users connected to the system.



      (5)   Number of non-metered users.



      (6)   A list of users discharging non-domestic and industrial
wastes and volume of waste discharged.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)



§ 51.124  ACCESS TO RECORDS.



   The Illinois EPA or the Federal EPA or its authorized representative
shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the village
which are applicable to the Sewer System or user charges or industrial cost
recovery for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and
transcriptions thereof to insure compliance with the terms of the Special and
General Conditions of any State Grant and the Federal Regulations and
conditions of the federal grant.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)



§ 51.125  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§ 51.060
through 51.125 shall become liable to the village by reasons of such
violation.



   (B)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this §§
51.060 through 51.125 except § 51.063, shall be served by the village with
written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable
time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall,
within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violations. The village may revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result
of any violation of any provision of §§ 51.060 through 51.125.



(Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)



CENTRAL SERVICE CHARGE



§ 51.135  TAP-ON AND CONNECTION FEES.



   (A)   Basic tap-on and/or connection fees.  The basic tap-on and/or
connection fees to be charged those persons who hereafter request that a
connection to the village water and sewer systems be made are as follows:



 


Type of Connection

 
Water
 
Sewer
 
Combined




Single-family unit
 
$2,000
 
$2,000
 
$4,000


Two-family unit
 
4,000
 
4,000
 
8,000


Multi-family unit (Three units or more):
 
 
 


  One bdrm. unit
 
1,000
 
1,000
 
2,000


  Two bdrm. unit
 
1,500
 
1,500
 
3,000


  Three bdrm. unit
 
2,000
 
2,000
 
4,000


Institutional, commercial, and industrial connections
 
2,250
 
2,250
 
4,500


Note: Plus a charge based upon the quantity and nature of waste discharged to
the sewer system and the quantity of water required.




 



   (B)   Fees described above in division (A) include:



 


Type of Connection

 

User Install Sewer Tap

 

User Install Water Tap

 

User Install Meter



Each residential unit
 

6"

 

1"

 

1"



Each institutional, commercial, and industrial unit   
 

6"

 

1"

 

1"



Note: Any additional taps or oversizing requested by the user or required by
the village shall be approved by the Director of Public Works. All additional
costs as determined by the Director of Public Works shall be the
responsibility of the user.



 



   (C)   If only one service is available, either water or sewer, the
fee will be for that service only. Any such service shall be deemed available
whenever a service line capable of serving the user is within 1,000 feet of
the user's property.



   (D)   Capacity expansion fee.  The capacity expansion fee to be
charged to those persons who hereafter request that the village provide
adequate and customary water and waste water utility service to them be made
as follows:



      (1)   The village has determined, based on the most readily
available information and projections, that a capacity expansion fee of $863
per population equivalent (PE) bears a rational relationship to necessary
costs of expansion of its system, and such amount is specifically and
uniquely attributable to the request for water and waste water utility
service, considering the present and future anticipated needs of the area.



   (E)   Meter fee handling charge.  For the handling, inspection and
connection of the meter to the outside reader, the village shall charge a fee
which shall be paid at time of meter purchase.



      (1)   The village has determined that the meter fee handling
charge shall be $50 per meter.



(Ord. 1313, passed 7-16-90; Am. Ord. 1481, passed 11-7-94; Am. Ord. 1680,
passed 1-20-98; Am. Ord. 1898, passed 6-3-02; Ord. 2629, passed 12-7-09)



§ 51.136  DETERMINATION OF FEES.



   (A)   The charges for fees under the provisions of this subchapter
shall be made by the Director of Public Works prior to village execution and
approval of application for water and/or sewer permits to the State
Environmental Protection Agency.



   (B)   Additional fees to be charged under the provisions of §
51.135 shall be determined by the Director of Public Works.



(Ord. 1313, passed 7-16-90)



§ 51.137  PAYMENT.



   (A)   Payment of fees described and required under the terms of this
subchapter shall be paid to the village as outlined below:



      (1)   Basic tap-on and or connection fees.  One-half the
total fee at the time of final plat approval by the Village Board, or in case
where final plat approval has already been granted at the time of the passage
of this subchapter, or in cases where final plat approval is not required,
then at the time of the request for connection; and



      (2)   One-half the fee, full balance thereof, at the receipt
of notification of water and/or sewer permit application by the State
Environmental Protection Agency.



   (B)   Capacity expansion fee.  The total fee at the time of final
plat approval by the Village Board. The amount of the fees shall be
calculated prior to final plat approval and shall be based on the Village
Engineer's determination of the number of population equivalents from the
most recently ascertainable data.



   (C)   All fees shall be paid to the village at the village hall.
Failure to pay required fees as outlined above shall result in the village
initiating a full and complete stop order.



(Ord. 1313, passed 7-16-90; Am. Ord. 1481, passed 11-7-94))



§ 51.138  SOURCES AND USES OF FUNDS.



   (A)   All funds derived from the basic tap-on and/or connection fees
shall be deposited in the sewer and water extension fund and shall be used to
expand and improve sewer and water mains, replace distribution and collection
systems necessary to maintain and bring adequate service to its users subject
only to the provisions of any applicable bond ordinances.



   (B)   All funds derived from the capacity expansion fees shall be
deposited in the sewer and water extension fund and shall be used only in
specific future construction, expansion and/or improvement of the village
water and/or sewer system for increasing capacity to service new customers
subject only to the provisions of any applicable bond ordinances.



   (C)   In the sewer and water extension fund, two fund balance
reserve accounts shall be set up, one for each of the two natures of the
sources of funds: i.e. one to be called “Reserved for Ordinance 1313,
Article I, Section 3(A) Uses,” and one to be called “Reserved for
Ordinance 1313, Article I, Section 3(B) Uses,” with no account for
unreserved fund balance.



   (D)   As of the effective date of enactment of this section, a
balance sheet for this fund shall be rendered by the Village Chief Financial
Officer, and any fund balance shall be reconstituted as a balance in the
account “Reserved for Ordinance 1313, Article I, Section 3(A) Uses.”



   (E)   Interest income in the sewer and water extension fund for a
given fiscal year shall be apportioned to the two aforementioned accounts
proportionally, based on each balance before the apportionment.



   (F)   Any inter-fund transfers-in, of monies surplused from other
utility funds of the village, beyond those funds working capital needs, shall
be apportioned to the two aforementioned accounts proportionally, based on
each balance before the transfers-in.



   (G)   In regard to all amounts to be recognized in the sewer and
water extension fund, the Village Engineer will specify to the Village
Treasurer the portion of each to be posted to each of the two aforementioned
accounts. The Village Engineer will do likewise as to the proceeds from any
sale of utility assets.



(Ord. 1313, passed 7-16-90; Am. Ord. 1481, passed 11-7-94)



§ 51.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of
§§ 51.001 through 51.125 for which no other penalty is set forth shall be
fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense.



   (B)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time
limit provided for in § 51.033(B) and § 51.125(B) shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not
exceeding $750 for each violation.  Each day in which any such violation
shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 



(Ord. 1311, passed 7-16-90; Ord. 1312, passed 7-16-90)



   (C)   Any person found to be in violation of any provision of §
51.018 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each
violation. Each day upon which a violation exists shall be deemed a separate
violation. In addition, the village shall have any other remedy available to
it at law or equity. 



(Ord. 1396, passed 10-19-92; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02)



CHAPTER 52:  CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY



Section



General Provisions



   52.01   Purpose; scope



   52.02   Definitions



   52.03   Annual registration required



Permits



   52.10   Permit required; applications and fees



   52.11   Action on permit applications



   52.12   Effect of permit



   52.13   Revised permit drawings



   52.14   Insurance



   52.15   Indemnification



   52.16   Security



   52.17   Permit suspension and revocation



   52.18   Change of ownership



Other Requirements



   52.30   General construction standards



   52.31   Traffic control



   52.32   Location of facilities



   52.33   Construction methods and materials



   52.34   Vegetation control



   52.35   Removal, relocation or modification of facilities



   52.36   Cleanup and restoration



   52.37   Maintenance; emergencies



Administration



   52.50   Variances



   52.51   Right to appeal



   52.52   Notices



   52.53   Enforcement



 



   52.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 52.01  PURPOSE; SCOPE.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies
and procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the
village’s jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with
the preservation of the integrity, safe usage and visual qualities of the
village rights-of-way and the village as a whole.



   (B)   Intent. In enacting this chapter, the village intends to
exercise its authority over the rights-of-way within the village and, in
particular, the use of the public ways and property by utilities by
establishing uniform standards and regulations to address issues presented by
utility facilities, including without limitation:



      (1)   Preventing interference with the use of streets,
sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;



      (2)   Preventing the  creation  of visual  and physical 
obstructions  and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and
pedestrian traffic;



      (3)   Preventing interference with the facilities and
operations of the village’s utilities and of other utilities lawfully
located in rights-of-way or public property;



      (4)   Protecting  against  environmental  damage, 
including  without  limitation damage to trees, from the installation of
utility facilities;



      (5)   Protecting against increased stormwater run-off due to
structures and materials that increase impermeable surfaces;



      (6)   Preserving the character of the neighborhoods in which
facilities are installed;



      (7)   Preserving open space, particularly the tree-lined
parkways that characterize the village’s residential neighborhoods;



      (8)   Preventing visual blight from the proliferation of
facilities in the rights-of-way; and



      (9)   Assuring the continued safe use and enjoyment of private
properties adjacent to utility facilities’ locations.



   (C)   Facilities subject to this chapter. This chapter applies to
all facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the
public rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the village. A facility
lawfully established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue
to be maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently
constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any
applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.



   (D)   Franchises, licenses or similar agreements. The village, in
its discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the village
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such
an agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent
with this chapter.



   (E)   Effect of franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. In the
event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the provisions of this
chapter and the provisions of any franchise, license or similar agreement
between the village and any utility, the provisions of such franchise,
license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the during the
term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.



   (F)   Conflicts with other chapters. This chapter supersedes all
chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.



   (G)   Conflicts with federal and state laws. In the event that
applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the
requirements of this chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements
of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or
state laws or regulations.



   (H)   Sound engineering judgment. The village shall use sound
engineering judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the
standards, conditions and requirements expressed in this chapter when the
village so determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability
of the village to regulate its rights-of-way for fire protection or the
public health, safety and welfare.



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



§ 52.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Any
term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92
Ill. Adm. Code 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.



   AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials.



   ANSI.  American National Standards Institute.



   APPLICANT. A person applying for a permit under this chapter.



   ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials.



   BACKFILL. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in
a trench or pit.



   BORE or BORING. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.



   CARRIER PIPE. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.



   CASING. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such
as carrier pipes, electrical conductors and fiber optic devices.



   CLEAR ZONE. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of
a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside
Design Guide.



   COATING. Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.



   CODE. The Code of Ordinances for the Village of Frankfort.



   CONDUCTOR. Wire carrying electrical current.



   CONDUIT. A casing or encasement for wires or cables.



   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCT. The installation, repair, maintenance,
placement, alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment
in place of facilities.



   COVER. The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or
conductor.



   CROSSING FACILITY. A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way
lines of a right-of-way.



   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The village employee responsible for
overseeing the Department of Public Works or his or her designee.



   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any work that obstructs the right-of-way or
causes a material adverse effect on the use of the right-of-way for its
intended use. Such work may include, without limitation, the following:
excavating or other cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of
materials, equipment, devices or structures; damage to vegetation; and
compaction or loosening of the soil but shall not include the parking of
vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially obstruct the flow
of traffic on a highway.



   EMERGENCY. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the
safety of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or
immediate maintenance required for the health and safety of the general
public served by the utility.



   ENCASEMENT. Provision of a protective casing.



   EQUIPMENT. Materials, tools, implements, supplies and/or other items
used to facilitate construction of facilities.



   EXCAVATION. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or
laying bare by digging.



   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.



   FACILITY. All structures, devices, objects and materials (including
track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, communications and video
cables and wires, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables and
appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or
within rights-of-way under this chapter, except those owned by the village.



   FREESTANDING FACILITY. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump or meter station.



   FRONTAGE ROAD. Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land
adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access on highway.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance or material which, due to its
quantity, form, concentration, location or other characteristics, is
determined by the Village Director of Public Works to pose an unreasonable
and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to
the ecological balance of the environment, including without limitation
explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases,
poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any
substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law,
statute or regulation.



   HIGHWAY. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including without limitation rural or urban roads, streets and alleys.
HIGHWAY includes without limitation all highway land and improvements,
including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage structures,
signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances necessary or
convenient for vehicle traffic.



   HIGHWAY CODE. The Illinois Highway Code, ILCS Ch. 605, Act 5, §§
1-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.



   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401.



   IDOT. Illinois Department of Transportation.



   ICC. Illinois Commerce Commission.



   JACKING. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical
means, with or without boring.



   JETTING. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.



   JOINT USE. The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two
or more utilities.



   J.U.L.I.E. The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators
utility notification program.



   MAJOR INTERSECTION. The intersection of two or more major arterial
highways.



   OCCUPANCY. The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.



   PARALLEL FACILITY. A facility that is generally parallel or
longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-way.



   PARKWAY. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or
sidewalk.



   PAVEMENT CUT. The removal of an area of pavement for access to a
facility or for the construction of a facility.



   PERMITTEE. That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to
§§ 52.10 and 52.11.



   PERSON. Includes without limitation individuals, partnerships,
corporations, LLCs and all other business associations.



   PRACTICABLE. That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather
than that which is simply convenient.



   PRESSURE. The internal force acting radially against the walls of a
carrier pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).



   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES. Pipelines carrying crude or refined
liquid petroleum products, including without limitation gasoline,
distillates, propane, butane or coal-slurry.



   PROMPT. Done within a period of time specified by the village. If no
time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.



   PUBLIC ENTITY. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the
government, whether at local, state or federal level.



   RESTORATION. The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway or other
area disrupted by the construction of a facility.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Any street, alley, other land or
waterway dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
other similar purposes, including without limitation utility easements, in
which the village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or
permit the location of facilities other than those of the village.
RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall not include any real or personal village
property that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and
shall not include village buildings, fixtures and other structures or
improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the right-of-way.



   ROADWAY. That part of the highway that includes the pavement and
shoulders.



   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and
its wholly-owned subsidiaries or between wholly-owned subsidiaries, when the
gross charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not
greater than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or
consumption and not for sale.



   SECURITY FUND. That amount of security required pursuant to § 52.16.



   SHOULDER. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing
lateral support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency
vehicular stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.



   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT. A decision(s) consistent with generally
accepted engineering principles, practices and experience.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. This term includes without limitation messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide-area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service,
computer exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services,
cellular mobile telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging
service and any other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way
communications, and any other transmission of messages or information by
electronic or similar means between or among points by wire, cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities. PRIVATE
LINE means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer
that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications
channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified locations to
one or more other specified locations. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include
value added services in which computer processing applications are used to
act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C.
521 et seq.) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other programming
services subject to an open video system fee payable to the village through
an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications
Commission (47 C.D.F. 76.1550 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Any person that installs, owns, operates
or controls facilities in the public right-of-way used or designed to be used
to transmit telecommunications in any form.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER.  Includes  every  person  engaged 
in  making  sales  of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.



   TRENCH. A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.



   UTILITY. The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this chapter.



   VENT. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or
vapors from an underground casing.



   VIDEO SERVICE. That term as defined in Section 21-201(v) of the
Illinois Cable and Video Competition Act of 2007, ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
21-201(v).



   VILLAGE. The Village of Frankfort.



   WATER LINES. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.



   WET BORING. Boring using water under pressure at the cuffing auger to
soften the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



§ 52.03  ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the village shall
register on January 1 of each year with the Director of Public Works,
providing the utility’s name, address and regular business telephone and
telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on
behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the
utility’s facilities in the right-of-way, a 24-hour telephone number for
each such person and evidence of insurance as required in § 52.14, in the
form of a certificate of insurance.



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



PERMITS



§ 52.10  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES.



   (A)   Permit required. No person shall construct any facility on,
over, above, along, upon, under, across or within any village right-of-way
which (i) changes the location of the facility, (ii) adds a new facility,
(iii) disrupts the right-of-way, or (iv) increases the amount of area or
space occupied by the facility beyond that already occupied on, over, above,
along, under, across or within the right-of-way, without first filing an
application with the Village Director of Public Works and obtaining a permit
from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No
permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service
connections to customers’ premises where there will be no disruption of the
right-of-way.



   (B)   Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to
this chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be
filed in such number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The
applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it
reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as
“proprietary” or “confidential” by clearly marking each page of such
materials accordingly.



   (C)   Minimum general application requirements. The application
shall be made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall
contain, at a minimum, the following:



      (1)   The utility’s name, address and telephone and fax
numbers;



      (2)   The applicant’s name and address, if different than
the utility, its telephone and fax numbers, e-mail address and its interest
in the work;



      (3)   The names, addresses, telephone and fax numbers and
e-mail addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the
applicant with respect to the application;



      (4)   A general description of the proposed work, the dates on
which the work is to commence and be completed, the purposes and intent of
the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and
detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character
of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely to
be affected or impacted by the work proposed;



      (5)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the
village:



         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the
protective measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the
Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices to prevent injury or
damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient
pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and



         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify
the nature of potential emergencies, including without limitation
construction and hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response
by the applicant. The intended response shall include notification to the
village and other utilities within the affected right-of-way and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance
with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance
with this section unless the village finds that additional information or
assurances are needed;



      (6)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work
proposed, including without limitation the precise location of the work, the
methods proposed to protect existing facilities within the affected
right-of-way, the screening and landscaping proposed for any freestanding
facilities and the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules and regulations;



      (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in § 52.14;



      (8)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in
§ 52.16;



      (9)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions
of this chapter (see § 52.50);



      (10)   Acknowledgment of the obligation to indemnify the
village as required in § 52.15;



      (11)   Acknowledgment of the obligation to pay professional
fees as required in § 52.11;



      (12)   Acknowledgment of the obligation not to file, claim or
permit to be filed or claimed any lien or other encumbrance upon any
right-of-way as required in § 52.30;



      (13)   Acknowledgment of the potential penalties, including
without limitation payment of the village’s reasonable attorney’s fees,
expert and witness fees and costs of suit, provided in § 52.99;



      (14)   Evidence of village licenses for all contractors and
subcontractors as required in § 110.01 of this code;



      (15)   For any freestanding facility, the proposed screening
and landscape plan;



      (16)   A tree survey from a certified arborist, together with
a proposed plan for tree preservation or replacement. Replacement shall be
accomplished by planting one or more trees, the total trunk diameter of which
is equivalent to one and one-quarter times that of the replaced tree. The
village may in its discretion direct the allocation and placement of such
replacement trees; and



      (17)   Such additional information as may be reasonably
required by the village.



   (D)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of
utilities. In addition to the requirements of division (C) above, the permit
application shall include the following items as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:



      (1)   In the case of new electric power, communications,
telecommunications, cable television service, video service or natural gas
distribution system installation, evidence that any “certificate of public
convenience and necessity” or other regulatory authorization that the
applicant is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to
obtain, has been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;



      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed
pipe size, design, construction class and operating pressures;



      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all
requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of
Public Water Supplies, have been satisfied;



      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that
the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control, and any other local
or state entities with jurisdiction, have been satisfied; or



      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the
type or types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure and
the design standard to be followed.



   (E)   Applicant’s duty to update information. Throughout the
entire permit application review period and the construction period
authorized by the permit, any amendments to information contained in a permit
application shall be submitted by the utility in writing to the village
within 30 days after the change necessitating the amendment.



   (F)   Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license or similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $100. No application
fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the
municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



§ 52.11  ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Village review of permit applications. Completed permit
applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the
Village Director of Public Works within a reasonable time after filing and,
at the discretion of the village, may also be reviewed by the Village
Engineer and/or other professional consultants, with the cost of all reviews
being borne by the applicant. If the application does not conform to the
requirements of all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and
regulations, the Village Director of Public Works shall reject such
application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the Village Director
of Public Works is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the
requirements of this chapter and all applicable ordinances, codes, laws,
rules and regulations, he or she shall issue a permit therefor as soon as
practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to
demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Village Director of Public Works,
that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Additional village review of applications of
telecommunications retailers.



      (1)   Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 65, § 4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the village
that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for
the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the village not less than ten days prior to
the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than 30 days
prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The Village Director
of Public Works shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the
facility may be placed, used and constructed.



      (2)   In the event that the Village Director of Public Works
fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications
retailer within either (i) ten days after service of notice to the village by
the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation
for new construction, or (ii) 25 days after service of notice by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without
obtaining a permit under this chapter.



      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the village,
where a permit is required for work pursuant to § 52.10, the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an application for a
permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject
to the requirements of division (A) above.



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



§ 52.12  EFFECT OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Authority granted; no property right or other interest
created. A permit from the village only authorizes a permittee to undertake
certain activities in accordance with this chapter on village rights-of-way
and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to
impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the public
rights-of-way.



   (B)   Duration. No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid
for a period longer than 180 days unless construction is actually begun
within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.



   (C)   Pre-construction meeting required. No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance at a
pre-construction meeting by the permittee and all major contractors and
subcontractors who will perform any work under the permit. The
pre-construction meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated
by the village, with such village representatives in attendance as the
village deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing
the work under the permit and reviewing special considerations necessary in
the areas where work will occur, including without limitation the presence of
other utility facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid
disruption of other utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during
construction and access and egress by adjacent property owners.



   (D)   Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by
the village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other
requirements of the village and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations.



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



§ 52.13  REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.



   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village within 90 days after
the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate
from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit
also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with § 52.50. If the village denies the
request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility
from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the
permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor.



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



§ 52.14  INSURANCE.



   (A)   Required coverages and limits.



      (1)   Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or
similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any
facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following
liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured, and
naming the village and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents
and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in below in this
division (A)(1)(a) and (b):



         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance, including
premises-operations, explosion, collapse and underground hazard (commonly
referred to as “C” and “U” coverages) and products-completed
operations coverage with limits not less than:



            1.   Five million dollars for bodily injury or
death to each person;



            2.   Five million dollars for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and



            3.   Five million dollars for all other types of
liability;



         (b)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and
hired vehicles with a combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury
and property damage for each accident;



         (c)   Worker’s compensation with statutory limits; and



         (d)   Employer’s liability insurance with limits of
not less than $1,000,000 per employee and per accident.



      (2)   If the utility is not providing such insurance to
protect the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such
contractors and subcontractors shall comply with this section.



   (B)   Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this
section may be in any combination of primary, excess and umbrella policies.
Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying
insurance on a following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the
primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or
umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.



   (C)   Copies required. Prior to commencing any work in the
right-of-way, the utility shall provide copies of any of the policies and
certificates of coverage required by this section to the village.



   (D)   Maintenance and renewal of required coverages.



      (1)   The insurance policies required by this section shall
contain the following endorsement:



         “It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may
not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30)
days after receipt by the Village, by registered mail or certified mail,
return receipt requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village
Administrator of such intent to cancel or not to renew.”



      (2)   Within ten days after receipt by the village of said
notice, and in no event later than ten days prior to said cancellation, the
utility shall obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement
insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.



   (E)   Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of
the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by division (A) above.
A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under division (A), or the requirements of divisions (B), (C) and
(D) above. A utility that elects to self-insure shall, prior to commencing
any work in the right-of-way, provide to the village evidence sufficient to
demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and
limit requirements required under division (A) above, such as evidence that
the utility is a “private self insurer” under the Workers Compensation
Act.



   (F)   Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility’s
liability. The legal liability of the utility to the village and any person
for any of the matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or
self-insurance required by this section shall not be limited by such
insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts
thereunder.



   (G)   Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this
section shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by
insurers legally able to conduct business with the permittee in the State of
Illinois. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated
“A-” or better and of a class size “X” or higher by A.M. Best Company.



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



§ 52.15  INDEMNIFICATION.



   By using, occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a
utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village
and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and
representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, settlements, awards, damages, losses and expenses,
including without limitation reasonable attorney’s fees, expert and witness
fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from, or caused
or contributed to by, or alleged to arise out of, result from, or alleged to
have been caused or contributed by, the utility’s use of, or presence on,
the right of way and/or negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions,
failures to act, or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers,
employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors which are related to the
right-of-way, including without limitation the location, design, construction
or maintenance of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in
providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or
omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a
franchise, license or similar agreement, provided, however, that the
utility’s indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries,
claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or
resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this chapter by the
village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives.



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



§ 52.16  SECURITY.



   (A)   Purpose. The permittee shall establish a security fund in a
form and in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall
be continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the
permittee’s sole cost and expense until the completion of the work
authorized under the permit. The security fund shall serve as security for:



      (1)   The faithful performance and timely completion by the
permittee of all the requirements of this chapter, including without
limitation restoration as required in § 52.36;



      (2)   Any expenditure, damage or loss incurred by the village
occasioned by the permittee’s failure to comply with any codes, rules,
regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the village issued
pursuant to this chapter; and



      (3)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages,
claims, costs or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by permittee in violation of this chapter,
including without limitation any damage to public property or restoration
work the permittee is required by this chapter to perform that the village
must perform itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the
permittee’s failure to perform or complete, and all other payments due the
village from the permittee pursuant to this chapter or any other applicable
law.



   (B)   Form. The permittee shall provide the security fund to the
village in the form, at the permittee’s election, of cash or an
unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the village. Any
letter of credit provided pursuant to this division (B) shall, at a minimum:



      (1)   Provide that it will not be canceled without at least
120 days’ prior notice to the village and the permittee;



      (2)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the
collection by the village of any amounts covered by it; and



      (3)   Shall provide a location convenient to the village and
within the State of Illinois at which it can be drawn.



   (C)   Amount. The dollar amount of the security fund shall be
sufficient to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the
right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the
construction under the permit, as determined by the Village Director of
Public Works, and may also include reasonable directly-related costs that the
village estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform
such restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the
permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations within the village,
with each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a
related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not
be undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous
phase or phases, the Village Director of Public Works may in the exercise of
sound discretion allow the permittee to post a single amount of security
which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit.
The amount of the security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the
greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions of this
division (C) for any single phase.



   (D)   Withdrawals. The village, upon 14 days’ advance written
notice clearly stating the reason for and its intention to exercise
withdrawal rights under this division (D), may withdraw an amount from the
security fund, provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the village for
such amount within the 14-day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the
permittee:



      (1)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the
permittee hereunder;



      (2)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that
are due and unpaid;



      (3)   Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims,
costs or expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by
reason of any action or non-performance by the permittee;



      (4)   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that
the village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the
security fund;



      (5)   Files, claims or permits to be filed or claimed any lien
or encumbrance upon any right-of way; or



      (6) Fails to complete its work in the right-of-way by the date
indicated in its application.



   (E)   Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice
from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund,
the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in
division (C) above.



   (F)   Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest
accrued on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by
the village, upon written request for the withdrawal to the village, provided
that any such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum
balance required in division (C) above.



   (G)   Closing and return of security fund. Upon completion of the
work authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the
return of the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit,
within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to
compensate the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any
provisions of this chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any
revocation of the permit, the security fund and any and all accrued interest
shall become the property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any
reasonable costs, losses or damages incurred by the village as a result of
said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of the costs, losses or
damages shall be refunded to the permittee.



   (H)   Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the village with
respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the
village, whether reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and
no action, proceeding or exercise of right with respect to the security fund
shall affect any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery
with respect to any of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise
violated.



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



§ 52.17  PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   Village right to revoke permit. The village may revoke or
suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the
following reasons:



      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting or materially
incomplete statements in the permit application;



      (2)   Non-compliance with any provision of this chapter;



      (3)   Permittee’s physical presence or presence of
permittee’s facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or
within the public rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the
public health, safety or welfare;



      (4)   Permittee’s failure to construct the facilities
substantially in accordance with the permit and approved plans; or



      (5)   Permittee’s failure to complete its work in the
right-of-way by the date indicated in its application.



   (B)   Notice of revocation or suspension. The village shall send
written notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to
this chapter, stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension
and the alternatives available to permittee under this section.



   (C)   Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or
suspension.



      (1)   Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or
suspension from the village, the permittee shall have the following options:



         (a)   Immediately provide the village with evidence that
no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;



         (b)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the
village, the deficiencies stated in the notice, providing written proof of
such correction to the village within five days after receipt of the notice;
or



         (c)   Immediately remove the facilities located on,
over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the public rights-of-way
and restore the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the village, providing
written proof of such removal to the village within ten days after receipt of
the notice.



      (2)   The village may, in its discretion and for good cause
shown, extend the time periods provided in this division (C).



   (D)   Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of
revocation or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately
upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within division
(A) above.



   (E)   Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. If the
permittee fails to comply with the provisions of division (C) above, the
village or its designee may, at the option of the village: (i) correct the
deficiencies; (ii) upon not less than 20 days’ notice to the permittee,
remove the subject facilities or equipment; or (iii) after not less than 30
days’ notice to the permittee of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem
them abandoned and property of the village. The permittee shall be liable in
all events to the village for all costs of removal.



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



§ 52.18  CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP.



   (A)   Notification of change. A utility shall notify the village in
writing no less than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any
facility in the right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new
owner of the utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and
privileges enjoyed by the former owner under the permit, if any, and all
applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this chapter,
with respect to the work and facilities in the right-of-way.



   (B)   Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current
permit be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a
new or amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to
have accepted and agreed to be bound by the terms and conditions of the
permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the
village’s right-of-way.



   (C)   Insurance and letters of credit. All required insurance
coverage or letters of credit must be changed to reflect the name of the new
owner upon transfer.



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



OTHER REQUIREMENTS



§ 52.30  GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   (A)   Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way
shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and
regulations and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and
construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable,
the principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications:



      (1)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;



      (2)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special
Provisions;



      (3)   Highway Design Manual;



      (4)   Highway Standards Manual;



      (5)   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;



      (6)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92
Ill. Adm. Code 545);



      (7)   Flagger’s Handbook; and



      (8)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance
Operations.



   (B)   Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a
discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards
required by this chapter, the Village Director of Public Works shall
determine, in the exercise of sound judgment, which principles apply. Such
decisions shall be final. If requested, the Village Director of Public Works
shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction,
maintenance or operation of a facility in the future.



   (C)   No liens or encumbrances. Neither the licensee nor any of its
contractors or subcontractors shall file or claim any lien or other
encumbrance upon any right-of-way.



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



§ 52.31  TRAFFIC CONTROL.



   (A)   Minimum requirements. The village’s minimum requirements for
traffic protection are contained in IDOT’s Illinois Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices and this code.



   (B)   Warning signs, protective devices, and flaggers. The utility
is responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices
and flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable federal, state and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility’s workers when
performing any work on the public rights-of-way.



   (C)   Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that
there is minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.



   (D)   Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any
residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident,
business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of
such work, provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs
pursuant to § 52.37, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable
under the circumstances.



   (E)   Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct
any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility’s attention by the village.



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



§ 52.32  LOCATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   General requirements. In addition to location requirements
applicable to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities,
regardless of type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of
this division (A).



      (1)   No interference with village facilities. No utility
facilities shall be placed in any location if the Village Director of Public
Works determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or
displacement of any of the village’s utility facilities or will otherwise
interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the village’s utility
facilities.



      (2)   Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location
shall cause only the minimum possible interference with the use of the
right-of-way and shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon and
interference with the rights and reasonable convenience, enjoyment and
aesthetics of property owners who adjoin said right-of-way.



      (3)   No interference with travel. No utility facility shall
be placed in any location that interferes with the usual travel on such
right-of-way.



      (4)   No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall
be placed in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the
right-of-way.



      (5)   Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation
shall use the smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power
pedestals and/or cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of
location, for the particular application.



   (B)   Parallel facilities located within highways.



      (1)   Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel
facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:



         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the
right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as
reasonable pole alignment will permit;



         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as
practicable from the curb, with a minimum distance of two feet behind the
face of the curb, where available;



         (c)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote from
pavement edge as practicable, with minimum distance of four feet outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway, and are not within the clear zone;



         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway;
and



         (e)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within
one foot of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way
line.



      (2)   Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel
facility may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:



         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way
line as practicable and not more than eight feet from and parallel to the
right-of-way line;



         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved
portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable or
inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be
installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and



         (c)   In the case of an underground power or
communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way
line as practicable and not more than five feet from the right-of-way line,
and any above-grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot of the
right-of-way line or as near as practicable.



   (C)   Facilities crossing highways.



      (1)   No future disruption. The construction and design of
crossing facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of
village highways may require the incorporation of materials and protections
(such as encasement or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future
repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing
facilities.



      (2)   Cattle passes, culverts or drainage facilities. Crossing
facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts or drainage
facilities.



      (3)   Ninety-degree crossing required. Crossing facilities
shall cross at or as near to a 90-degree angle to the centerline as
practicable.



      (4)   Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead
power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:



         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as
required by ICC’s rules entitled, “Construction of Electric Power and
Communication Lines” (83 Ill. Adm. Code 305);



         (b)   Poles are located within one foot of the
right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and



         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are
avoided.



      (5)   Underground power or communication facility. An
underground power or communication facility may cross a highway only if:



         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will
provide maximum maintenance-free service life; and



         (b)    Capacity for the utility’s foreseeable future
expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.



      (6)   Markers. The village may require the utility to provide
a marker at each right-of-way line where an underground facility, other than
a power or communication facility, crosses a highway. Each marker shall
identify the type of facility, the utility and an emergency phone number.
Markers may also be eliminated as provided in 49 C.F.R. 192.707.



   (D)   Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The
village may require that facilities be located within particular
rights-of-way that are not highways, rather than within particular highways.



   (E)   Freestanding facilities.



      (1)   The village may restrict the location and size of any
freestanding facility located within a right-of-way.



      (2)   Any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way
shall be screened from view in accordance with a screening and landscaping
plan approved by the village.



   (F)   Above ground facilities. Above ground facilities may be
installed only if:



      (1)   The Village Director of Public Works determines that
underground installation is not technically feasible; and



      (2)   The proposed installation will be made at a location,
and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest
protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without
adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include without limitation
self-supporting armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration
of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be
used whenever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is
strongly discouraged.



   (G)   Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.



      (1)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or
roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other
means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall
include without limitation underground, underwater, independent poles, cable
supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the
bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are
volatile, flammable, corrosive or energized, especially those under
significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk, and such
installations are not permitted.



      (2)   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a
facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data
demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or
disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway
structure will be based upon the following considerations:



         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the
commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to
persons and property in the event of damage to or failure of the faculty;



         (b)   The type, length, value and relative importance of
the highway structure in the transportation system;



         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility
and their comparative practicability;



         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;



         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased
load of the proposed facility;



         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance
and painting;



         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure;
and



         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility
service as compared to the risk involved.



   (H)   Appearance standards.



      (1)   The village may prohibit the installation of facilities
in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.



      (2)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction
does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features
visible to the right-of-way user or impair the aesthetic quality of the lands
being traversed.



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



§ 52.33  CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS.



   (A)   Standards and requirements for particular types of
construction methods.



      (1)   Boring or jacking.



         (a)   Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under
rights-of-way shall be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance
specified by the Village Director of Public Works from the edge of the
pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours
in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours
after boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they
shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be
designed, erected, supported, braced and maintained so that it will safely
support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the
boring or jacking operation.



         (b)   Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall
not be permitted under the roadway.



         (c)   Borings with diameters greater than six inches.
Borings over six inches in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the anger shall not exceed the outside
diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch.



         (d)   Borings with diameters six inches or less. Borings
of six inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking,
guided with auger or auger and following pipe method.



         (e)   Tree preservation. Any facility located within the
drip line of any tree designated to be preserved on the preservation plan
approved by the village shall be bored under or around the root system.



      (2)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair
or maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of Section 603 of IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction.”



         (a)   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to
the practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipeline testing.
Only one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the Village Director of Public Works.



         (b)   Open trench and excavated material. Open trench
and windrowed excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6
of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable,
the excavated material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench
as added protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the
paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for
windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated
material shall be hauled to an off-road location.



         (c)   Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench
within the drip line of any tree designated to be preserved on the
preservation plan approved by the village.



      (3)   Backfilling.



         (a)   Any pit, trench or excavation created during the
installation of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth and
length using methods and materials in accordance with IDOT’s “Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.” When excavated material
is hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill
shall be used.



         (b)   For a period of three years from the date
construction of a facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to
remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction
of the facility. If so ordered by the Village Director of Public Works, the
utility at its expense shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the
top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill
material and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs and driveways to the
proper grades, as determined by the Director of Public Works.



      (4)   Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation
or repair shall only be permitted on a highway if that portion is closed to
traffic and if no other construction method is technically feasible. If a
variance to the limitation set forth in this division (A)(4) is permitted
under § 52.50, the following requirements shall apply:



         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the Village Director of Public Works.



         (b)   Restoration of pavement in kind shall be
accomplished as soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous
mixture shall be provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the
temporary repair or the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the
village.



         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.



         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been
reconstructed with a concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or
resurfaced in the last three years, permits shall not be issued unless such
work is determined to be an emergency repair or other work considered
necessary and unforeseen before the time of the reconstruction or unless a
pavement cut is necessary for a J.U.L.I.E. locate.



      (5)   Encasement.



         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the
load of the highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be
continuous either by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed
installation approved by the village.



         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall
extend within one foot of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes
shall be located in the area established as clear zone for that particular
section of the highway.



         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing,
encasement shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or
village-approved jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be
omitted only if pipe is installed prior to highway construction and carrier
pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of a type approved by the
village. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of
installation method.



         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.



         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products
pipelines with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be
eliminated only if (i) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future
maintenance or repair, and (ii) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.



         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum
products pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that
construction does not disrupt the right-of-way.



      (6)   Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be
provided and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following
table for minimum cover for the type of facility, unless the village in its
discretion requires greater coverage:



 


TYPE OF FACILITY

 

MINIMUM COVER



Electric lines
 
30 inches


Communication, cable or video service lines
 
18 - 24 inches (determined by village)


Gas or petroleum products
 
30 inches


Water line
 
Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection


Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage line
 
Sufficient cover to provide freeze protection



 



   (B)   Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities.



      (1)   Electric power or communication lines.



         (a)   Code compliance. Electric power or communications
facilities within village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated and
maintained in conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code 305 and the
National Electrical Safety Code.



         (b)   Overhead facilities. Overhead power or
communication facilities shall use single pole construction and, where
practicable, joint use of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every
reasonable effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not he
needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if
guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.



         (c)   Underground facilities. Cable may be installed by
trenching or plowing, provided that special consideration is given to boring
in order to minimize damage when crossing improved entrances and side roads.
If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be provided
between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if (i) the
crossing is installed by the use of “moles,” “whip augers” or other
approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation, or (ii) the installation is by the open trench method which is
only permitted prior to roadway construction. Cable shall be grounded in
accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code.



         (d)   Burial of drops. All temporary service drops
placed between November 1 of a given year and March 15 of the following year,
also known as snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of such following year,
weather permitting, unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather
permitting, utilities shall bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops,
within ten business days after placement.



      (2)   Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines may be installed by:



         (a)   The use of “moles,” “whip augers” or other
approved methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;



         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided
between the ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;



         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between
ultimate ditch lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway
construction; or



         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if
installation is not possible by other means.



      (3)   Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas
pipelines within rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained and operated
in a village-approved manner and in conformance with 49 C.F.R. 192, IDOT’s
“Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction” and all other
applicable laws, rules and regulations.



      (4)   Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products
pipelines within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of
ANSI Standard Code for Pressure Piping, (Liquid Petroleum Transportation
Piping Systems ANSI-B 31.4).



      (5)   Waterlines. sanitary sewer lines, storm water sewer
lines or drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines
and drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the
recommendations of the current “Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Illinois.”



      (6)   Ground mounted appurtenances. Ground mounted
appurtenances to overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a
right-of-way, shall be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one
foot in width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free
area may be provided by an extension of the mounting pad or by heavy duty
plastic or similar material approved by the Village Director of Public Works.
With the approval of the Village Director of Public Works, shrubbery
surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area.
The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color
to blend with the surroundings.



   (C)   Materials.



      (1)   General standards. The materials used in constructing
facilities within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards
of the appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT’s “Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,” the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.



      (2)   Material storage on right-of-way. No material shall be
stored on the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Village
Director of Public Works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit,
wire, poles, cross arms or other materials shall be distributed along the
right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards
to the public, obstacles to right-of-way maintenance and damage to the
right-of-way and other property.



      (3)   Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility
to the village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in
the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.



   (D)   Operational restrictions.



      (1)   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the
discretion of the village, be required to be discontinued when such
operations would create hazards to traffic or the public health, safety and
welfare. Such operations may also be required to be discontinued or
restricted when conditions are such that construction would result in
extensive damage to the right-of-way or other property.



      (2)   These restrictions may be waived by the Village Director
of Public Works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility
services.



      (3)   Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of
construction are those set forth in § 94.01 of this code.



   (E)   Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to
construct facilities within the village shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and
ascertain the presence and location of existing above-ground and underground
facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed
facilities. The village will make its permit records available to a utility
for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an
excavation or when requested by the village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall
locate and physically mark its underground facilities within 48 hours,
excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground
Facilities Damage Prevention Act (ILCS Ch. 220, Act 50 §§ 11 et seq.).



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



§ 52.34  VEGETATION CONTROL.



   (A)   Electric utilities—compliance with state laws and
regulations. An electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and
vegetation control activities in the right-of-way in accordance with
applicable Illinois laws and regulations and with such local franchise or
other agreement with the village as permitted by law.



   (B)   Other utilities—tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming
that is done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way, and
that is not performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations
specifically governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance
operation, but shall require the application for and the issuance of a
permit, in addition to any other permit required under this chapter.



      (1)   Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for
tree trimming permits shall include a tree survey from a certified arborist
and assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent workers with
supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree
trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the interest of
assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.



      (2)   Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in
damaged or misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for
cancellation of the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The
village will require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees
removed without authorization. The formula developed by the International
Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the
compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village
may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical
pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition. Replacement shall be
accomplished by planting one or more trees, the total trunk diameter of which
is equivalent to one and one-quarter times that of the replaced tree. The
village may in its discretion direct the allocation and placement of such
replacement trees.



   (C)   Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The village
may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or
trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of higher
poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.



   (D)   Chemical use.



      (1)   Except as provided in this division (D), no utility
shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or
vegetation in the village for any purpose, including without limitation the
control of growth, insects or disease.



      (2)   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not
be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the Village Director of Public Works that such spraying is
the only practicable method of vegetation control.



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



§ 52.35  REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF FACILITIES.



   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the
village, a utility shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities
within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have determined
that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary
for the construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any village
improvement, or the operations of the village, in or upon the rights-of-way.



   (B)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following
written notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls or maintains
any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the public
rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such
facilities or appurtenances from the public rights-of-way. A facility is
unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:



      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's
license or franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;



      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the
prior grant of a license or franchise, if required;



      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without
prior issuance of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or



      (4)    If the facility was constructed or installed at a
location not permitted by the permittee’s license or franchise.



   (C)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The village
retains the right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within
the rights-of-way of the village, as the village may determine to be
necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety
emergency. If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify
the utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall
notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.



   (D)   Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility
within the public rights-of-way of the village, the utility shall notify the
village within 90 days. Following receipt of such notice, the village may
direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the
Village Director of Public Works determines that such removal will be in the
best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the
village does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it,
the abandoning utility shall be deemed by giving notice of abandonment to the
village to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the
facility by another utility or person.



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



§ 52.36  CLEANUP AND RESTORATION.



   The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf,
terrain and other property, all to the satisfaction of the village, within
ten days after any portion of the right-of-way is disturbed, damaged or
destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the utility. This includes
restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces
shall be made using materials and methods approved by the Village Director of
Public Works. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of
backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding or any other requirement to
restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that
which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The time period
provided in this section may be extended by the Village Director of Public
Works for good cause shown.



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



§ 52.37  MAINTENANCE; EMERGENCIES.



   (A)   General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under,
across or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in
a manner satisfactory to the village and at the utility’s expense.



   (B)   Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify
non-compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit.



      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion
of the right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all
necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the
right-of-way, including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If
a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency
is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in
repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on
the shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means
of access to the facility are available.



      (2)   The utility shall notify the Village Director of Public
Works or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency as soon as
possible, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for
protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the
necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere
with the free movement of traffic, the village police shall be notified
immediately.



      (3)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand
to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least
inconvenience to the traveling public.



   (C)   Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the
village of a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within
48 hours after an emergency repair.



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 52.50  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one
or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the
Village Director of Public Works as a part of the permit application. The
request shall identify each provision of this chapter from which a variance
is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.



   (B)   Authority to grant variances. The Village Director of Public
Works shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of
this chapter identified in the variance request on an individual basis.



   (C)   Conditions for granting of variance. The Village Director of
Public Works may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the
variance has demonstrated that:



      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the
utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a
special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable,
given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and



      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or
facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is
requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach.



   (D)   Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a
condition for authorizing a variance, the Village Director of Public Works
may require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards
and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter
but which carry out the purposes of this chapter.



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



§ 52.51  RIGHT TO APPEAL.



   Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement, decision or
determination, including without limitation the denial of any variance, made
by the Village Director of Public Works under the provisions of this chapter
shall have the right to appeal to the Village Board, or such other board or
commission as the Board may designate. The application for appeal shall be
submitted in writing to the Village Clerk within 30 days after the date of
such order, requirement, decision or determination. The Village Board shall
commence its consideration of the appeal at the Board’s next regularly
scheduled meeting occurring not less than seven days after the filing of the
appeal. The Village Board shall decide the appeal in a timely manner.



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



§ 52.52  NOTICES.



   (A)   Any notice required to be sent to the village pursuant to this
chapter shall be hand-delivered or sent via first class mail to the Village
President, the Village Clerk, the Village Administrator and the Village
Director of Public Works at the following address: Village of Frankfort
Administration Building 432 W. Nebraska Street Frankfort, Illinois 60423.



   (B)   Any notice required to be sent to a utility pursuant to this
chapter shall be hand-delivered or sent via first class mail to the contact
person(s) and address(es) identified in the utility’s annual registration.



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



§ 52.53  ENFORCEMENT.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional
or further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter.



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



§ 52.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine in
accordance with the penalty provisions of this code as well as any other
remedies which may be available in law or equity. If the village prevails in
a suit to compel compliance with this chapter, the defendant utility shall
pay the village’s costs, including without limitation reasonable
attorney’s fees, expert and witness fees and costs of suit.



(Ord. 2479, passed 6-16-08)



CHAPTER 53:  PUBLIC UTILITIES



Section



   53.01   Definitions



   53.02   Reimbursement of village expenses



 



   53.99   Penalty



§ 53.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATIVE COST.  The estimated cost for the village to prepare
and maintain employee, equipment and materials cost estimates and maintain
its financial records associated with the reimbursable event. The village's
administrative cost is 20% of the village's total employee, equipment and
materials costs.



   EMPLOYEE COST.  The product of the village's estimated per hour total
expenses associated with an employee including but not limited to
compensation, benefits and insurance multiplied by 1.5 and then multiplied by
the number of hours worked.



   EQUIPMENT COST. The product of the village estimated total per hour
expense associated with the purchase, lease, operation, repair and
maintenance of the equipment or the village's contracted costs for equipment
multiplied by 1.5 and then multiplied by the number of hours involved.



   GOVERNMENTAL SERVICES. Police, security, public health, safety and
welfare related services performed or made available by, using village
employees, equipment, materials or village operated utilities as well as
contracts entered into by the village with a third party to provide services.



   MATERIAL COST.  The product of actual cost to the village for purchase
of any materials used by the village or village contracted cost for materials
in providing governmental services during the reimbursable event multiplied
by 1.5.



   PUBLIC UTILITY. 



      (1)   Any corporation, company, limited liability company,
association, joint stock company, firm, partnership or individual, or other
entity, their lessees, trustees or receivers, appointed by any court
whatsoever that owns, controls, operates, manages or maintains within or
proximate to the limits of the Village of Frankfort, Will and Cook Counties,
Illinois, directly or indirectly, for any public use,



any plant, facilities, equipment, structures, devices or any type or
description property used or to be used in connection with the production,
storage, transmission, sale, delivery or furnishing of: natural gas,
compressed natural gas, propane gas, power, electricity, water,
communications, telephone, gas, cable television, internet, petroleum
products or other utility that is regulated by any governmental entity;



      (2)   For purposes of this chapter, PUBLIC UTILITY does not
include utilities that are owned and operated by a political subdivision.



   REIMBURSABLE EVENT.  Any occurrence where the Village of Frankfort
provides governmental services where village employees or village contracted
services cumulatively spend more than one hour which is attributable in whole
or part to installation, maintenance, repair or replacement of any to any
real or personal property of a public utility.



(Ord. 2701, passed 3-8-11)



§ 53.02  REIMBURSEMENT OF VILLAGE EXPENSES.



   A public utility shall pay the Village of Frankfort in full within 30
days from invoice for the total of all the village's employee, equipment,
material and administrative costs associated with the village providing
governmental services for a reimbursable event.



(Ord. 2701, passed 3-8-11)



§ 53.99  PENALTY.



   In addition to and not in lieu of any other civil remedies available to
the village under this chapter, any public utility found to have violated any
provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than $250 not more than
$500, with each day of violation constituting a separate offense.



(Ord. 2701, passed 3-8-11)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



      70.   TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT



      71.   TRAFFIC CONTROL SCHEDULES



      72.   PARKING REGULATIONS



      73.   VILLAGE VEHICLE LICENSE



      74.   BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES AND CERTAIN OTHER VEHICLES



      75.   OPERATIONAL PROHIBITIONS



   Editor’s note: Ordinance No. 1731, passed January 16, 1999, adopted
the Village of Frankfort Traffic Code, marked Exhibit “A,” and repealed
the previous traffic regulations, Ordinance Nos. 1372, 571, 676, and 1136. 
The current traffic regulations are on file in the village hall.



CHAPTER 70:  TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT



Section



   70.01   Illinois Vehicle Code adopted as Village of Frankfort
Traffic Code



   70.02   Village Attorney to conduct statutory summary suspension



   70.03   Residential, urban and non-urban speed limits established
throughout the village



§ 70.01  ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED AS VILLAGE OF FRANKFORT TRAFFIC CODE.



   The Illinois Vehicle Code adopted as Village of Frankfort Traffic Code
as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated
as a part of this code as if fully set out herein.



(Ord. 1944, passed 12-2-02)



§ 70.02    VILLAGE ATTORNEY TO CONDUCT STATUTORY SUMMARY SUSPENSION.



   The Village Attorney shall represent the interests of the village and
conduct all statutory summary suspension/implied consent hearings pursuant to
Section 2-118.1 when the underlying complaint or citation giving rise to the
statutory summary suspension is charged as a local ordinance violation.



(Ord. 1944, passed 12-2-02)



§ 70.03  RESIDENTIAL, URBAN AND NON-URBAN SPEED LIMITS ESTABLISHED
THROUGHOUT THE VILLAGE.



   Unless otherwise established for specific streets by ordinance or
unless otherwise posted, the absolute maximum speed limits on all streets
which are within the corporate limits of the village and which are not under
the jurisdiction of the State of Illinois Department of Transportation or the
Illinois State Toll Highway Authority and for which any county or highway
commissioner does not have the maintenance responsibilities, are as follows:



   (A)   Residence District:   25 MPH



   (B)   Urban District:   30 MPH



   (C)   Non-Urban District   35 MPH



   (D)   However, the following specific streets shall have the
following maximum speed limits:



 



88th Avenue
 
Northbound and southbound from St. Francis Road to LaPorte Road extended Way
 
35 MPH


116th Avenue
 
North/southbound from south of Laraway Road to Steger Road
 
35 MPH


Colorado Avenue
 
Eastbound and westbound from U.S. Route 45 to Pfeiffer Road
 
30 MPH


Crooked Creek Drive
 
 
25 MPH


Crystal Lake
 
Northbound at 100 feet north of LaPorte Road
 
25 MPH


Crystal Lake Way
 
Southbound at 100 feet south of LaPorte Road
 
25 MPH


Elsner Road
 
Northbound and southbound from U.S. Route 30 to Nebraska Street
 
35 MPH


Heritage Drive
 
Northbound at 100 feet north of Laraway Road
 
25 MPH


Lakeview Estates Boulevard
 
 
25 MPH


Majestic Lane
 
At Laraway Road
 
25 MPH


Nature Creek Circle
 
 
25 MPH


Nebraska Street
 
Westbound at 100 feet west of Elsner Road
 
25 MPH


Pfeiffer Road
(88th Ave.)
 
Fronting Waterstone subdivision
 
45 MPH


Pfeiffer Road
 
Northbound and southbound from Colorado Avenue to St. Francis Road
 
30 MPH


Pfeiffer Road
 
Northbound and southbound from U.S. Route 30 to Steger Road
 
40 MPH


Regency
 
Northbound at 100 feet north of Laraway Road
 
25 MPH


St. Francis Road
 
Eastbound and westbound between Route 45 and 88th Avenue
 
45 MPH


Sauk Trail
 
Eastbound 100 feet east of Center Road
 
35 MPH


Sauk Trail
 
Westbound 100 feet west of Harlem Avenue
 
35 MPH


Sauk Trail
 
Eastbound 100 feet east of Larch Road
 
45 MPH


Sauk Trail
 
Westbound 100 feet west of Larch Road
 
35 MPH


Sauk Trail
 
East and westbound between Center Road and Pfeiffer Road
 
35 MPH


Scheer Road
 
North of Steger Road to Flagstone Turn
 
35 MPH


Steger Road
 
East/westbound from 116th Avenue to Scheer Road
 
35 MPH


Steger Road
 
East/westbound from U.S. Route 45 to Scheer Road
 
35 MPH


Stuenkel Road
 
Fronting Waterstone subdivision
 
45 MPH


Woodbridge Drive
 
Southbound at 100 feet south of U.S. Route 30
 
25 MPH


Wolf Road
 
Northbound and southbound between Laraway and Steger Roads
 
35 MPH




 



(Ord. 1944, passed 12-2-02; Am. Ord. 1960, passed 4-7-03; Am. Ord. 2043,
passed 1-5-04; Am. Ord. 2081, passed 5-17-04; Am. Ord. 2127, passed 11-1-04;
Am. Ord. 2193, passed 9-6-05; Am. Ord. 2199, passed 9-19-05; Am. Ord. 2319,
passed 9-18-06; Am. Ord. 2428, passed 11-19-07; Am. Ord. 2866, passed
9-16-13; Am. Ord. 2929, passed 7-21-14)



§ 70.04  VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT



   (A)   Preamble.  The preamble to Ordinance 2663 is adopted by
reference into this section as if fully set forth herein.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   DRIVER or OPERATOR.  Every person who drives or is in actual physical
control of a vehicle as defined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-116.



   IMPOUNDMENT OFFENSE.  Any of the following offenses under the laws of
the state or analogous ordinances of the village:



      (1)   Driving a motor vehicle without a valid license (ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-101).



      (2)   Driving while driver's license, permit, or privilege to
operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked, (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
6-303) except a person whose driver's license, permit, or privilege to
operate a motor vehicle is suspended only for a violation of ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, §§ 13 et seq., the “Vehicle Emissions Inspection Law of 2005”;



      (3)   Fleeing or attempting to elude a peace officer (ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 11-204);



      (4)   Driving under the influence of alcohol, other drug or
drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof (ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501);



      (5)   A person under 21 years of age driving a motor vehicle
having consumed or in possession of an alcoholic beverage;



      (6)   Reckless driving or aggravated reckless driving (ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-503);



      (7)   Street racing (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-505);



      (8)   Driving a motor vehicle when a warrant is outstanding
for the arrest of the vehicle's driver;



      (9)   Driving 40 miles an hour or more in excess of applicable
speed limit (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-601.5);



      (10)   Indecent solicitation of a child (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5,
§ 11-6);



      (11)   Aggravated assault (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 12-2);



      (12)   Aggravated battery with a firearm (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5,
§ 12-4.2);



      (13)   Aggravated battery of a child (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §
12-4.3);



      (14)   Aggravated battery of a senior citizen (ILCS Ch. 720,
Act 5, § 12-4.6);



      (15)   Theft (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 16-1)



      (16)   Retail theft, when the value of the merchandise exceeds
$150.00 (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 16-25);



      (17)   Robbery (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 18-1);



      (18)   Armed robbery (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 18-2);



      (19)   Burglary (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 19-1);



      (20)   Residential burglary (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 19-3);



      (21)   Arson (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 20-1);



      (22)   Aggravated arson (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 20-1.1);



      (23)   Possession of explosives or explosive or incendiary
devices (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 20-2);



      (24)   Criminal damage to property in excess of $300.00 (ILCS
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-1);



      (25)   Any weapons related offenses under Article 24 of the
Criminal Code of 1961, including carrying a concealed weapon, discharge of
firearms or air guns, or prohibited possession of a weapon; or other weapons
offenses under ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 24-1 et seq.



      (26)   Mob action (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 25-1);



      (27)   Manufacture, deliver, or possess with intent to
manufacture or deliver a controlled substance (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570, § 401);



      (28)   Possession of a controlled or counterfeit substance or
controlled substance analog (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570, § 402);



      (29)   Possession of cannabis (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550, § 4);



      (30)   Manufacture or delivery of cannabis (ILCS Ch. 720, Act
550, § 5);



      (31)   Cannabis trafficking (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550, § 5.1);



      (32)   Delivery of cannabis on school grounds (ILCS Ch. 720,
Act 550, § 5.2);



2011 S-17



      (33)   Unauthorized production or possession of cannabis
sativa plant (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550, § 8);



      (34)   Possession of drug paraphernalia under the Drug
Paraphernalia Control Act (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 600, § 3.5); and



      (35)   Any offense which is classified as a felony.



   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE.  Every vehicle or type of vehicle defined by
section 5/1-146 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-146).



   OPERATOR.  See DRIVER.



   OWNER(S).  Owner(s) of record of a motor vehicle is based upon either
the vehicle's registered owner or certificate of title with the Secretary of
State or other applicable governmental office or agency if not registered in
Illinois.



   VEHICLE.  See MOTOR VEHICLE.



   (C)   Impoundment of motor vehicles.



      (1)   Enforcement.  The Police Department of the Village is
hereby authorized to implement, direct and supervise a program of vehicle
seizure and impoundment pursuant to the provisions of this section.  The
Police Department, and any other duly authorized agents of the village, is
hereby authorized to seize and impound any vehicle eligible for impoundment
pursuant to this section.



      (2)   Impoundment required.  Any motor vehicle used or
involved in the alleged commission of any impoundment offense shall be
immediately seized and impounded by the village.



      (3)   Seizure and impoundment. Whenever a police officer has
probable cause to believe that a motor vehicle is subject to seizure and
impoundment pursuant to this section, the police officer shall provide for
the towing of the motor vehicle according to police department procedures. 
When the motor vehicle is towed and so long as the person is present at the
time of seizure, the police officer shall notify the person who is found to
be in control of the motor vehicle at the time of the alleged violation,
and/or the owner of the vehicle, of the fact of the seizure and of the motor
vehicle owner's right to request a preliminary hearing.  The motor vehicle
shall be impounded pending the completion of the hearings provided for in
this section, unless the owner of the motor vehicle posts with the village a
cash bond as provided in this section.



   (D)   Impoundment hearing process.



      (1)   Notice required.  Within in two business days of
impoundment, the village shall give one written notice to the owner and
driver of the motor vehicle by personal hand delivery or by certified United
States mail return-receipt requested of:



         (a)   The impoundment of the vehicle;



         (b)   The amount of the village administrative fee and
tow and daily storage charge;



         (c)   The opportunity to post a bond and pay tow and
storage charges for release of the vehicle pending any hearing;



         (d)   The opportunity to request a preliminary hearing
before the Police Chief or the Chief's designee regarding the impoundment
within five business days of the date of the notice; and



         (e)   Notice of the date, time, and place of a final
hearing regarding the vehicle impoundment as provided in this section.



      (2)   Preliminary hearing.  Within seven business days from
the date of the written notice, the owner of record and the driver of a
vehicle seized and impounded pursuant to this section may preliminarily
appeal the impoundment.  This request shall be in writing, include the
owner's name, address, phone number, and email address, and be filed with the
Chief of Police or the Chief's designee, who shall conduct such a preliminary
hearing within two business days of receipt of the owner's request for the
hearing.  The Police Department will give the owner notice by mail,
telephone, email, or in person on the date and time of this hearing.  For
purposes of this section, “business days” shall mean Monday through
Friday, excluding holidays.  All interested persons shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to be heard at the preliminary vehicle impoundment
hearing.  The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing and
hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it is the type commonly relied
upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.  If,
after the hearing, the Chief or designee determines there is probable cause
to believe that the vehicle is subject to impoundment pursuant to this
section, the Chief of Police shall order the continued impoundment of the
vehicle as provided in this section, unless the owner of the vehicle posts
with the village a cash bond in the amount of $200 and pays all applicable
towing and storage fees as provided in this section.  If the Chief of Police
or designee determines there is no such probable cause, the vehicle will be
released to the owner without penalty or payment of other fees including
towing and storage charges.



      (3)   Notice of final hearing.  Unless the owner
affirmatively waives the right to a hearing, within two business days after a
motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this section, the village
shall notify the owner of record of that motor vehicle and the driver of the
motor vehicle by either personal service or certified mail, return-receipt
requested of the date, time, and location of a hearing that will be conducted
pursuant to this section.  The notice shall state that towing and storage
and administrative fees may be imposed and, if determined to be owed by the
owner, that a motor vehicle will not be released until paid in full and, if
not properly paid, the village may lien, dispose of, and sell the motor
vehicle as provided by law as well as in accordance with applicable law. 
The hearing shall be scheduled not less than seven days or more than 21 days
from the date of the notice of hearing.



      (4)   Final hearing.  The hearing shall be scheduled not less
than seven days or more than 21 days from the date of the notice of hearing.



      (5)   Appointment of hearing officer.  The Village
Administrator shall appoint a hearing officer to preside over the final
hearing, which hearing officer must be an attorney in good standing and
licensed to practice law in the state.



      (6)   Waiver.  By written waiver, the vehicle owner may wave
all rights to a final hearing and consent to pay all applicable fees and
costs associated with the vehicle seizure.



      (7)   Hearing officer duties.  The hearing officer shall be
empowered and is hereby authorized and directed to:



         (a)   Preside over the final hearing as the adjudicator;



         (b)   Rule upon motions presented in the matter;



         (c)   Administer oaths;



         (d)   If otherwise permitted by law, issue subpoenas to
secure the attendance of witnesses and production of relevant documentation;



         (e)   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is
relevant to the basis of the impoundment or seizure;



         (f)   Make final determinations of violation liability;



         (g)   Assess fines and penalties as established by
ordinance; and



         (h)   Provide for an accurate recordation of the final
hearing.



      (8)   Opportunity to be heard.  All interested persons shall
be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing.  At any time
prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer may, at the request of either
party, direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing.  The
formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence
shall be admissible only if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably
prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.  In a hearing on the
propriety of impoundment of a vehicle, any police report verified under oath
or affirmed by an officer participating in the arrest that to the best of the
officer's knowledge, the report is true, accurate, and in substance complete
and (1) is prepared in the performance of a law enforcement officer's duties
and (2) sufficiently describes the circumstances leading to the impoundment,
shall be admissible evidence of the vehicle owner's liability, unless
admission is rebutted by clear and convincing evidence.  If, after the
hearing, the hearing officer determines by a preponderance of evidence that
the vehicle was used in connection with a violation set forth in this
section, the hearing officer shall enter an order finding the owner of record
of the vehicle civilly liable to the village for an administrative fee in the
amount of $$200 dollars and requiring the vehicle to continue to be impounded
until the owner pays the administrative fee to the village and all towing and
vehicle storage charges due for the vehicle.  If the owner of record fails
to appear at the hearing, the hearing officer shall enter a default order in
favor of the village.  If the hearing officer finds that no such violation
occurred, the hearing officer shall order the immediate return of the owner's
vehicle or cash bond without fees including towing and vehicle storage
charges.



   (E)   Fees and charges.



      (1)   Administrative fee.



         (a)   There is assessed against the owner of any vehicle
which has been seized and impounded under village ordinance a village
administrative fee of $200.



         (b)   However, this administrative fee does not apply if:



            1.   The motor vehicle used in the violation was
stolen at that time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police
authorities within 24 hours after the theft was discovered; or



            2.   The motor vehicle is operating as a common
carrier and the violation occurs without the knowledge of the person in
control of the motor vehicle; or



            3.   The motor vehicle is subject to successful
forfeiture proceedings under ILCS Ch. 725, Act 150, §§ 1 et seq., the Drug
Asset Forfeiture Procedure Act, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 36-1 et seq., the
Seizure and Forfeiture of Vessels, Vehicles, and Aircraft Act, or state or
federal forfeiture laws.  For purposes of this section, the “owner of
record” or “owner” of a motor vehicle is the record title holder as
registered with the Secretary of State.



      (2)   Determination of towing and storage charges.  The cost
for towing and daily storage of a motor vehicle impounded pursuant to this
section shall be approved by the Village Administrator based upon the state
tow charge schedule for Chicagoland area for all tow companies authorized to
tow for the village Police Department.



      (3)   Towing and storage charges.  There is assessed the
owner of any vehicle seized and impounded under village ordinance a towing
fee and storage fee in such amounts as from time to time determined under
this section.



      (4)   Cash bond pending hearing.  To release the vehicle
pending the hearing, the owner of an impounded motor vehicle may, after
impoundment and prior to final hearing, post with the village a $200 cash
bond of United States currency and pay all vehicle towing and storage
charges.  A condition of the bond includes this amount can be applied in
payment of any sums which may be found to be due the village under this
section or other ordinances.



      (5)   Payment.  If an administrative or other fee or cost is
imposed under this section, such fee shall constitute a debt due and owing to
the village.  If a cash bond has been posted pursuant to this section, the
bond shall be applied to the fee.  If a vehicle has been impounded when such
a fee is imposed, the village may seek to obtain a judgment on the debt and
enforce such judgment against the vehicle as provided by law.  Except as
provided otherwise by law, a vehicle shall continue to be impounded until all
fees and costs are paid to the village and any applicable towing and storage
fees are paid in full, in which case possession of the vehicle shall be given
to the vehicle owner, or the vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of [to
satisfy] a judgment to enforce a lien as provided by law.  If the
administrative and other applicable fees and costs are not paid within 35
days after a notice of determination in the final hearing, such fees and
costs are due and payable as given to the parties.  If the vehicle owner who
defaults by failing to appear at the hearing or otherwise fails to pay all
fees and costs imposed under this section, the vehicle shall be deemed
unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the
disposition of unclaimed vehicles.  Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary, if the administrative fee and other applicable fees and costs are
not paid within 35 days after the expiration of time at which administrative
review of the hearing officer's determination may be sought, or within 30
days after an action seeking administrative review has been resolved in favor
of the village, whichever is applicable, the vehicle shall be deemed
unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the
disposition of unclaimed vehicles under the state vehicle code.



   (F)   Possession of vehicle.



      (1)   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no
owner, lien holder, or other person shall be legally entitled to take
possession of a vehicle impounded under this section until the administrative
fee or other fees applicable under this section have been paid.  However,
whenever a person with a lien of record against an impounded vehicle has
commenced foreclosure proceedings, possession of the vehicle shall be given
to that person if he or she agrees in writing to refund to the village the
amount of the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less any amounts required
to pay all lien holders of record, not to exceed the administrative penalty,
plus the applicable fees.



         (a)   The provisions of this section authorizing an
owner or other party to regain possession of a motor vehicle are not
applicable when vehicle or asset forfeiture proceedings have been instituted
under state or federal drug asset forfeiture laws or Article 36 of the
Illinois Criminal Code (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 36-1 et seq.).  In such
case, the village shall not release, or dispose of, the vehicle to any person
except as consistent with those proceedings.



         (b)   In the event the Police Department determines that
the vehicle impounded pursuant to this section should not be released to its
owner or other persons, or disposed of as an unclaimed vehicle, due to the
need to retain the vehicle as part of a continuing criminal investigation, or
as evidence in a crime, then the village shall notify the owner that the
vehicle will be retained and not released except as required by law.



      (2)   Vehicle possession.



         (a)   Except as provided otherwise in this section, a
motor vehicle shall continue to be impounded until:



            1.   The administrative fee, plus any applicable
towing and storage charges, are paid, in which case possession of the motor
vehicle shall be given to the person who is legally entitled to possess the
motor vehicle; or



            2.   The motor vehicle is sold or otherwise
disposed of to satisfy a judgment to enforce a lien as provided by law.



         (b)   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law,
no owner, lien holder, or other person shall be legally entitled to take
possession of a motor vehicle impounded under this section until the civil
fees applicable under this section have been paid.



   (G)   Applicability.  This section shall not replace or otherwise
abrogate any existing state or federal laws or village ordinance pertaining
to vehicle seizure and impoundment, and this administrative fee shall be in
addition to and not in lieu of any fines, costs, penalties, or fees that may
be assessed by a court for any of these offenses.



(rd. 2663, passed 11-1-10)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC CONTROL SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Stop intersections



      II.   Yield intersections



      III.   Speed limit signs



      IV.   Right turn only signs



      V.   Miscellaneous signs



      VI.   No parking signs



      VII.   Strictly enforced speed limit signs



      VIII.   Overweight and overdimension permits



SCHEDULE I:  STOP INTERSECTIONS.



   The intersections enumerated below are designated as stop intersections
within the corporate limits of the village.  Establish and post a stop sign
at the following:



 



80th Avenue:
 
Northbound at Sauk Trail


80th Avenue:
 
North/Southbound at Laraway Road


80th Avenue:
 
Southbound at Steger Road


88th Avenue:
 
Southbound at St. Francis Road


94th Avenue:
 
Northbound at U.S. Route 30


95th Avenue:
 
Northbound at U.S. Route 30


108th Avenue:
 
East and westbound at Nebraska Street


108th Avenue:
 
Southbound at Nebraska Street


116th Avenue:
 
Southbound at Steger Road


Abbey Court North:
 
Southbound at Abbey Drive


Abbey Drive:
 
South/Northbound at Colorado Avenue


Abbey Drive:
 
Westbound at Abbey Woods clock tower


Aberdeen Road:
 
Eastbound at Harlem Avenue


Aine Drive:
 
Northbound at LaPorte Road


Anise Drive:
 
Eastbound at 116th Avenue


Aine Drive:
 
Westbound at Brendan Street


Anna Lane:
 
North and southbound at Crooked Creek Drive


Arbour Walk Drive:
 
Eastbound as Woodbridge Drive


Ash Street:
 
Northbound at Kansas Street


Ash Street:
 
Northbound at Nebraska Street


Ashford:
 
Eastbound at Regency Drive


Ashford:
 
Westbound at Heritage Drive


Ashley Court:
 
Northbound at Colorado Avenue


Aspen Street:
 
Northbound at Colorado Avenue


Aster Drive:
 
Northbound at Stoll Road


Autumn Drive:
 
Northbound at Stoll Road


Autumn Drive (east leg):
 
Southbound at Stoll Road


Autumn Drive (west leg):
 
Southbound at Stoll Road


Azure Drive:
 
Southbound at Steger Road


Bankview Drive:
 
Eastbound at U.S. Route 45


Bankview Drive:
 
Northbound at Colorado Avenue


Bear Claw Lane:
 
Southbound at Windsor Lane


Bear Claw Trail:
 
Northbound at Pineview Lane


Berwick Drive:
 
Northbound at Granton Place


Berwick Drive:
 
Southbound at Pemrose Lane


Big Buck Trail:
 
Westbound at 80th Avenue


Big Sable Point:
 
Eastbound at Pfeiffer Road


Big Sable Point:
 
Westbound at Grand Traverse Drive


Birchwood Road:
 
Southbound at Colorado Avenue


Blarney Road:
 
Southbound at Pine Ridge Drive


Bowen Street-East:
 
Eastbound at Lawndale Boulevard


Bowen Street-East:
 
Westbound at White Street


Bowen Street-West:
 
Eastbound at White Street


Brendan Street:
 
Northbound at Waterview Trail


Brendan Street:
 
Southbound at St. Francis Road


Brendan Street:
 
Westbound at Waterview Trail


Breton Road:
 
Northbound at Windy Hill Drive


Brittany Drive:
 
Eastbound at Plank Trail Drive


Brittany Drive:
 
Westbound at Plank Trail Drive


Brook Stone Court:
 
Northbound at Pine Ridge Drive


Brookside Lane:
 
Westbound at Elsner Road


Brookhaven Drive:
 
East and westbound at Pine Ridge Drive


Brookhaven Drive:
 
Eastbound at Pine Ridge Drive


Buffalo Wild Wings
 
Southbound at Lincoln-Way Lane


  Private Drive:
 
 


Butternut Trail:
 
Northbound at Ironwood Drive


Butternut Trail:
 
Southbound at U.S. Route 30


Callista Drive:
 
Eastbound at Pine Ridge Drive


Cambridge Court:
 
Eastbound at 94th Avenue


Cardinal Lake Drive:
 
Eastbound at 108th Avenue


Caroline Court:
 
Northbound at Sandalwood Drive


Caroline Court:
 
Southbound at Sandalwood Drive


Carpenter Street:
 
Southbound at Elwood Street


Center Road:
 
Northbound at Nebraska Street


Charrington Drive:
 
Eastbound at Ascott


Charrington Drive:
 
Westbound at Ascott


Chestnut Court:
 
Southbound at Nebraska Street


Chestnut Drive:
 
Northbound at Nebraska Street


Chestnut Drive:
 
Southbound at Sauk Trail


Cobblestone Trail:
 
Southbound at Flagstone Turn


Colorado Avenue:
 
Westbound at Hawthorne Road


Colorado Avenue:
 
Eastbound at Pfeiffer Road


Coquille Drive:
 
Eastbound at 116th Avenue


Coquille Drive:
 
Southbound at Azure Drive


Coriander Lane:
 
Southbound at Sandalwood Drive


Corsair Road:
 
Westbound at Center Road


Cottonwood Road:
 
North/Southbound at Indiana Court


Cottonwood Road:
 
Southbound at Lincoln Lane


Coventry Lane:
 
Westbound at 78th Avenue


Crimson Lane:
 
Northbound at Stoll Road


Crimson Lane:
 
Southbound at Autumn Drive


Crooked Creek Drive:
 
East and westbound at Lakeview Estates Boulevard


Crooked Creek Drive:
 
Eastbound at 80th Avenue


Dublin Court:
 
Southbound at York Drive


Dublin Way:
 
Northbound at York Drive


Dublin Way:
 
Southbound at Steger Road


Dunlap Reef Drive:
 
Westbound at Michigan Island Drive


Dunlap Reef Drive:
 
Eastbound at Grand Haven Drive


Eagle Bluff Court:
 
Southbound at Colorado Avenue


Elm Street:
 
North/Southbound at U.S. Route 30


Elsner Road:
 
Eastbound/Southbound at Nebraska Street


Elsner Road:
 
North/Southbound at Nebraska Street


Elsner Road:
 
Northbound at U.S. Route 30


Elwood Street:
 
Eastbound at White Street


Emily Lane:
 
Southbound at Sandalwood Drive (both intersections)


English Lane:
 
Northbound at Windy Hill Drive


Escanaba Harbor Court:
 
Northbound at Colorado Avenue


Evergreen Drive:
 
Northbound at Nebraska Street


Evergreen Drive:
 
Southbound at Sauk Trail


Falls View Way:
 
Westbound at 116th Avenue


Field Stone Drive:
 
Westbound at Stone Creek Boulevard


Field Stone Drive:
 
Southbound at Stanford Drive


Firenze Drive:
 
Northbound at Siena Drive


Firenze Drive:
 
Southbound at Steger Road


Flagstone Turn:
 
Eastbound at 116th Avenue


Flagstone Turn:
 
Westbound at Scheer Road


Folker’s Drive:
 
Eastbound at Old Frankfort Way


Francisca Way:
 
Southbound at Colorado Avenue


Frankfort Main:
 
Westbound at U.S. Route 45


Franklin Avenue:
 
East/Westbound at Grant Street


Franklin Avenue:
 
Eastbound at Maple Street


Franklin Avenue:
 
Westbound at Elsner Road


Franklin Avenue:
 
Westbound at Locust Street


Georgetown Commons:
 
Eastbound at Harlem Avenue


Ginger Drive:
 
Northbound at Sandalwood Lane


Ginger Lane:
 
Westbound at 92nd Avenue


Grand Haven Drive:
 
Westbound at Holland Harbor Drive


Grand Haven Drive:
 
Southbound at Colorado Avenue


Grand Traverse Drive:
 
Northbound at St. Francis Road


Granite Drive:
 
Northbound at Flagstone Turn


Grant Avenue:
 
North/Southbound at Franklin Street


Granton Place:
 
Southbound at Steger Road


Granton Place:
 
Northbound at Mayfield Drive


Granton Place:
 
Westbound at Granton Place


Granton Place:
 
Eastbound at Harlem Avenue


Gray’s Reef Court:
 
Northbound at Colorado Avenue


Gulfstream Road:
 
Westbound at Center Road


Gull Island Court:
 
Northbound at Colorado Avenue


Hackberry Road:
 
Northbound at Cedar Lane


Hackberry Road:
 
Southbound at U.S. Route 30


Hamilton Avenue:
 
North/Southbound at Franklin Avenue


Hankins Court:
 
Southbound at Mayfield Drive


Harlem Avenue:
 
Within 200 to 300 feet of the Old Plank Road Trail crossing on  Harlem Avenue


Hawthorne Road:
 
East/Westbound at Cottonwood Road


Hawthorne Road:
 
Northbound at Indiana Court


Hawthorne Road:
 
Westbound at Hackberry Road


Heritage Drive:
 
Eastbound/Westbound at Princeton Circle


Hickory Street:
 
North/Southbound at Nebraska Street


Hickory Street:
 
Northbound at Kansas Street


High Stone Way (2 locations):
 
Northbound at Pine Ridge Drive


Highland Road:
 
Southbound at Sauk Trail


Hinspeter Drive:
 
Eastbound at Wolf Road


Hinspeter Drive:
 
Westbound at Wolf Road


Hinspeter Drive:
 
Northbound at Stoll Road


Hobby Avenue:
 
North/Southbound at Meadow Avenue


Holland Harbor Drive:
 
Southbound at Colorado Avenue


Holland Harbor Circle:
 
Northbound at Colorado Avenue/Holland Harbor Drive


Holland Harbor Circle:
 
Northbound at Colorado Avenue/Little Traverse Bay Drive


Hunt Club Drive:
 
Northbound at Colorado Avenue


Hunters Trail:
 
Northbound at Pineview Lane


Indiana Court:
 
Eastbound at Hawthorne Road


Indiana Court:
 
Westbound at Cedar Lane


Industry Avenue:
 
Westbound at Center Road


Iowa Court:
 
Eastbound at Elm Street


Ironwood Drive:
 
Eastbound at Cedar Lane


Jasmine Drive:
 
Northbound at Sandalwood Lane


Johnson Avenue:
 
East/Westbound at Locust Street


Johnson Avenue:
 
East/Westbound at Washington Parkway


Joshua Drive:
 
North and southbound at Pine Ridge Drive


Kansas Street:
 
East/Westbound at Maple Street


Kansas Street:
 
Eastbound at White Street


Katie Lane:
 
North/southbound at Crooked Creek Drive


Katie Lane:
 
Westbound at Lakeview Estates Boulevard


Kelsey Marie Lane:
 
Northbound at Crooked Creek Drive


Lakeview Estates Boulevard:
 
Southbound at Steger Road


Lambrecht Drive:
 
Northbound at Laraway Road


Lambrecht Drive:
 
Southbound at Industry Avenue


Lancaster Drive:
 
Westbound at Mayfield Drive


Lancaster Drive:
 
Westbound at Windsor Drive


LaPorte Meadows Drive:
 
Southbound and St. Francis Drive


LaPorte Road:
 
Westbound at 88th Avenue


Larch Road:
 
North/Southbound at Nebraska Street


Larch Road:
 
Southbound at Sauk Trail


LaSalle Bank Private Drive:
 
Northbound at Lincoln-Way Lane


Lavender Lane:
 
Eastbound at Rosemary Road


Lawndale Boulevard:
 
Southbound at East Bowen Street


Ledgestone Way:
 
Northbound at Laraway Road


Ledgestone Way:
 
Southbound at Flagstone Turn


Liatris Drive:
 
East and westbound at Wildflower Drive


Lily Pad Lane:
 
Northbound at Pineview Lane


Limestone Court:
 
Northbound at Flagstone Turn


Lincoln Lane:
 
East/Westbound at Hackberry Road


Lincoln Lane:
 
Eastbound at Cedar Lane


Lincoln Lane:
 
Westbound at Cedar Lane


Lincoln-Way Lane:
 
To the west of Garden Gate South Development Drive entrance and north of
Lincoln-Way High School


Linden Drive:
 
North/Southbound at Sauk Trail


Linden Drive:
 
Northbound at Nebraska Street


Linden Drive:
 
Southbound at Pfaff Drive


Little Traverse Bay Drive:
 
Northbound at Grand Haven Drive


Little Traverse Bay Drive:
 
Southbound at Colorado Avenue


Locust Street:
 
North/Southbound at Michigan Road


Locust Street:
 
North/Southbound at Nebraska Street


Locust Street:
 
North/Southbound at U.S. Route 30


Locust Street:
 
Northbound at Colorado Avenue


Luther Lane:
 
Northbound at Nebraska Street


Luther Lane:
 
Southbound at Sauk Trail


Maddeline Lane:
 
North and southbound at Lakeview Estates Boulevard


Maddeline Lane:
 
Northbound at Pine Ridge Drive


Maddeline Lane:
 
Southbound at Crooked Creek Drive


Majestic Lane:
 
Northbound at Laraway Road


Majestic Lane:
 
Southbound at Dungarvan Road


Mallow Drive:
 
Southbound at Milford Lane


Maple Street:
 
East/Westbound at Elm Street


Maple Street:
 
North/Southbound at Nebraska Street


Maple Street:
 
Northbound at Folker’s Drive


Maple Street:
 
Southbound at U.S. Route 45


Marble Drive:
 
Northbound at High Stone Way


Marble Drive:
 
Southbound at Stone Creek Boulevard


Marble Drive:
 
Northbound at Stone Creek Boulevard


Mayfield Drive:
 
Northbound at Lancaster Drive


McDonald Lane:
 
Eastbound at White Street


Meadow Avenue:
 
Eastbound at Locust Street


Michigan Island Court:
 
Southbound at Grand Haven Drive


Michigan Island Drive:
 
Northbound at Grand Haven Drive


Michigan Island Drive:
 
Southbound at Colorado Avenue


Michigan Road:
 
East/Westbound at Locust Street


Michigan Road:
 
Eastbound at Elm Street


Milford Lane:
 
Southbound at Pine Ridge Drive


Milford Lane:
 
Westbound at Blarney Road


Misty Falls Lane:
 
Eastbound at Merritton Road


Nature Creek Circle:
 
Eastbound at 80th Avenue


Nebraska Court A:
 
Southbound at Nebraska Street


Nebraska Street:
 
East and westbound at Penny Lane


Nebraska Street:
 
East/Westbound at Center Road


Nebraska Street:
 
East/Westbound at Elsner Road


Nebraska Street:
 
East/Westbound at Larch Road


Nebraska Street:
 
East/Westbound at U.S. Route 45


Nebraska Street:
 
Northbound/Southbound at Elsner Road


Nebraska Street:
 
North and southbound at 108th Avenue


Nebraska Street:
 
School drive entrance


Netherby Way:
 
Westbound at 116th Ave


North Pebble Lake Court:
 
Southbound at Flagstone Turn


North Pine Ridge Court:
 
Southbound at Pine Ridge Drive


Oak Street:
 
North/Southbound at Nebraska Street


Oak Street:
 
Northbound at Elwood Street


Oak Street:
 
Southbound at Kansas Street


Oakfield Drive:
 
North/Southbound at Northwoods Drive


Oakfield Drive:
 
North/Southbound at Pineview Lane


Oakfield Drive:
 
Northbound at Big Buck Trail


Oakton Avenue:
 
Northbound at Heritage Drive


Oakton Avenue:
 
Southbound at Princeton Circle


Ohio Road:
 
Eastbound at Locust Street


Ohio Road:
 
Northbound at Colorado Avenue


Old Plank Road Trail:
 
East and westbound at 108th Avenue


Old Plank Road Trail:
 
East and westbound at Elsner Avenue


Old Plank Road Trail:
 
East and westbound at Maple Street


Old Plank Road Trail:
 
East and westbound at Oak Street


Old Plank Road Trail:
 
East and westbound at White Street


Old Plank Road Trail:
 
East and westbound at Larch Road


Old Plank Road Trail:
 
East and westbound at Pfeiffer Road


Ontario Street:
 
Westbound at Center Road


Open Space Parking Lot:
 
Westbound at Granton Place


  (Adjacent to Lots 7 & 143)
 
 


Oregon Street:
 
East/Westbound at Hickory Street


Oregon Street:
 
East/Westbound at Maple Street


Oregon Street:
 
East/Westbound at Oak Street


Oregon Street:
 
East/Westbound at Walnut Street


Oregon Street:
 
Eastbound at Ash Street


Oregon Street:
 
Westbound at Locust Street


Outlot H (2 locations adjacent to Pine Ridge Drive):
 
Southbound at Pine Ridge Drive


Parkview Lane:
 
North and southbound at Pine Ridge Drive


Parkview Lane:
 
Southbound at Pine Ridge Drive


Pembrook:
 
Eastbound at Heritage Drive


Pemrose Lane:
 
Northbound at Granton Place


Pemrose Lane:
 
Southbound at Granton Place


Penny Lane:
 
Eastbound at Elsner Road


Penny Lane:
 
North and southbound at Nebraska Street


Penny Lane:
 
Westbound at Nebraska Street


Pfaff Drive:
 
Westbound at Center Road


Pfeiffer Road:
 
North/Southbound at Sauk Trail


Pfeiffer Road:
 
Northbound at St. Francis Road


Pfeiffer Road:
 
Northbound at U.S. Route 30


Pfeiffer Road:
 
Southbound at Laraway Road


Pine Ridge Drive:
 
Eastbound at 80th Avenue


Pine Ridge Drive:
 
North and southbound at Callista Drive


Pine Ridge Drive:
 
Westbound at Pfeiffer Road


Pineview Lane:
 
East/Westbound at Oakfield Drive


Pineview Lane:
 
Westbound at 80th Avenue


Plank Trail Drive:
 
Northbound at U.S. Rt. 30


Pleasant Hill Road:
 
Eastbound at U.S. Route 45


Pleasant Hill Road:
 
Westbound at Elsner Road


Port Washington Court:
 
Westbound at Pfeiffer Road


Port Washington Drive:
 
Eastbound at Pfeiffer Road


Prairie Trail Lane:
 
Southbound at Pine Ridge Avenue


Prestwick Drive:
 
Eastbound at Harlem Avenue


Princeton Circle:
 
Northbound/Southbound at Heritage Drive


Princeton Circle:
 
Westbound at Heritage Drive


Regency:
 
Northbound at Princeton Circle


Regency Drive:
 
Southbound at Laraway Road


Riverside Drive:
 
Eastbound at Sara Springs Drive


Rosemary Road:
 
Southbound at Sandalwood Drive


Sage Drive:
 
Northbound at Sandalwood Lane


Sager Road:
 
Eastbound at U.S. Route 45


Saint Andrews Way:
 
Southbound at Sauk Trail


Sandalwood Lane:
 
Eastbound at 116th Avenue


Sandalwood Lane:
 
Westbound at 116th Avenue


Sangmeister Road:
 
Eastbound at Center Road


Sangmeister Road:
 
Westbound at U.S. Route 45


Sapphire Court:
 
Eastbound at 116th Avenue


Sara Springs Drive:
 
Eastbound at LaGrange Road


Sauk Trail:
 
Center Road/4-Way Stop


Sauk Trail:
 
East/Westbound at Pfeiffer Road


Sauk Trail:
 
Westbound at Ash Street


Shetland Drive:
 
Southbound at Sauk Trail


Siena Drive:
 
Eastbound at Toscana Drive


Siena Drive:
 
Westbound at Wolf Road


Smith Street:
 
Southbound at Elwood Street


Somerset:
 
Southbound at Heritage Drive


South Pebble Lake Court:
 
Northbound at Flagstone Turn


Southwick Drive:
 
Eastbound at Harlem Avenue


Southwick Drive:
 
Northbound at Laraway Road


Spruce Road:
 
Southbound at Colorado Avenue


Stanford Drive:
 
East and westbound at Maddeline Lane


Stanford Drive:
 
Westbound at Pine Ridge Drive


Stanford Drive:
 
Westbound at Stone Creek Boulevard


Stanley Trail North (2 locations):
 
Southbound at Crooked Creek Drive


Stanley Trail South (2 locations):
 
Northbound at Crooked Creek Drive


Star Court:
 
Eastbound at Brendan Street


St. Francis Road:
 
East and westbound at 88th Avenue


Stoll Road:
 
Eastbound at Wolf Road


Stoll Road:
 
Westbound at Merritton Road


Stone Creek Boulevard  (2 locations):
 
Northbound at Pine Ridge Drive


Stonebridge Road:
 
Southbound at Ironwood Drive


Sun River Drive:
 
Northbound at Coquille Drive


Sun River Drive:
 
Southbound at Coquille Drive


Sutton Dale Lane:
 
East entrance at Nebraska Street


Sutton Dale Lane:
 
School parking lot entrance


Sutton Dale Lane:
 
West entrance at Nebraska Street


Swallow Tail Lane:
 
Eastbound at 108th Avenue


Swanstone Court:
 
Northbound at Flagstone Turn


Sycamore Lane:
 
Northbound at Nebraska Street


Sycamore Lane:
 
Southbound at Sauk Trail


Tanglewood Lane:
 
Southbound at Colorado Avenue


Thistlewood:
 
Westbound at Hunter Woods Drive


Thyme Lane:
 
Southbound at Sandalwood Drive


Torino Way:
 
Southbound at Zermatt Drive, 200 feet east of 116th Avenue


Town Center:
 
Three entrances onto Colorado Avenue


Trolley Barn:
 
Exit onto Nebraska Street


Tuscany Drive:
 
Northbound at Riverside Drive


Utah Street:
 
East/Westbound at Hickory Street


Utah Street:
 
East/Westbound at Maple Street


Utah Street:
 
East/Westbound at Oak Street


Utah Street:
 
Eastbound at Ash Street


Vail Drive:
 
Northbound at Colorado Avenue


Venezia Drive:
 
Eastbound at Toscana Drive


Venezia Drive:
 
Westbound at Firenze Drive


Walnut Street:
 
North/Southbound at Nebraska Street


Walnut Street:
 
Northbound at Kansas Street


Walnut Ridge Court:
 
North/Southbound at Butternut Circle South


Washington Parkway:
 
North/Southbound at Johnson Avenue


Washington Parkway:
 
Northbound at U.S. Route 30


Waterview Trail:
 
Eastbound at LaPorte Road


Waterview Trail:
 
Northbound at LaPorte Road


Waterview Trail:
 
Southbound at St. Francis Road


Waterview Trail:
 
Westbound at St. Francis Road


Waterview Trail:
 
Westbound at Steger Road


White Street:
 
At Nebraska Street/3-Way Stop


White Street:
 
Northbound at U.S. Route 45


Wildflower Drive:
 
Eastbound at LaPorte Meadows Drive


Wildflower Drive:
 
Northbound at LaPorte Road


Williamsburg Trail:
 
Eastbound at Elsner Road


Willow Street:
 
Northbound at Colorado Avenue


Windsor Lane:
 
Southbound at Mayfield Drive


Windy Hill Drive:
 
Northbound at U.S. Route 30


Windy Hill Drive:
 
Westbound at Pfeiffer Road


Wisconsin Road:
 
Westbound at Locust Street


Wolf Road:
 
Southbound at Steger Road


Wood Street:
 
Eastbound at Tanglewood Lane


Woodbridge Drive:
 
Northbound at U.S. Route 30


Woodland Lane:
 
Eastbound at LaPorte Meadows Drive


York Court:
 
Eastbound at Dublin Way


York Drive:
 
Eastbound at Wolf Road


York Drive:
 
Westbound at Dublin Way


Yorktown Road:
 
Westbound at Brittany Drive


Zermatt Drive:
 
Northbound at Zermatt Drive


Zermatt Drive:
 
Westbound at 116th Avenue




 



(Ord. 1686, passed 2-2-98; Am. Ord. 1708, passed 7-20-98; Am. Ord. 1767,
passed 12-6-99; Am. Ord. 1774, passed 1-18-00; Am. Ord. 1852, passed 5-7-01;
Am. Ord. 1871, passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord. 1886, passed 4-15-02; Am. Ord. 1944,
passed 12-2-02; Am. Ord. 1960, passed 4-7-03; Am. Ord. 1999, passed 7-21-03;
Am. Ord. 2043, passed 1-5-04; Am. Ord. 2048, passed 2-2-04; Am. Ord. 2058,
passed 3-2-04; Am. Ord. 2117, passed 9-20-04; Am. Ord. 2120, passed 10-4-04;
Am. Ord. 2127, passed 11-1-04; Am. Ord. 2167, passed 6-20-05; Am. Ord. 2193,
passed 9-6-05; Am. Ord. 2199, passed 9-19-05; Am. Ord. 2224, passed 10-17-05;
Am. Ord. 2260, passed 1-9-06; Am. Ord. 2294, passed 6-19-06; Am. Ord. 2310,
passed 8-21-06; Am. Ord. 2340, passed 12-18-06; Am. Ord. 2347, passed 1-8-07;
Am. Ord. 2363, passed 2-20-07; Am. Ord. 2386, passed 4-30-07; Am. Ord. 2458,
passed 4-28-08; Am. Ord. 2481, passed 6-16-08; Am. Ord. 2649, passed 4-26-10;
Am. Ord. 2753, passed 11-21-11; Am. Ord. 2761, passed 12-19-11; Am. Ord.
2778, passed 6-4-12; Am. Ord. 3129, passed 2-5-18)



SCHEDULE II:  YIELD INTERSECTIONS.



   The intersections enumerated below are designated as yield
intersections within the corporate limits of the village.  Establish and
post a yield sign at the following:



 



95th Avenue:
 
Southbound at Lawndale Court


Alana Lane:
 
Eastbound at Mary Drive


Alana Lane:
 
Westbound at Elise Boulevard


Amhearst Court:
 
Westbound at Misty Falls Lane


Anna Lane:
 
Northbound at Lakeview Estates Boulevard


Anna Lane:
 
Southbound at Katie Lane


Arbour Walk Drive:
 
Northbound at Raintree Lane


Aspen Street:
 
Southbound at Vail Street


Berwick Court
 
Westbound at Berwick Drive


Birchwood Road:
 
Northbound at Illinois Road


Birchwood Road:
 
Northbound at Tanglewood Lane


Birchwood Road:
 
Southbound at Meadow Avenue


Black Stone Court:
 
Westbound at Stone Creek Boulevard


Blarney Road:
 
Northbound at Dungarvan Road


Blarney Road:
 
Southbound at Dungarvan Road


Blue Bird Lane:
 
Northbound at Nebraska Street


Blue Bird Lane:
 
Southbound at Nebraska Street


Blue Stone Court:
 
Westbound at Stone Creek Boulevard


Boulder Court:
 
Westbound at Aspen Street


Box Elder:
 
Northbound at Ohio Road


Box Elder:
 
Southbound at Illinois Road


Breton Road:
 
Southbound at Farm View Drive


Brook Court:
 
Eastbound at Mary Drive


Brookhaven Lane:
 
Westbound at Parkview Lane


Callista Drive:
 
Westbound at Parkview Lane


Cambridge:
 
Eastbound/Westbound at 95th Avenue


Cappel Lane (East):
 
Northbound at Frankfort Main


Cappel Lane (West):
 
Northbound at Frankfort Main


Cardinal Lake Drive:
 
Westbound at Morning Dove Lane


Carpenter Street:
 
Northbound at Bowen Street


Catherine Court:
 
Westbound at Aine Drive


Cedar Lane:
 
Eastbound at Hackberry Road


Chilton Court:
 
Eastbound at Stone Creek Boulevard


Chimay Court:
 
Westbound at Dublin Way


Church Court:
 
Southbound at Church Street


Church Street:
 
Southbound at Pfaff Drive


Church Street:
 
Westbound at Linden Drive


Cobblestone Trail:
 
Northbound at Sapphire Court


Concord Drive:
 
Northbound at Williamsburg Trail


Coquille Circle:
 
Southbound at Coquille Drive


Coriander Lane:
 
Northbound at Tea Tree Lane


Dewey Circle:
 
Northbound at Folker’s Drive


Diamond Court:
 
Westbound at Cobblestone Trail


Doud Court:
 
Northbound at Frankfort Main


Elise Boulevard:
 
Eastbound at Mary Drive


Elm Street:
 
Northbound at Wisconsin Road


Elm Street:
 
Southbound at Franklin Avenue


Emily Lane:
 
North/Southbound at Anise Drive


Falls View Circle:
 
Southbound at Merritton Road


Falls View Circle:
 
Westbound at Falls View Way


Farm View Drive:
 
Westbound at English Lane


Forestview Court:
 
Southbound at Parkview Lane


Forestview Drive:
 
Eastbound at Woodland Lane


Forestview Drive:
 
Northbound at Parkview Lane


Frontier Court:
 
Northbound at Pineview Lane


Georgetown Commons:
 
Westbound at Georgetown Road


Ginger Drive:
 
Southbound at Myrrh Lane


Grant Avenue:
 
Northbound at Johnson Avenue


Grant Avenue:
 
Southbound at Pleasant Hill Road


Gray Stone Court:
 
Eastbound at Stone Creek Boulevard


Hamilton Avenue:
 
Northbound at Johnson Avenue


Hamilton Avenue:
 
Southbound at Pleasant Hill


Hawthorne Road:
 
East/Westbound at Cottonwood Road


Hickory Street:
 
Southbound at Pacific Street


Higley Court:
 
Southbound at Frankfort Main


Hinspeter Drive:
 
Eastbound at Aster Drive


Hobby Avenue:
 
Southbound at Lincoln Lane


Hughes Street:
 
Northbound at Stoll Road


Hughes Street:
 
Southwesterly at Hinspeter Drive


Hunter Woods Drive:
 
Southbound at Steeplechase Drive


Jasmine Drive:
 
Southbound at Myrrh Lane


Jeanette Court:
 
Southbound at Stoll Road


Jennifer Street:
 
Westbound at Elise Boulevard


Johnson Avenue:
 
Southbound at Franklin Avenue


Joshua Drive:
 
Northbound at Brookhaven Drive


Joshua Drive:
 
Southbound at Tatum Lane


Katie Court:
 
Eastbound at Katie Lane


Karli Jean Court:
 
Eastbound at Katie Lane


Kelsey Marie Lane:
 
Southbound at Stanley Trail South


Kent Court:
 
Southbound at Frankfort Main


Lakeview Court:
 
Northbound at Raintree Lane


LaPorte Meadows Court:
 
Eastbound at LaPorte Meadows Court


Larch Court A:
 
Westbound at Larch Road


Larch Court B:
 
Westbound at Larch Road


Laura Lane:
 
Northbound at Hinspeter Drive


Leslie Lane:
 
Northbound at Tanglewood Lane


Lexington Lane:
 
East/Westbound at Concord Drive


Lexington Lane:
 
Southbound at Yankee Ridge Drive


Lilac Court:
 
Westbound at Waterview Trail


Linden Court:
 
Westbound at Linden Road


Linden Road:
 
Northbound at Illinois Road


Linden Road:
 
Southbound at Meadow Avenue


Longview Drive:
 
Northbound at Brittany Drive


Longview Drive:
 
Southbound at Brittany Drive


Lynze Lane:
 
Eastbound at LaPorte Meadows Court


Mallow Drive:
 
Northbound at Dungarvan Road


Mallow Drive:
 
Southbound at Dungarvan Road


Mary Drive:
 
Southbound at Jennifer Street


Maura Court:
 
Eastbound at Brendan Street


Mayberry Lane:
 
Northbound at Northwoods Drive


Mayberry Lane:
 
Southbound at Pineview Lane


Mayfield Court:
 
Northbound at Mayfield Drive


Michigan Road:
 
Westbound at Hobby Avenue


Misty Falls Circle:
 
Northbound at Falls View Way


Misty Falls Circle:
 
Westbound at Misty Falls Lane


Mulberry Road:
 
Northbound at Johnson Avenue


Mulberry Road:
 
Southbound at Franklin Avenue


Munich Court:
 
Southbound at Zermatt Drive


Murphy Circle:
 
Northbound at Folker’s Drive


Nature Creek Court:
 
Westbound at Nature Creek Circle


Nevada Street A:
 
Northbound at Nevada Street


Nevada Street:
 
East/Westbound at Larch Road


Northwoods Court:
 
Eastbound at Northwoods Drive


Northwoods Drive:
 
Southbound at Big Buck Trail


Oakton Court:
 
Westbound at Oakton Avenue


Overlook Courts:
 
East/Westbound at Overlook Drive


Overlook Drive:
 
Southbound at Wood Street


Pacific Street:
 
East/Westbound at Oak Street


Pacific Street:
 
Westbound at Maple Street


Patrick Court:
 
Northeasterly at Hinspeter Drive


Patrick Court:
 
Southwesterly at Hinspeter Drive


Pembrook Court:
 
East/Westbound at Pembrook Drive


Penny Court:
 
Northbound at Penny Lane


Penny Court:
 
Southbound at Penny Lane


Perth Court:
 
Southbound at Zermatt Drive


Port Washington Drive:
(cul-de-sac)
 
Southbound onto Port Washington Drive


Port Weller Court:
 
Southbound at Misty Falls Lane


Prairie Trial Lane:
 
Northbound at Parkview Lane


Prestwick Drive:
 
Eastbound at Hawthorne


Princeton Court:
 
Southbound at Princeton Circle


Pueblo Court:
 
Westbound at Aspen Street


Quartz Court:
 
Westbound at Cobblestone Trail


Raintree Court:
 
Southbound at Raintree Lane


Raintree Lane:
 
Westbound at Arbour Walk Drive


Ruby Court:
 
Westbound at Cobblestone Trail


Saddlebred Court:
 
Eastbound at Windy Hill Drive


Sage Drive:
 
Southbound at Myrrh Lane


Sapphire Court:
 
Eastbound at Cobblestone Trail


Shimmering View Court:
 
Eastbound at Brendan Street


Shimmering View Drive:
 
Westbound at Brendan Street


Shire Court (east):
 
Northbound at Farm View Drive


Shire Court (west):
 
Northbound at Farm View Drive


Southwick Court:
 
Westbound at Southwick Drive


Spruce Road:
 
Northbound at Tanglewood Lane


Star Court:
 
Eastbound at Brendan Street


Sun River Drive:
 
Northbound at Coquille Drive


Sun River Drive:
 
Southbound at Coquille Drive


Swallow Tail Lane
 
Westbound at Morning Dove Lane


Tanglewood Courts:
 
East/Westbound at Tanglewood Lane


Tapatio Drive:
 
Southbound at Azure Drive


Tatum Lane:
 
Eastbound at Maddeline Lane


Tatum Lane:
 
Westbound at Parkview Lane


Thyme Lane:
 
Northbound at Tea Tree Lane


Topanga Canyon:
 
Eastbound at Tapatio Drive


Topanga Canyon:
 
Westbound at Tapatio Drive


Torino Way:
 
Southbound at Zermatt Drive


Utah Street:
 
East/Westbound at Walnut Street


Vermont Road:
 
Eastbound at Johnson Avenue


Vermont Road:
 
Southbound at Franklin Avenue


Vienna Way:
 
Westbound at Zermatt Drive


Virginia Court:
 
Westbound at Georgetown Road


Walnut Street:
 
Southbound at Pacific Street


Washington Parkway:
 
Southbound at Franklin Avenue


Westbrook:
 
Westbound at Pembrook Drive


Wetland Court:
 
Northbound at Falls View Way


Willow Street:
 
Northbound at Johnson Avenue


Willow Street:
 
Southbound at Franklin Avenue


Wood Street:
 
Westbound at Oakwood Street


Woodbridge Drive:
 
Southbound at Raintree Lane


Woodland Lane:
 
Northbound at Parkview Lane


Yankee Ridge Court:
 
Westbound at Yankee Ridge Drive


Yankee Ridge Drive:
 
Northbound at Williamsburg Trail


Yorktown Road:
 
Eastbound at Georgetown Road


Yorktown Road:
 
Eastbound/westbound at Old North Church




 



(Ord. 1686, passed 2-2-98; Am. Ord. 1774, passed 1-18-00; Am. Ord. 1852,
passed 5-7-01; Am. Ord. 1871, passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord. 1886, passed 4-15-02;
Am. Ord. 1944, passed 12-2-02; Am. Ord. 1960, passed 4-7-03; Am. Ord. 2043,
passed 1-5-04; Am. Ord. 2048, passed 2-2-04; Am. Ord. 2058, passed 3-2-04;
Am. Ord. 2117, passed 9-20-04; Am. Ord. 2120, passed 10-4-04; Am. Ord. 2127,
passed 11-1-04; Am. Ord. 2193, passed 9-6-05; Am. Ord. 2199, passed 9-19-05;
Am. Ord. 2294, passed 6-19-06; Am. Ord. 2340, passed 12-18-06; Am. Ord. 2458,
passed 4-28-08; Am. Ord. 2649, passed 4-26-10; Am. Ord. 2994, passed
10-19-15; Am. Ord. 3129, passed 2-5-18; Am. Ord. 3159, passed 6-18-18)



SCHEDULE III:  SPEED LIMIT SIGNS.



   The village shall post at locations wherever it deems appropriate in
the respective districts, the following speed signs:



   (A)   Residence District:   25 MPH



   (B)   Urban District:   30 MPH



   (C)   Non-Urban District:   35 MPH



   (D)   All residential roadways within the Village of Frankfort shall
be limited to a speed of 25 MPH and shall be posted with a 25 MPH speed limit
sign with the following list of street exceptions:



 



88th Avenue
 
Northbound and southbound from St. Francis Road to LaPorte Road extended
 
35 MPH


116th Avenue
 
North/Southbound from south of Laraway Road to Steger Road
 
35 MPH


Colorado Avenue
 
Eastbound and westbound from U.S. Route 45 to Pfeiffer Road
 
30 MPH


Crooked Creek Circle
 
Westbound
 
25 MPH


Crystal Lake Way
 
Northbound at 100 ft. north of LaPorte Road
 
25 MPH


Crystal Lake Way
 
Southbound at 100 ft. south of LaPorte Road
 
25 MPH


Elsner Road
 
Northbound and southbound from U.S. Route 30 to Nebraska Street
 
35 MPH


Falls View Way
 
Eastbound from 116th Avenue to Misty Falls Lane
 
25 MPH


Heritage Drive
 
Northbound at 100 ft. north of Laraway Road
 
25 MPH


Lakeview Estates  Boulevard
 
Northbound
 
25 MPH


Majestic Lane
 
Southbound
 
25 MPH


Nature Creek Circle
 
Westbound
 
25 MPH


Nebraska Street
 
Westbound at 100 ft. west of Elsner Road
 
25 MPH


Nethers Way
 
Eastbound from 116th Avenue to Misty Falls Lane
 
25 MPH


Pfeiffer Road
 
Northbound and southbound from Colorado Avenue to St. Francis Road
 
30 MPH


Pfeiffer Road
 
Northbound and southbound from U.S. Route 30 to Steger Road
 
40 MPH


Regency
 
Northbound at 100 ft. north of Laraway Road
 
25 MPH


Saint Francis Road
 
East/Westbound from 88th Avenue to Waterview Drive
 
35 MPH


Sauk Trail
 
Eastbound 100 ft. east of Center Road
 
35 MPH


Sauk Trail
 
Eastbound 100 ft. east of Larch Road
 
45 MPH


Sauk Trail
 
Westbound 100 ft. west of Harlem Avenue
 
35 MPH


Sauk Trail
 
Westbound 100 ft. west of Larch Road
 
35 MPH


Sauk Trail
 
East and westbound between Center Road and Pfeiffer Road
 
35 MPH


Scheer Road
 
North of Steger Road to Flagstone Turn
 
35 MPH


Steger Road
 
East/westbound from 116th Avenue to Scheer Road
 
35 MPH


Steger Road
 
East/westbound from U.S. Route 45 to Scheer Road
 
40 MPH


Stoll Road
 
Westbound 100 feet east of Merritton Road
 
25 MPH


Wolf Road
 
Northbound and southbound between Laraway and Steger Roads
 
35 MPH


Wolf Road
 
Northbound and southbound between Laraway Road and U.S. Route 30
 
40 MPH


Woodbridge Drive
 
Southbound at 100 ft. south of U.S. Route 30
 
25 MPH




 



(Ord. 1686, passed 2-2-98; Am. Ord. 1744, passed 6-7-99; Am. Ord. 1767,
passed 12-6-99; Am. Ord. 1774, passed 1-18-00; Am. Ord. 1871, passed 9-4-01;
Am. Ord. 1944, passed 12-2-02; Am. Ord. 1960, passed 4-7-03; Am. Ord. 2043,
passed 1-5-04; Am. Ord. 2048, passed 2-2-04; Am. Ord. 2081, passed 5-17-04;
Am. Ord. 2117, passed 9-20-04; Am. Ord. 2127, passe 11-1-04; Am. Ord. 2193,
passed 9-6-05; Am. Ord. 2199, passed 9-19-05; Am. Ord. 2319, passed 9-18-06;
Am. Ord. 2682, passed 11-15-10; Am. Ord. 2866, passed 9-16-13; Am. Ord. 2929,
passed 7-21-14; Am. Ord. 3085, passed 4-24-17)



SCHEDULE IV:  RIGHT TURN ONLY SIGNS.



 

Abbey Court North
 
Southbound at Abbey Drive


Majestic Lane
 
Northbound at Laraway Road


Sutton Dale Lane
 
On the Stop Sign at the school parking lot entrance



 



(Ord. 1686, passed 2-2-98; Am. Ord. 1944, passed 12-2-02; Am. Ord. 2193,
passed 9-6-05; Am. Ord. 2347, passed 1-8-07)



SCHEDULE V:  MISCELLANEOUS SIGNS.



 



80th Avenue
 
Install a "12-ton weight limit" sign north and southbound from Sauk Trail to
Laraway Road


88th Avenue
 
Install “School Zone” signs on the north and south sides of the school
along 88th Avenue


108th Avenue
 
Install “Caution Trail Crossing” and bike symbol caution signs


116th Avenue
 
Install “School Zone” signs on the east and west sides of the street,
between Sandalwood Drive and Laraway Road


Center Road
 
Install “No Thru Truck Traffic” signage from Nebraska Street to the CN
Railroad tracks


Chelsea School
22265 S. 80th Ave.
 
Post a “No Right Turn” sign in the proper location for vehicles exiting
the parking lot at school dismissal time


Crystal Lake Way
 
Weight Limit 3 Tons


Locust Street
 
Install “No Thru Truck Traffic” signage between U.S. Route 30 and
Colorado Avenue


Majestic Lane
 
“Do Not Enter” sign at Laraway Road


Majestic Lane
 
“Keep Right” sign northbound at Laraway Road


Majestic Lane
 
“No Left Turn” sign northbound at Laraway Road


Maple Street
 
Relocate the existing “Caution Trail Crossing” sign to just south of
Sherlock and north of Kansas Streets


Maple Street and Nebraska
 
Install “No Truck Traffic” signage at the southwest corner of Maple
Street and Nebraska Street


Nebraska Street
 
Install “School Zone” signs at the eastern most intersection of Shilling
Road and Nebraska Street to the western most intersection of Sutton Dale
Lane    and Nebraska Street


Old Frankfort Way
At U.S. Route 45
 
Install “No Thru Truck Traffic” signage for eastbound traffic


Pfeiffer Road
 
Install a “12-ton weight limit” sign on the road between U.S. Route 30
and Laraway Road


Pfeiffer Road
 
Install a “12-ton weight limit” sign northbound between Laraway Road and
U.S. Route 30


St. Francis Road
 
Install a “12-ton weight limit” sign westbound between 84th Avenue and
U.S. Route 45


Sauk Trail
 
Install school bus stop signs at locations designated by Lincoln-Way High
School as student pick-up and drop-off points


Sauk Trail
 
Remove conflicting speed control signage


Sauk Trail
 
Install a "12-ton weight limit" sign east and westbound from Pfeiffer Road to
Harlem Avenue


White Street
at U.S. Route 45
 
Install “No Thru Truck Traffic” signage for southbound traffic




 



(Ord. 1713, passed 9-8-98; Am. Ord. 1744, passed 6-7-99; Am. Ord. 1871,
passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord. 1880, passed 1-22-02; Am. Ord. 1944, passed 12-2-02;
Am. Ord. 2144, passed 10-20-04; Am. Ord. 2193, passed 9-6-05; Am. Ord. 2347,
passed 1-8-07; Am. Ord. 2649, passed 4-26-10; Am. Ord. 2677, passed 10-18-10;
Am. Ord. 2700, passed 2-22-11; Am. Ord. 2971, passed 5-18-15)



SCHEDULE VI:  NO PARKING SIGNS.



   Establish and post a no parking sign at the following:



 



80th Avenue
 
Post a “no parking” sign on both the east and west side of 80th Avenue
between Pine Ridge Drive and Big Buck Trail


80th Avenue
 
Post a “no parking” sign along the east side of 80th Avenue between Sauk
Trail and Laraway Road.


108th Avenue
 
Post a “no parking - this side of street” sign on the west side of 108th
Avenue from Pioneer Trail, south to Cardinal Lake Drive.


Aberdeen Road
 
Post “No parking, stopping, or standing from Harlem Avenue to Here”
signage from Harlem Avenue 175 feet west on the north side of Aberdeen Road.


Anise Drive
 
Post a “no parking corner to here” sign 30 feet east of 116th Avenue for
eastbound traffic.


Anise Drive
 
Post a “no parking here to corner” sign 30 feet east of 116th Avenue for
westbound traffic.


Ash Street
 
Designate five parking spaces on the northwest corner of Ash Street, south of
Kansas Street, as “1 Hour Parking - 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.”.


Designate two marked parallel parking spaces on the northeast corner of Ash
Street, south of Kansas Street, as “20 Minute Parking - 9:00 a.m. - 6:00
p.m.”.


Aspen Street
 
Post a “parking prohibited when school is in session, 8:00 a.m. - 10:00
a.m., Monday-Friday” sign on both sides of the street.


Bankview Drive
 
Post a “parking prohibited when school is in session, 8:00 a.m. - 10:00
a.m., Monday-Friday” sign on both sides of the street.


Big Buck Trail
 
Post a “no parking - corner to here” sign on south side of Big Buck Trail
from 80th Avenue, east 220 feet; and

Post a “no parking - here to corner” sign on the north side of Big Buck
Trail from 220 feet east of 80th Avenue to 80th Avenue.


Boulder Court
 
Post a “parking prohibited when school is in session, 8:00 a.m. - 10:00
a.m., Monday-Friday” sign on both sides of the street.


Carpenter Street
 
Post a “No Parking 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.” sign on the west side of the
street.


Croft Lane
 
Post a “No parking - 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. - on school days” sign
along the east and west side of Croft Lane.


Crystal Lake Way
 
Post a “No parking here to corner” sign on the east side of Crystal Lake
Way,  starting 75 feet south of LaPorte Road.


Post a “No parking corner to here” sign on the west side of Crystal Lake
Way, for 25 feet beginning at LaPorte Road.


Elwood Street
 
Post a “No Parking 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.” sign on the north side of the
street.


Heritage Drive
 
Post signs on the east and west sides of Heritage Drive within the first 200
feet north of Laraway Road.


Hickory Street
 
Install "No parking between signs Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m." and "Handicapped bus loading only" signage on the west side of the
street at the Frankfort Park District Founders Center, in the vicinity of the
handicapped accessible sidewalk, located north of Utah Street.


Indiana Court
 
Post a “no parking corner to here” sign at the intersection with
Hawthorne Road, continuing 50 feet east on the south side of Indiana Court.


Johnson Avenue
 
Post signs on the north side of Johnson Avenue between Elm Street and Willow
Street.


Larch Avenue
 
Post signs on existing bike route sign posts on both sides of the street.


Lincoln-Way Lane
 
Post a “no parking” sign on both sides of the street.


Locust Street
 
Post “no parking - 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. - on school days” signs along
the east and west side of Locust Street, north of Colorado Avenue.


Locust Street
 
Post a “no parking here to corner” sign for north and southbound
traffic  south of Nebraska Street.


Locust Street
 
Post a “no parking here to corner” sign for northbound traffic north and
south of Oregon Street.


Locust Street
 
Post a “no parking here to corner” sign for northbound traffic north and
south of Utah Street.


Luther Lane
 
Post a “no parking corner to here” sign 30 feet south of Nebraska Street
for southbound traffic.


Luther Lane
 
Post a “no parking here to corner” sign 30 feet south of Nebraska Street
for northbound traffic.


McDonald Lane
 
Post a “no parking - this side of street” sign on the south side of
McDonald Lane, from White Street, west to its terminus


Nebraska Street
 
Post a “no parking corner to here” sign 30 feet east of Luther Lane for
eastbound traffic.


Nebraska Street
 
Post a “no parking here to corner” sign 30 feet west of Luther Lane for
eastbound traffic.


Nebraska Street
 
Post a “no parking corner to here” sign 30 feet east of Sycamore Lane for
eastbound traffic.


Nebraska Street
 
Post a “no parking here to corner” sign 30 feet west of Sycamore Lane for
eastbound traffic.


“Maple Street
 
Post signs on existing bike route posts on both sides of Maple Street.


Oak Street
 
Post sign on the east side of Oak on the existing bike route post sign post.


Oak Street
 
Post sign on the west side of Oak just north of the trail.


Oregon Street
 
Post a “no parking here to corner” sign for east and westbound traffic at
Locust Street.


Pfeiffer Road
 
Post signs on both north and south of trail on both sides of the road within
200 feet of the trail.


Pine Ridge Drive
 
Post “no parking” sign along the east side of Pine Ridge Drive fronting
the park.


Pine Ridge Drive
 
Post “no parking here to corner” sign for southbound traffic on Pine
Ridge Drive north of Callista Drive.


Pueblo Court
 
Post a “parking prohibited when school is in session, 8:00 a.m. - 10:00
a.m., Monday-Friday” sign on both sides of the street.


Regency Drive
 
Post sign along the east side of Regency Drive between Laraway Road and
Ashford Avenue.


Regency Drive
 
Post sign along the west side of Regency Drive 100 feet north of Laraway Road.


Regency Drive
 
Post signs on the east and west sides of Regency Drive within 200 feet north
of Laraway Road.


Sandalwood Drive
 
Post a “no parking corner to here” sign 30 feet east of 116th Avenue for
eastbound traffic.


Sandalwood Drive
 
Post a “no parking here to corner” sign 30 feet east of 116th Avenue for
westbound traffic.


Settler’s Lane
 
Post a “no parking - 10:00 a.m. - 11:00 a.m. - on school days” sign along
the east and west side of Settler’s Lane.


Steger Road
 
Post a “no parking” signage on Steger Road from Center Road to S. Center
Road for both sides of the street and post “no parking” signage on Steger
Road from S. Center Road to 9436 W. Steger Road on north side of street.


Sycamore Lane
 
Post a “no parking corner to here” sign 30 feet south of Nebraska Street
for southbound traffic.


Sycamore Lane
 
Post a “no parking here to corner” sign 30 feet south of Nebraska Street
for northbound traffic.


Utah Street
 
Post a “no parking here to corner” sign for east and westbound traffic at
Locust Street.


Utah Street
 
Post sign on the north side of Utah for that portion 495 feet east of Locust
Street.


Vail Drive
 
Post a “parking prohibited when school is in session, 8:00 a.m. - 10:00
a.m., Monday-Friday” sign on both sides of the street.


W. Bowen Street
 
Post a “No Parking” sign on the south side of the street between Smith
Street and White Street.


White Street
 
Post signs adjacent to the Old Plank Road Trail on White Street.


Designate one parallel parking space on the east side of White Street,
between Nebraska Street and the Trolley Barn (at pedestrian walkway), as
“20 Minute Parking - 9:00 a.m. - 6:00 p.m.”.


Windy Hill Drive
 
Post a “no parking” sign along the west side of Windy Hill Drive for
approximately 100 feet from the centerline of Saddlebred Court.




 



(Ord. 1713, passed 9-8-98; Am. Ord. 1890, passed 5-6-02; Am. Ord. 1944,
passed 12-2-02; Am. Ord. 2224, passed 10-17-05; Am. Ord. 2260, passed 1-9-06;
Am. Ord. 2285, passed 6-5-06; Am. Ord. 2428, passed 11-19-07; Am. Ord. 2481,
passed 6-16-08; Am. Ord. 2587, passed 5-18-09; Am. Ord. 2606, passed 8-17-09;
Am. Ord. 2649, passed 4-26-10; Am. Ord. 2677, passed 10-18-10; Am. Ord. 2717,
passed 5-16-11; Am. Ord. 2766, passed 2-21-12; Am. Ord. 2934, passed 8-18-14;
Am. Ord. 2940, passed 9-15-14; Am. Ord. 2961, passed 1-20-15; Am. Ord. 2982,
passed 9-21-15; Am. Ord. 3035, passed 6-20-16; Am. Ord. 3036, passed 6-20-16;
Am. Ord. 3048, passed 8-15-16; Am .Ord. 3070, passed 11-21-16; Am .Ord. 3074,
passed 12-19-16; Am. Ord. 3110, passed 9-18-17; Am. Ord. 3117, passed
10-2-17; Am. Ord. 3121, passed 11-20-17; Ord. 3159, passed 6-18-18)



SCHEDULE VII:  STRICTLY ENFORCED SPEED LIMIT SIGNS.



   Establish and post a “strictly enforced” speed limit sign at the
following:



 

Charrington Drive
 
Install “strictly enforced” speed limit signs on the east and west sides
of the street.


Elise Boulevard
 
Southbound at Laraway Road.


Lakeview Estates Boulevard
 
East and westbound at Maddeline Lane.


Pineridge Drive
 
East and westbound at High Stone Way.


Sandalwood Drive
 
Westbound at Mary Drive.


 
 
 



 



(Ord. 2386, passed 4-30-07; Am. Ord. 2994, passed 10-19-15)



SCHEDULE VIII:  OVERWEIGHT AND OVERDIMENSION PERMITS.



   (A)   Weight restrictions.



      (1)   The maximum weight permitted on all village roads shall
be 80,000 pounds, except as otherwise designated.



      (2)   Unless authorized in this schedule, it shall be unlawful
to operate a motor vehicle on any non-designated village road with a gross
weight, including load, in excess of the maximum weight limits or in excess
of special weight limits provided for by ordinance and signposted, without
having first obtained an overweight permit from the Chief of Police or
designee.



   (B)   Application for overweight and overdimension permits.
Applications for all overweight and overdimension permits shall be submitted
in the method and form required by the Chief of Police or designee and shall
include at a minimum:



      (1)   The type of vehicle;



      (2)   The weights and dimensions of the vehicle(s);



      (3)   The description of the load;



      (4)   The requested route to be taken by the vehicle;



      (5)   The destination of the vehicle within the village; and



      (6)   The name of the carrier, if different than the applicant.



   (C)   Issuance of overweight and overdimension permits. Upon receipt
of a completed application and proof of payment of the fee, the Chief of
Police or designee may issue an overweight or overdimension permit, subject
to the following conditions:



      (1)   In consideration of seasonal or other time limitations,
the Chief of Police or designee may restrict the number or time of daily
trips authorized by each permit, as is consistent with the public safety.



      (2)   In establishing the routes to be traveled, the Chief of
Police or designee may establish the route consistent with public safety,
taking into consideration existing traffic, the character of the road or
roads and the configuration of the terrain.



      (3)   All permits shall be nontransferable and shall be valid
only for the applicant or his or her agent or employee and the specific
vehicle listed on the application.



      (4)   Every permit shall be carried in the vehicle in paper or
electronic form to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any
police officer, or agent of the village.



      (5)   No refunds of the permit fee shall be made to the
applicant following the issuance of a permit.



      (6)   The applicant shall comply with all township, village,
county and state statutes, ordinances, regulations, rules and requirements.



      (7)   Altering or falsifying a permit will revoke the
applicant's permit privileges for 12 months.



      (8)   The Chief of Police or designee is authorized to create
and amend reasonable provisions for permits.



   (D)   Fee schedule for permits. Overweight permits for an overweight
vehicle, including load, may be applied for and may be granted per the fee
schedule as set forth in this section.



      (1)   Limited continuous operation (LCO) overweight permits.
LCO permits are issued to a single power unit and may tow or carry
non-divisible, interchangeable loads for the duration of the permit. The
maximum gross weight for any LCO permit is 120,000 pounds.



         (a)   Permits for limited continuous operation shall be
based on the following fee schedule:



 


Daily ($100)

 
Expires at 11:59 p.m. the date of issue


Weekly ($250)
 
Valid for seven days from the requested date and time of issuance.


Monthly ($500)
 
Valid for 30 days from the requested date and time of issuance.



 



         (b)   Other loads. Permits for non-divisible overweight
movements shall be based on the following fee schedule:



 


OVERWEIGHT PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE




Weight (With Load)

 

Single Trip**

 

Round Trip***



Up to 100,000 lbs.
 
$75
 
$150


100,001-120,000 lbs.
 
$100
 
$200


120,001-150,000 lbs.
 
$125
 
$250


Over 150,000 lbs.
 
$150
 
$300


**   Single trip. One move from the point of origin to the point of
destination. Any additional stops between the point of origin and the point
of destination are expressly prohibited. Single trip permits are valid for
five days from the requested date and time of issuance.

***   Round trip. Two trips over the same route in opposite directions.
Any additional stops between the point of origin and point of destination
(and reverse) are expressly prohibited. Round trip permits shall be valid for
a period of time not to exceed ten days from the date of issuance.



 



            1.   Overdimension only permits may be applied for
and may be granted in the amount of $50 for single trips and $100 for round
trips.



            2.   If a vehicle requires a permit due to excess
weight and excess dimensions, permits for each such excess must be obtained
before being operated on a village roadway.



   (E)   Penalty.



      (1)   Operation of vehicle without a permit. Whenever any
vehicle is operated or movement made in violation of a permit issued in
accordance with this Schedule, the person to whom such permit was granted, or
the driver of such vehicle, is guilty of such violation and either, but not
both, persons may be prosecuted for such violation as stated in this division
(E). Any person, firm or corporation convicted of such violation shall be
guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined for the first offense, not less
than $50 nor more than $200 and, for the second offense by the same person,
firm or corporation within a period of one year, not less than $200 nor more
than $300 and, for the third offense by the same person, firm or corporation
within a period of one year after the date of the first offense, not less
than $300 nor more than $500 and the village shall not issue permits to the
person, firm or corporation convicted of a third offense during a period of
one year after the date of conviction for such third offense.



      (2)   Vehicle with a gross weight in excess of maximum weight
limits on a non-designated road. Any person who violates this schedule
operating a vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the maximum weight
limits or in excess of special weight limits provided for by ordinance and
signposted, without having first obtained an overweight permit from the Chief
of Police or designee, in addition to any other fines and penalties as
provided by law/ordinance, shall be fined a minimum of $500 and a maximum as
provided by law; except that a vehicle with a gross weight in excess of
80,000 pounds may instead be subject to the fines and penalties as set forth
in division (D)(1)(b)2. Prior to release of a vehicle with a gross weight in
excess of the maximum weight limits on a non-designated road, a sufficient
bond must be posted. Each occurrence shall constitute a separate offense.



      (3)   Vehicle with a gross weight in excess of prescribed
weight limits. Any person who violates this schedule operating a vehicle with
a gross weight in excess of prescribed weight limits, in addition to any
other fines and penalties as provided by law/ordinance, shall be subject to
the fines and penalties as follows:



         (a)   Weight. Whenever any vehicle is operated in
violation of the provisions of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-111, the owner or
driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of such violation and either
the owner or the driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation.
Any person charged with a violation of any of these provisions who pleads not
guilty shall be present in court for the trial on the charge. Any person,
firm or corporation convicted of any violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
15-111, as enforced by the village, including, but not limited to, a maximum
axle or gross limit specified on a regulatory sign posted in accordance with
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-111(g), in addition to any surcharge, court costs,
and fees, shall be fined according to the following schedule:



 


POUNDS OVERWEIGHT

 

FINE





Up to and including 2,000
 

$100



From 2,001 through 2,500
 

$270



From 2,501 through 3,000
 

$330



From 3,001 through 3,500
 

$520



From 3,501 through 4,000
 

$600



From 4,001 through 4,500
 

$850



From 4,501 through 5,000
 

$950




From 5,001 or more

 

The fine shall be computed by assessing: $1,500 for the first 5,000 pounds
overweight and $150 for each additional increment of 500 pounds overweight or
fraction thereof




*   In addition, any person, firm or corporation convicted of four or more
violations of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-111 within any twelve-month period
shall be fined an additional amount of $5,000 for the fourth and each
subsequent conviction within the 12 month period. Provided, however, that
with regard to a firm or corporation, a fourth or subsequent conviction shall
mean a fourth or subsequent conviction attributable to any one
employee-driver, ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-113(a).





 



         (b)   Width, height, length of vehicles. Whenever any
vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§§ 15-102, 15-103 or 15-107, the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be
deemed guilty of such violation and either may be prosecuted for such
violation. Any person, firm or corporation convicted of any violation of ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-102, 15-103 or 15-107, shall be fined for the first
or second conviction an amount equal to not less than $50, nor more than
$500, and for the third and subsequent convictions by the same person, firm
or corporation within a period of one year after the date of the first
offense, not less than $500, nor more than $1,000, ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
15-113(b).



(Ord. 3125, passed 12-18-17)



CHAPTER 72:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



   72.01   Definitions



   72.02   Parking when snow has accumulated to depth of two inches or
more



   72.03   Towing



   72.04   Parking and storage of commercial vehicles



   72.05   Parking and storage of recreational vehicles



   72.06   Prohibited parking at Breidert Green and on Oak Street



   72.07   Parking on lawns



   72.08   Sale of parked vehicles or merchandise therefrom



   72.09   Prohibited parking along U.S. Route 30 from Wolf Road to
Illinois Route 43



   72.10   Prohibited parking along U.S. Route 45 (La Grange Road)



 



   72.99   Penalty



§ 72.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different .



   REGISTERED CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.  Any organization required to
register and file a charitable organization statement and an annual report or
a religious organization exemption form with the Office of the Attorney
General of Illinois under the Charitable Trust Act (ILCS Ch. 76, Act 55, §§
1 et seq.), as amended, and/or the Solicitation for Charity Act (ILCS Ch.
225, Act 460, §§ 1 et seq.), and has tax exempt status as a charity or
religious organization from the Internal Revenue Service.



   STREET OR HIGHWAY.  The entire width between property lines of every
way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.



   VEHICLE.  Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



(Ord. 880, passed 2-3-75; Am Ord. 2773, passed 4-30-12)



§ 72.02  PARKING WHEN SNOW HAS ACCUMULATED TO DEPTH OF TWO INCHES OR MORE.



   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle or for any vehicle to remain
parked upon any street in the village to remain parked upon any street in the
village between the consecutive hours of 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m., when
immediately prior to or during said period of time, snow has or does
accumulate to the depth of two inches or more as measured at the intersection
of Hickory and Kansas Streets.



(Ord. 880, passed 2-3-75)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.03  TOWING.



   Any police officer in the village is hereby authorized to tow or cause
to be towed to a suitable storage area, any vehicle within the village which
is in violation of this chapter and such vehicle shall thereupon be impounded
until lawfully claimed.  The owner of the vehicle which is impounded under
the provisions of this chapter shall be charged in addition to other
penalties which may be imposed hereunder, a fee in a sum sufficient to cover
the charges and expenses for towing and storage of any such vehicle, which
fee shall be payable to the Village Clerk; said fee must be paid in full
prior to the release of the vehicle so impounded, and the same may be
collected by the village in an action at law or as an additional fine
hereunder.  The above fee is in addition to the fine provided for in §
72.99 for the violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 880, passed 2-3-75)



§ 72.04  PARKING AND STORAGE OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
park any commercial vehicle, commercial trailer or utility trailer on any of
the streets or alleys of the village for a period in excess of one hour
between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (prevailing local time). The Chief of Police
may extend said period as deemed necessary to the public health, welfare or
safety.



   (B)   A commercial vehicle is defined herein for purposes of this
section as any vehicle other than a regular passenger motor vehicle
manufactured or used, in whole or in part, for commercial purposes, the
weight of which is in excess of 9,000 pounds.



   (C)   Commercial trailers or utility trailers are defined as any
unpowered vehicle, which is designed to be drawn by another vehicle.



(Ord. 1879, passed 1-7-02; Am. Ord. 3111, passed 9-18-17)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 72.05  PARKING AND STORAGE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.



   (A)   No recreational vehicle may be parked on any street, alley,
public parking lot or public way. Recreational vehicles parked in a front
private driveway shall not be parked in excess of 48 hours in any seven-day
period. No recreational vehicle may be stored or parked on private property
within a residentially zoned area in excess of 48 hours unless such vehicle
is parked on an approved paved surface, is not located in any required front,
side or rear setback as defined by the Zoning Code,  is screened from view
from the public street by a fence or landscaping, or is located no less than
three feet behind the front wall, as extended, of the primary structure of
the lot.



   (B)   For  the  purposes  of  this  section, 
“recreational  vehicles”  includes  but  is  not  limited  to
every camping trailer, motor home, mini-motor home, travel trailer, truck
camper, boat, boat trailer, snowmobile, snowmobile trailer or van camper or
any other vehicle including air, land or watercraft used primarily for
recreational purposes and not used commercially nor owned by a commercial
business.



(Ord. 1879, passed 1-7-02; Am. Ord. 3157, passed 5-21-18)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 72.06  PROHIBITED PARKING AT BREIDERT GREEN AND ON OAK STREET.



   (A)   On Sundays, during the spring and summer months(April through
October) when the Frankfort Country Market is in scheduled session, it shall
be unlawful to park any vehicle, without a Country Market permit sticker, in
the Breidert Green parking lot, from the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. The
intent of the ban is to keep the area free of vehicular traffic to allow the
market vendors unencumbered access to the lot to unload and set up their
wares.



   (B)   It shall also be unlawful to park on Oak Street and in the
Chamber of Commerce parking lot on Oak Street without a Country Market
sticker during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. on Sundays (April through
October), for the same reason as set forth in division (A) above.



(Ord. 2273, passed 4-3-06; Am Ord. 2772, passed 4-30-12; Am. Ord. 2850,
passed 7-22-13)



§ 72.07  PARKING ON LAWNS.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B), it shall be unlawful to
park any vehicle on any property, including lawns, fields, grassy areas or
any other location within the village not designed, permanently improved,
primarily used and permitted by the village for the parking of vehicles.



   (B)   As a result of a village approved special event, temporary
parking on lawns conducted by a registered religious or charitable
organization as defined in § 72.01, or the property owner, subject to the
following conditions:



      (1)   Temporary parking shall not exceed four days;



      (2)   No temporary parking is allowed on any property in a
residential zoned district, except on fully improved, owner-occupied lots;



      (3)   This excludes any properties subject to current or
pending adverse actions, including but not limited to, foreclosure and liens.



(Ord. 2276, passed 4-3-06; Am Ord. 2773, passed 4-30-12; Am. Ord. 3137,
passed 3-19-18)



§ 72.08  SALE OF PARKED VEHICLES OR MERCHANDISE THEREFROM.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle for the purpose of
displaying it for sale upon a street or upon property not zoned for
automobile sales.  Nevertheless, a single vehicle may be displayed for sale
upon residential property, provided said vehicle is licensed and registered
to the owner of the property and complies with § 72.07.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to peddle or sell any merchandise from a
parked vehicle.



(Ord. 2277, passed 4-3-06)



§ 72.09  PROHIBITED PARKING ALONG U.S. ROUTE 30 FROM WOLF ROAD TO ILLINOIS
ROUTE 43.



   (A)   Parking shall not be permitted along U.S. Route 30 from Wolf
Road to Illinois Route 43 (Harlem Avenue), and along Wolf Road from U.S.
Route 30 to the Old Plank Road Trail Bike Path, within the corporate limits
of the Village of Frankfort.



   (B)   The President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
Frankfort will prohibit future parking at such locations on or immediately
adjacent to the U.S. Route 30 improvements as may be determined and directed
by the State of Illinois to be necessary to ensure the free flow of traffic
and safety to the motoring public.



(Ord. 2498, passed 8-18-08; Am. Ord. 2703, passed 3-21-11)



§ 72.10  PROHIBITED PARKING ALONG U.S. ROUTE 45 (LA GRANGE ROAD).



   (A)   Parking shall not be permitted along U.S. Route 45 (La Grange
Road) from Nebraska Street to Laraway Road within the corporate limits of the
Village of Frankfort.



   (B)   The President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
Frankfort will prohibit future parking at such locations on or immediately
adjacent to the U.S. Route 45 improvements as may be determined and directed
by the State of Illinois to be necessary to ensure the free flow of traffic
and safety to the motoring public.



(Ord. 2523, passed 10-20-08)



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of § 72.02 shall upon
conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not less than $25 and not more
than $750.



(Ord. 880, passed 2-3-75; Am. Ord. 1739, passed 4-19-99; Am. Ord. 1943,
passed 12-2-02)



CHAPTER 73:  VILLAGE VEHICLE LICENSE



Section



   73.01   Voluntary license



   73.02   Application



   73.03   Non-binding license fee



   73.04   Duration of license



   73.05   Purchase of license



   73.06   Removal of tag on sale



   73.07   Emblems



   73.08   Use of funds



§ 73.01  VOLUNTARY LICENSE.



   Every person who owns or operates a vehicle, who resides in the
village, or regularly garages or regularly parks such vehicle overnight
within the village, shall have the opportunity to voluntarily purchase a
vehicle license. Such license shall be issued as hereinafter provided.



(Ord. 1795, passed 4-17-00; Am. Ord. 2771, passed 4-30-12)



§ 73.02  APPLICATION.



   Application for a license shall be made to the Village Clerk upon a
form provided therefor, giving the name, address and telephone number of the
applicant, a description of the vehicle for which the license is desired, the
class of vehicle as hereinafter set forth, and any other information as may
be prescribed. Upon payment of the non-binding license fee as hereinafter
provided, the Village Clerk shall issue or cause to be issued a license
authorizing the use of such vehicle within the limits of the village.



(Ord. 1795, passed 4-17-00; Am. Ord. 2771, passed 4-30-12)



§ 73.03  NON-BINDING LICENSE FEE.



   (A)   The non-binding license fee paid annually to the Village Clerk
shall be as follows:



      (1)   Passenger vehicle or truck of less than one-ton
capacity:  $5.00.



      (2)   Passenger vehicle or truck of less than one-ton capacity
owned by a senior citizen age 65 or over:  $2.50.



      (3)   Two-axle commercial vehicle of less than 24,000 pounds
gross vehicle weight:  $7.50.



      (4)   Commercial vehicle with more than two axles, or of a
gross vehicle weight of 24,000 pounds or more:  $10.00.



      (5)   Motor bicycle, motor scooter or other two- or
three-wheel motor vehicle:  $3.00.



      (6)   The village waives the $5.00 license fee for those
residents who own a passenger vehicle or truck of less than one-ton capacity
that qualifies as a hybrid-electric vehicle, as defined in division (B) of
this section and is listed in the Fuel Economy Guide or its successor
publication.



   (B)   A HYBRID-ELECTRIC VEHICLE, as defined by the United States
Department of Energy and United States Environmental Protection Agency, and
published in the Fuel Economy Guide, “typically combines the internal
combustion engine of a conventional vehicle with the battery and electric
motor of an electric vehicle. The combination offers low emissions, with the
power, range, and convenient fueling of conventional (gasoline and diesel)
vehicles, and they never need to be plugged in.” (Source: U.S. Department
of Energy, Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy web site,
www.eere.energy.gov; www.fueleconomy.gov)



(Ord. 1795, passed 4-17-00; Am. Ord. 2334, passed 11-6-06; Am. Ord. 2771,
passed 4-30-12)



§ 73.04  DURATION OF LICENSE.



   All vehicle licenses shall be non-expiring, with no expiration date set
forth on the license.



(Ord. 1795, passed 4-17-00; Am. Ord. 2771, passed 4-30-12)



§ 73.05  PURCHASE OF LICENSE.



   All persons who wish to acquire licenses hereunder may do so
voluntarily at any time of the year.



(Ord. 1795, passed 4-17-00; Am. Ord. 2771, passed 4-30-12)



§ 73.06  REMOVAL OF TAG ON SALE.



   Immediately upon the sale of any vehicle licensed under the terms of
this chapter, the vendor shall remove any currently valid license emblem.



(Ord. 1795, passed 4-17-00; Am. Ord. 2771, passed 4-30-12)



§ 73.07  EMBLEMS.



   Upon the issuance of the license, the Village Clerk shall deliver to
the applicant a sticker license emblem, which shall bear the words “Village
of Frankfort, Illinois,” and a number identical with the number of each
license. It shall be the duty of each licensee to affix the same in the lower
right-hand corner of the windshield of the licensed vehicle, approximately
one inch from the right and lower sections of the frame of the windshield, so
as to be plainly visible at all time.



(Ord. 1795, passed 4-17-00; Am. Ord. 2771, passed 4-30-12)



§ 73.08  USE OF FUNDS.



   All revenue derived from such non-binding license fees, except for the
cost of issuing the licenses and emblems and collecting the fees, shall be
kept as a separate fund and used only for paying the cost of improving,
paving, repairing and maintaining the streets and other public roadways
within the village, or as may otherwise be permitted by the laws of the state.



(Ord. 1795, passed 4-17-00; Am. Ord. 2771, passed 4-30-12)



CHAPTER 74:  BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES AND CERTAIN OTHER VEHICLES



Section



   74.01   Motorized play vehicles



   74.02   Neighborhood vehicles



§ 74.01  MOTORIZED PLAY VEHICLES.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      MOTORIZED PLAY VEHICLE.  Each and every device that, together
with its operator, passenger or load, is propelled in whole or in part by
means other than human motor power, and that is capable of being operated
upon any highway, road, street, parking lot, sidewalk or other property
within the Village of Frankfort, including but not limited to electric
personal assistive mobility devices as defined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
1-117.7 and any and all devices known as or referred to as motorized
scooters, motorized skateboards, go-carts, mini-bikes, which are propelled by
any type of motor or engine whatsoever and include a platform or other space
on which an operator or passenger may ride, but excluding motorized
wheelchairs as defined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.3, and vehicles for
which certificates of title and registration plates or stickers have been
issued by the State of Illinois pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 1-100 et. seq.



   (B)   Prohibition. 



      (1)    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, ride,
use or otherwise control any motorized play vehicle over, across or upon any
public road, highway, street, sidewalk, bicycle path, parking or other public
property within the village, except as may be directed by any sworn law
enforcement officer of the village or except as may be necessary or required
by any employee of the village duly engaged in the performance of official
village business or duties.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, ride,
use or otherwise control any motorized play vehicle over, across or upon any
private road, highway, street, sidewalk, bicycle path, parking lot or other
private property within the village, unless the owner of such private
property shall consent thereto.



   (C)   Impoundment.  Any and all motorized play vehicles operated in
violation of this chapter may be impounded by the Village of Frankfort Police
Department and held as evidence of such violation pending the final
disposition of any ordinance violation or other legal proceedings commenced
in relation to such violation.



   (D)   Parental liability. It shall further be unlawful under this
chapter for any parent or any legal guardian of any minor to permit,
authorize, allow or acquiesce in the operation of any motorized play vehicle
by such minor in violation of this chapter or to negligently fail to exercise
reasonable care to prevent the operation of any motorized play vehicle by
such minor in violation of this chapter. Any parent or any legal guardian of
any minor who permits, authorizes, allows or acquiesces in the operation of
any motorized play vehicle by such minor in violation of this chapter or who
negligently fails to exercise reasonable care to prevent the operation of any
motorized play vehicle by such minor in violation of this chapter shall be
liable for any and all damages and injuries to persons or property resulting
therefrom.



(Ord. 2103, passed 7-19-04)



 

§ 74.02  NEIGHBORHOOD VEHICLES.



   (A)   Definitions.  For purposes of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE (EPAMD).  A
self-balancing, two non-tandem wheeled device designed to transport only one
person with an electric propulsion system that limits the maximum speed of
the device to 15 miles per hour or less.



      EMPLOYEE.  Any officer, full time, part time, volunteer or
unpaid person working under the direction, supervision and control of and
performing work or services for the Village of Frankfort, the Frankfort Fire
Protection District, or the Will County Forest Preserve District,



      NEIGHBORHOOD VEHICLE. A self-propelled and motor vehicle with an
engine displacement under 1,200 cubic centimeters which is capable of
attaining in one mile a speed of more than 20 miles per hour, but not more
than 25 miles per hour, and which conforms to federal regulations under Title
49 C.F.R. Part 571.500. At minimum, a neighborhood vehicle must be equipped
as follows: brakes, a steering apparatus, tires, a rearview mirror, red
reflectorized warning devices in the front and rear, a slow moving emblem (as
required of other vehicles in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-709) on the rear of
the neighborhood vehicle, a headlight that emits a white light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the front, a tail lamp that emits a red light visible
from at least 100 feet from the rear, brake lights, and turn signals.



      RECREATIONAL TRAIL.  Includes any public path, trail, route
including the Old Plank Road Trail designed to be used by pedestrians,
bicycles, walkers, joggers and other recreational users.



      SIDEWALK.  A paved walkway for pedestrian usage beside or
proximate to a street or roadway which is not designed or intended for use as
a recreational vehicle.



      STREET.  Includes any highway, roadway, street, alleyway
designed or intended for vehicular travel, street right-of-way, street
parkways and public sidewalks.



   (B)   Prohibited use of neighborhood vehicles. Except as provided in
division (C) below, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
neighborhood vehicle or EPAMD on any street, recreational trail or public
property in the Village of Frankfort.



   (C)   Authorization of use by Village of Frankfort and Frankfort
Fire Protection District.  Any person who is an employee of the Village of
Frankfort, the Frankfort Fire Protection District or the Will County Forest
Preserve District may operate a neighborhood vehicle or EPAMD on village
streets or recreational trails subject to compliance with the following:



      (1)   The person must have a valid Illinois driver's license
in his or her name issued by the Illinois Secretary of State.



      (2)   Neighborhood vehicle or EPAMD must be owned, leased or
otherwise controlled by the Village of Frankfort, the Frankfort Fire
Protection District, or the Will County Forest Preserve District.



      (3)   Neighborhood vehicles or EPAMD(s) may be operated only
on streets where the posted or authorized speed limit is 35 miles per hour or
less, recreational trails or public ways. In addition, an EPAMD may also be
operated on sidewalks. This does not prohibit a neighborhood vehicle or EPAMD
from crossing a street at an intersection where the street has a posted speed
limit of more than 35 miles per hour.



      (4)   Neighborhood vehicles or EPAMD(s) shall be operated in
conformance with all applicable laws of the State of Illinois and ordinances
of the Village of Frankfort not inconsistent with this section.



      (5)   The neighborhood vehicle shall be operated in
conformance with any rules and regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police
of the Village of Frankfort regarding the operation of neighborhood vehicles
or EPAMD(s).



   (D)   Chief of Police rules and regulations.  The Chief of Police
may promulgate and publish rules and regulations for the operation of
neighborhood vehicles and EPAMD(s) not inconsistent with this section.



   (E)   Penalty.  Any business or person found to have violated any
provision of this section shall be fined not less than $250 for the first
offense and not less than $500 for each subsequent offense.



(Ord. 2693, passed 2-22-11)



CHAPTER 75:  OPERATIONAL PROHIBITIONS



Section



   75.01   Muffler; muffler cutout; excessive smoke, gas or noise
prohibited



   75.02   Exemptions



 



   75.99   Penalty



§ 75.01  MUFFLER; MUFFLER CUTOUT; EXCESSIVE SMOKE, GAS OR NOISE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Muffler; muffler cutout. Every motor vehicle and motorcycle
with an internal combustion engine shall at all times be equipped with a
muffler which is in good working order and in constant operation to prevent
excessive noise or unusual sound, and no person shall use a muffler cutout,
by-pass or similar device upon a motor vehicle on a highway. Every motorcycle
muffler shall be equipped with baffle plates.



   (B)   Excessive smoke or gas. No person shall own, operate or have
in his or her possession any motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with a
device for producing excessive smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil
or any other chemical to flow into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of
such vehicle, or equipped in any other way to produce or emit smoke or
dangerous or annoying gases from any portion of such vehicle, other than the
ordinary gases emitted by the exhaust of an internal combustion engine under
normal operation.



   (C)   Jake braking. No person, while operating a commercial motor
vehicle within the village, shall apply an engine braking system (a practice
commonly known as “jake braking”), or otherwise use the vehicle’s
engine in such a manner as to emit excessive noise.



   (D)   Measurement of sound by law enforcement. Any law enforcement
personnel who hears a sound that may be a violation of this section shall be
entitled to measure the sound according to the following standards:



      (1)   The primary means of detection shall be by means of the
officer’s ordinary auditory senses, so long as the officer’s hearing is
not enhanced by any mechanical device such as a microphone or hearing aid.



      (2)   The officer must have a direct line of sight and hearing
to the motor vehicle producing the sound so that he or she can readily
identify the offending motor vehicle and the estimated distance involved.



(Ord. 2441, passed 2-19-08)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.02  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   This chapter does not apply to emergency and/or police
vehicles.



   (B)   It is a defense to a violation of § 75.01(C) that the driver
used an engine braking system that emits excessive noise in an emergency to
avoid a collision with a person or another vehicle on the highway.



(Ord. 2441, passed 2-19-08)  Penalty, see § 75.99



§ 75.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of § 75.01 shall upon
conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not less than $75 and not more
than $750.



(Ord. 2441, passed 2-19-08)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ABANDONED VEHICLES



      91.   ALARM SYSTEMS



      92.   ANIMALS



      93.   LITTER CONTROL



      94.   NUISANCES; WEEDS



      95.   PARADES AND PUBLIC GATHERINGS



      96.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      97.   OFF-ROAD RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



      98.   SNOWMOBILES



      99.   FIREWORKS



CHAPTER 90:  ABANDONED VEHICLES



Section



   90.01   Definitions



   90.02   Abandonment of vehicles



   90.03   Leaving of wrecked, nonoperating vehicle on street



   90.04   Disposition of wrecked or discarded vehicles



   90.05   Parking or storing vehicles on public streets



   90.06   Impoundment of vehicles; fees



 



   90.99   Penalty



§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHIEF OF POLICE.  The Chief of Police of the village or his authorized
representative.



   PERSON.  Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.



   PROPERTY.  Any real property within the village or any village
property, within or without the corporate limits, which is not a street or
highway.



   STREET or HIGHWAY.  The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.



   VEHICLE.  A machine propelled by power other than human power designed
to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides, and
transport persons or property or pull machinery, and shall include, without
limitation, automobile, truck trailer, motor cycle, tractor, bus, buggy, and
wagon.



(Ord. 571, passed 4-4-66)



§ 90.02  ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES.



   No person shall abandon any vehicle within the village or on village
property, within or without the corporate limits, and no person shall leave
any vehicle at any place within the village or on village property within or
without the corporate limits, for such time and under such circumstances as
to cause such vehicle to reasonably appear to have been abandoned.



(Ord. 571, passed 4-4-66)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.03  LEAVING OF WRECKED, NONOPERATING VEHICLE ON STREET.



   No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked,
or junked vehicle on any street or highway within the village or on village
property within or without the corporate limits, provided such vehicle may be
left at a place authorized by the village.



(Ord. 571, passed 4-4-66)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  DISPOSITION OF WRECKED OR DISCARDED VEHICLES.



   No person in charge or control of any property other than village
property within the village, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or
otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked,
junked, or discarded vehicle to remain on such property longer than 30 days,
and no person shall leave any such vehicle on any property other than village
property within the village longer than 30 days or on village property,
within or without the corporate limits, for a longer time than 48 hours;
except that this section shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an
enclosed building, a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise
operated in a lawful place and manner when necessary to the lawful operation
of such business enterprise, or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or
depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the village.



(Ord. 571, passed 4-4-66)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.05  PARKING OR STORING VEHICLES ON PUBLIC STREETS.



   No person shall park or store any vehicle on any public street, alley,
or public way for more than 48 successive hours.



(Ord. 571, passed 4-4-66)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.06  IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES; FEES.



   (A)   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to remove or have
removed any vehicle left at any place within the village or on any village
property, within or without the corporate limits, which reasonably appears to
be in violation of this chapter or lost, stolen, or unclaimed. Such vehicle
shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with
the state and provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that any vehicle
left at any place, other than on village property, shall not be removed and
impounded as provided herein until the Chief of Police shall have given
written notice to remove said vehicle within ten days of the mailing of such
notice and of the intention of the Chief of Police to remove and impound such
vehicle if it has not been removed at the end of such time. 



   (B)   The notice required in division (A) above shall be given by:



      (1)   Affixing notice on such vehicle.



      (2)   Sending notice by mail to the owner of such vehicle at
his last known address if the owner is reasonably ascertainable; and



      (3)   By sending notice by mail to the person owning or
controlling the property on which such vehicle is located.



   (C)   The Chief of Police may enter upon private property at all
reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting such vehicle, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to prevent the Chief of Police from entering on
private property for purposes of carrying out his duties hereunder or to
interfere with him in the lawful performance of his duties under the
provisions of this chapter.  The Chief of Police may tow, or cause to be
towed, any vehicle abandoned, parked, or otherwise kept in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, to a suitable storage area.



   (D)   The owner of or person abandoning, parking, or otherwise
keeping a vehicle in violation of the provisions of this chapter, which is
impounded under the provisions of law and this chapter, shall be charged a
fee in a sum sufficient to cover the charges and expenses of impounding and
the enforcement of this chapter, payable to the Village Clerk, which fee may
be collected by the village in an action at law against said violator, and
which fee must be paid prior to the release of the vehicle so impounded. 
This fee shall be in addition to the fine provided for herein for the
violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 571, passed 4-4-66)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   Every person who is convicted of a violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $750
for each offense.  Each day such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.



(Ord. 571, passed 4-4-66; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02)



CHAPTER 91:  ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



General Provisions



   91.01   Definitions



   91.02   Operational requirements



   91.03   Alarm equipment supplier



   91.04   Liability of village limited



   91.05   Fees



Telephonic Alarm Systems



   91.20   Permit required



   91.21   Application for permit



   91.22   Right of inspection



   91.23   Restricted numbers



   91.24   Revocation



   91.25   Annual permit



Burglar Alarm Systems



   91.30   Supervision and inspection of control boards



   91.31   Permit



   91.32   Approval of plans



   91.33   Installation



   91.34   Enforcement



   91.35   Operation



   91.36   Fees



 



   91.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 91.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM EQUIPMENT SUPPLIER.  Any person, firm, or corporation that sells
or leases, and/or installs automatic protection devices that transmit over
regular telephone lines a prerecorded voice alarm upon receipt of a stimulus
from a detection apparatus.



   AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE.  An electrically operated instrument
composed of sensory apparatus and related hardware which automatically sends
over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a
prerecorded voice alarm or other alarm signal upon receipt of a stimulus from
the sensory apparatus that has detected a physical force or condition
inherently characteristic of a fire or unauthorized intrusion.  AUTOMATIC
PROTECTION DEVICE includes but is not limited to any burglar, fire, or other
protection device which emits any visual or audible signal which sounds,
signals, or is transmitted in any manner, including transmission by
telephonic or other means, to any center used for reception of alarm signals.



   COMMUNICATIONS CENTER.  The Lincoln-Way facility which is a central
dispatch and communications facility for the Village Police Department.



   DIRECT LINE.  A telephone line leading directly to the communications
center of the Police Department that is for use only to report emergency
messages and signals on a person-to-person basis.



   KEY (to a telephone line).  To use a telephone line for transmitting a
message, either by direct connection or by a mechanism not so connected that
utilizes the microphone of a standard telephone to do so.



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, or
society, but such term does not include the village.



   POLICE CHIEF.  The Chief of the Police Department of the village or
his authorized representative.



   POLICE DEPARTMENT.  The Police Department of the village.



   PRIMARY TRUNKLINE.  A telephone line leading into the communications
center of the Police Department that is for the purpose of handling emergency
calls on a person-to-person basis, and which line is identified by a specific
listing among the emergency numbers in the telephone directory issued by the
telephone company serving the village.



   SIGNALING DEVICE.  An electrically operated instrument composed of
sensory apparatus and related hardware that, upon detection of a physical
force or condition characteristic of an emergency, will excite a signal line
in such a way as to cause both visual and audible signals to be registered by
indicators on a monitor panel at the receiving terminal of that signal line
in a central location.



   SIGNAL LINE.  A line not connected to any standard telephone equipment
which leads into an indicator panel in the communications center of the
Police Department or to such a panel in either a central station protective
system or a modified central station, and which is designed to transmit
electrically an alarm signal readily identifiable as to location of origin.



   SPECIAL TRUNKLINE.  A telephone line leading into the communications
center of the Police Department that is for the primary purpose of handling
emergency messages which originate from automatic protection devices and are
transmitted directly or through an intermediary.



   TELEPHONE COMPANY.  The public utility that has a franchise
authorizing it to furnish telephone service to subscribers in the village.



   TELEPHONIC ALARM SYSTEM.  Any mechanism, equipment, or device which is
designed to operate automatically through the use of public telephone
facilities to transmit a signal, message, or warning to another location.



(Ord. 785, passed 11-20-72; Am. Ord. 1097, passed 9-19-83)



§ 91.02  OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No automatic protection device or telephonic alarm system that
is installed by any person on premises of any kind in the village shall be
keyed to a primary trunkline.



   (B)   Any alarm equipment supplier who installs automatic protection
devices or telephonic alarm systems for the purpose of sending prerecorded
emergency messages directly to the Police Department shall first obtain
necessary instructions, including a designated telephone number, from the
communications center in order to key such devices to a special trunkline
into the communications center.



   (C)   All automatic protection devices or telephonic alarm systems
that were keyed prior to November 20, 1972 to a primary trunkline shall be
disconnected therefrom. The owner or lessee of any such device shall be
responsible for its disconnection.



   (D)   An owner or lessee of an automatic protection device or
telephonic alarm system who has it disconnected as required by this section,
may authorize an alarm equipment supplier who has a temporary permit or a
license, as required by this chapter to key the automatic protection device
to a special trunkline into the communications center, provided that the
device meets operational requirements, as set forth in this chapter or as
required by the Lincoln Way communications center.



   (E)   No one except an alarm equipment supplier with a temporary
permit or a license from the village, as required by this chapter shall
install any automatic protection device or telephonic alarm system or key the
same to a special trunkline.



   (F)   (1)   Every alarm equipment supplier who has keyed any
automatic protection device to a special trunkline shall furnish the
communications center with a current list of such installations, showing the
following:



         (a)   Name, residence address, and telephone number of
owner or lessee.



         (b)   Address of place where device is installed and
telephone number at that location.



         (c)   Name and telephone number of any other person(s)
at a different location who is authorized to respond to an emergency and open
the place where the device is installed.



      (2)   Within ten days after the end of each quarter following
the last month included in the initial list, every alarm equipment supplier
shall furnish the communications center with a supplemental list of any such
additional installations that he has keyed to a special trunkline, along with
any corrections or deletions.



   (G)   Automatic protection devices or telephonic alarm systems
installed on premises of any kind that are keyed to a special trunkline shall
meet the following minimum operational requirements.



      (1)   The content of the type of recorded message to be
transmitted by such device must be intelligible and in a format approved by
the communications center concerned as appropriate for the nature of the
alarm.



      (2)   No recorded message shall be delivered to the Police
Department more than three times as the result of a single stimulus of the
sensory mechanism.



      (3)   The length of time for transmitting the recorded message
must not exceed 15 seconds.



      (4)   The time gap between delivery of each recorded message
must be in the range from 10 to 12 seconds.



      (5)   Such device must be capable of transmitting an alarm
message to two or more recipients, so that upon installation, any message
will be sent not only on a special trunkline, but also on the line of an
authorized person having a key to the premises who is available to respond to
an emergency.



      (6)   The sensory mechanism used in connection with such
devices must be adjusted to suppress false indications of fire or intrusion,
so that the devices will not be actuated by impulses due to transient
pressure changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, wind noises such as
the rattling or vibrating of doors or windows, vehicular noise adjacent to
the installation, or other forces unrelated to genuine alarms.



      (7)   All components comprising such a device must be
maintained by the owner or lessee in good repair to assure reliability of
operation.



   (H)   Each alarm equipment supplier that sells or leases to a person
an automatic protection device which is installed on such person's premises,
and which is keyed to a special trunkline, shall furnish that person with
instructions as to the way the device operates, along with a maintenance
manual and a correct circuit diagram pertaining to such device.



   (I)   Each alarm equipment supplier, as referred to in division (H)
above, shall also furnish the communications center with a copy of the
instructions as to the way the device operates, along with a maintenance
manual and a correct circuit diagram. If the communications center finds such
to be incomplete, unclear, or otherwise inadequate, he may require the alarm
equipment supplier to have the same revised to meet the communications
center's approval and then promptly distributed to persons for whom
installations of such devices have already been made as well as to persons
for whom installations are henceforth made.



   (J)   Each alarm equipment supplier that sells or leases to a person
an automatic protection device which is installed on such person's premises,
and which is keyed to a special trunkline, must offer service, directly or
through an agent, on a 24 hour basis, seven days a week, to repair such
device, so as to correct any malfunction of same that may occur.



   (K)   At the time of installation, each alarm equipment supplier
shall furnish to the person for whom an automatic protection device has been
installed, written information as to how service can be obtained at any time,
including the telephone number to call for service; and such person shall be
responsible for having the device repaired as quickly as possible after he
learns, either from his own sources or from notification by the
communications center or any member of the Police Department, that the device
is not working properly.



   (L)   When messages evidencing failure to comply with the
operational requirements herein set forth are received by the communications
center and the Department Chief concerned concludes that the automatic
protection device sending such messages should be disconnected in order to
relieve the burden of responding to false alarms, he is authorized to demand
that the owner or lessee of such device, or his representative at the place
where it is installed, disconnect such device until it is made to comply with
said operational requirements. If disconnection of the defective automatic
protection device is not accomplished promptly by such demand, and the
Department Chief concerned determines that one malfunctioning device is
repeatedly sending false alarms in succession without any intermittent valid
alarms, he may then take whatever steps are necessary to disconnect the
defective automatic protection device.



   (M)   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter,
the communications center and the Chief of the Police Department shall each
have the authority, at reasonable times and upon oral notice, to enter upon
any premises to inspect the installation and operation of an automatic
protection device or signaling device, the purpose of which is to report an
emergency to the communications center or the Police Department, either
directly or through an intermediary.



(Ord. 785, passed 11-20-72)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.03  ALARM EQUIPMENT SUPPLIER.



   Each alarm equipment supplier engaged in selling or leasing, and/or
installing automatic protection devices for keying to a special trunkline or
an operator trunkline shall apply for a license on a form to be furnished by
the communications center. Any person who desires to become an alarm
equipment supplier and who proposes to key automatic protection devices
either to a special trunkline or an operator trunkline, shall first apply for
a license on a form to be furnished by the communications center. Each
application shall be signed by the individual proprietor of such business or
by a partner or authorized corporate official, as appropriate for the type of
business organization, and shall include the information required by the
communications center and submit the fee required herein.



(Ord. 785, passed 11-20-72)



§ 91.04  LIABILITY OF VILLAGE LIMITED.



   The village and communications center shall take every reasonable
precaution to assure that alarm signals and prerecorded alarm messages
received by the communications center or village are given appropriate
attention and are acted upon with dispatch. Nevertheless, the village and the
communications center shall not be liable for any defects in operation of
automatic protection devices and signal line systems, for any failure or
neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt of an alarm from such a source
nor for the failure or neglect of any person with a license issued pursuant
to this chapter or with a franchise, in connection with the installation and
operation of equipment, the transmission of alarm signals and prerecorded
alarm messages, or the relaying of such signals and messages. In the event
that the village or communications center finds it necessary to disconnect a
defective automatic protection device or signaling device, then neither the
village nor the communications center shall incur liability by such action.



(Ord. 785, passed 11-20-72)



§ 91.05  FEES.



   (A)   Each application for permit to install a telephonic alarm
system shall be accompanied by an installation fee to be established by the
Board of Trustees. As a condition to granting a permit to maintain and
operate said system, an annual fee to be established by the Board of Trustees
shall be paid in advance for each year of operation of said system.



   (B)   Each application for permit to install a burglar alarm system,
automatic protection device, or a signaling device which utilizes a signal
line to activate an indicator on the central control board located at the
communications center shall be accompanied by an installation fee to be
established by the Board of Trustees.  As a condition to granting a permit
to operate and maintain such a device or system, an annual fee to be
established by the Board of Trustees shall be paid in advance for each year
of operation of said system.



   (C)   Each application for a permit or license for an alarm
equipment supplier shall be accompanied by a fee to be established by the
Board of Trustees.



   (D)   Failure to pay annual operation fees on or before January 1 in
each year shall result in disconnection of the burglar alarm system,
automatic protection device, or signaling device from the control panel at
the communications center after the expiration of 15 days from the date such
permit holder receives written notice from the communications center of his
failure to pay said annual operation fee, or in the case of telephonic alarm
system operational fees, any such system shall be disconnected and removed by
the permit holder within 15 days from the date notice of such failure to pay
is received by the permit holder.



   (E)   False alarm fees.



      (1)   In the event that more than three alarms are received by
the communications center from a permit holder under the terms and provisions
of this chapter during a one calendar year period, which are determined by
the Chief of Police or communications center to be due to human error,
mechanical difficulty or in any way a false alarm, then and in that event,
such permit holder shall pay a fee to be established by the Board of Trustees
for the fourth such false alarm during any such one year period. For each
additional false alarm thereafter in any such one year period an additional
fee to be established by the Board of Trustees per false alarm shall be paid
by such permit holder to the communications center.



      (2)   All false alarm fees provided for by this division shall
be paid by the person, firm, corporation, or business owning or in possession
of the premises within 30 days from the date the false alarm fee bill thereof
is deposited in a mail box of the U.S. Postage Service with the postage fully
prepaid addressed to the above described person or entity.  Failure to pay
such fee as required in this division shall be punishable by prosecution by
the village or institution of such other appropriate procedures as determined
by the village, including disconnection of the alarm from the central board
of the communications center.



      (3)   In the event any person, firm, corporation, or business
owning or in possession of any premises within the corporate limits of the
village has any automatic protection device, signaling device, or other type
of burglar alarm system or automatic protection device not attached to or
originally transmitted to the communications center which emits any visual,
audible, or any other type of signal, transmits, displays, or otherwise emits
more than three false alarms during any calendar year, which alarm is falsely
activated as a result of, but not limited to, human error, mechanical
failure, or difficulty or malfunction in the system, then in such instance
the person, firm, business, or corporation shall pay a false alarm fee to be
established by the Board of Trustees to the village a false alarm fee to be
established by the Board of Trustees per false alarm for the fourth such
alarm during any one calendar year and shall pay to thereafter in any one
calendar year.



      (4)   The Police Department of the village shall maintain
records which shall be prima facie evidence of the dates the village received
and investigated any false alarms for each premises located within the
corporate limits of the village and further, the Police Department shall
notify the person, firm, corporation, or business owning or in control of
such premises after the third false alarm of the false alarm fees required
under this chapter.



(Ord. 785, passed 11-20-72; Am. Ord. 1097, passed 9-19-83)



TELEPHONIC ALARM SYSTEMS



§ 91.20  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate or maintain a telephonic alarm system which
automatically transmits a signal message or warning to any village police
department or communications center telephone line, without first obtaining a
permit as required by this subchapter. 



(Ord. 785, passed 11-20-72)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.21 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   Applications for permits to install, maintain, or operate a
telephonic alarm system which is intended to automatically transmit a signal,
message or warning to any police department or communications center
telephone line shall be filed with the chief of the concerned department on
forms supplied by the communications center, together with an application fee
as herein set forth. Said application shall set forth the name, address, and
telephone number of both the installer of the system and the person or
business on whose premises the system will be installed, as well as a
description of the system and the location where it is proposed to be
installed.



   (B)   The chief of the concerned department shall approve such
application if he finds that the following applies.



      (1)   The use of said alarm system to transmit a signal,
message or warning to a designated Police Department telephone line will not
interfere with the orderly conduct of the communications center.



      (2)   The person installing the system maintains an adequate
service organization to repair, maintain, and otherwise service telephonic
alarm systems sold or leased by him. The Police Chief or the communications
center may impose reasonable conditions on the exercise of said permit.



(Ord. 785, passed 11-20-72)



§ 91.22  RIGHT OF INSPECTION.



   The chief of the concerned department or the communications center
shall have the right to inspect any telephonic alarm system on the premises
where it is intended to function prior to issuance of any permit for its
operation and he may cause an inspection of such system to be made at any
time after issuance of a permit to determine whether it is being used in
conformity with the terms of the permit and the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 785, passed 11-20-72)



§ 91.23  RESTRICTED NUMBERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install,
operate or maintain a telephonic alarm system which automatically transmits a
signal, message, or warning to any police department or the communications
center telephone line, except to such telephone number or numbers as
designated by the permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 785, passed 11-20-72)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.24  REVOCATION.



   The chief of the concerned department of the communications center may
revoke any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter, after
giving written notice to the permit holder and an opportunity for the permit
holder to be heard, if it is determined that the telephonic alarm system
installed pursuant to said permit has been installed, maintained or operated
in violation of the provisions of this subchapter, or of any term or
condition of said permit, or for failure to pay the service fee specified
herein.



(Ord. 785, passed 11-20-72)



§ 91.25  ANNUAL PERMIT.



    Each permit holder shall pay to the communications center a fee in the
amount herein set forth to reimburse the communications center for the cost
of providing special telephone lines to receive calls from telephonic alarm
systems and other expenses of operation.



(Ord. 785, passed 11-20-72)



BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS



§ 91.30  SUPERVISION AND INSPECTION OF CONTROL BOARDS.



   It shall be unlawful to manufacture, install, operate, or assemble any
electrical control board or signaling device designed to be used as a burglar
alarm system, unless such manufacture, installation, or assembly is
supervised by the communications center or Police Inspector.  Any such board
or signaling device not manufactured or assembled in the village shall be
inspected and approved by said Police Inspector or the Chief of Police as a
prerequisite to granting a permit.



(Ord. 785, passed 11-20-72)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.31  PERMIT.



   No electric board, signaling device, or control system, covering
burglar alarm devices connected with the communications center or Police
Department shall be installed without the permission of the communications
center.



(Ord. 785, passed 11-20-72)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.32  APPROVAL OF PLANS.



   Any corporation, person, or individual servicing any commercial or
industrial establishment with such system shall submit said plan to the Chief
of Police or the communications center, and such system shall be controlled
and operated through the central control board, owned and operated by the
communications center.



(Ord. 785, passed 11-20-72) 



§ 91.33  INSTALLATION.



   The installation of any such alarm on any premises in the village shall
be installed under the supervision of the Chief of Police and the
communications center.



(Ord. 785, passed 11-20-72) 



§ 91.34  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to enforce the provisions of
this subchapter to the end that said system may be unified and operated
through one control board.



(Ord. 785, passed 11-20-72)



§ 91.35  OPERATION.



   The communications center shall decide all questions arising as to the
use and operation of such systems, through the electric control board of the
communications center.



(Ord. 785, passed 11-20-72)



§ 91.36  FEES.



   Before permission is granted to any person, or persons, for the
installation of a burglar alarm system, the installation and service fees
shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter to the
communications center.



(Ord. 785, passed 11-20-72)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Failure of any person to comply with the requirements of
written notice of a violation of any provision hereof within three days of
receipt of such notice, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, shall
constitute an offense punishable by a fine not to exceed $750.  Such notice
shall continue in force and effect until full compliance with the
requirements stated therein, and each and every failure to comply with such
notice within 24 hours after the three days allowed for compliance shall
constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   Any person, firm, business, or corporation who is the owner or
in possession of any premises which fails to pay any false alarm fees within
the time enumerated in § 91.05 shall be subject to prosecution by the
village and upon conviction, subject to a fine of not less than $25 nor more
than $750 for each such false alarm.



(Ord. 785, passed 11-20-72; Am. Ord. 1097, passed 9-19-83; Am. Ord. 1943,
passed 12-2-02)



CHAPTER 92:  ANIMALS



Section



   92.01   Definitions



   92.02   Cruelty to animals



   92.03   Disturbing the peace



   92.04   Keeping of certain animals restricted



   92.05   Housing animals



   92.06   Running at large



   92.07   Dogs on school yards



   92.08   Animal excrement



   92.09   Number of dogs/cats



   92.10   Vaccination (inoculation against rabies)



   92.11   Dangerous and vicious dogs



   92.12   Diseased animals



   92.13   Licensing (Frankfort ID tags)



   92.14   Impoundment of dogs, cats, and other animals



   92.15   Interference with officers



   92.16   Liability of owner of dog, cat or other animal attacking or
injuring person or animal



   92.17   Right of entry for inspections, apprehension of dogs, cats
or other animals



   92.18   Animal to animal bites or abrasions



   92.19   Animal to human bites or abrasions



   92.20   Nuisances



   92.21   Enforcement; exemption from liability



 



   92.99   Penalty



§ 92.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. The employee(s) or designee(s) of the Village
of Frankfort including the Frankfort Township, Illinois Animal Control
Officer, authorized to exercise policing powers in the enforcement of this
chapter and animal control laws of Illinois.



   AT LARGE. Animals not confined or otherwise restrained or controlled in
an enclosure or by leash or lead.



   BITTEN or BITES. An animal that has seized, gripped, wounded or pierced
any person or animal with its teeth or jaw.



   CAT. Felis catus (Feline family).



   CONFINED. The restriction of an animal at all times by the owner, to an
escape-proof building, house or other enclosure away from other animals and
the public.



   CONTROL or CONTROLLED. Any animal that is fully secured and restrained
by a leash or lead line of sufficient strength not more than five feet in
length, a run line, or confined.



   DANGEROUS DOG.



      (1)   Any individual dog anywhere other than upon the property
of the owner or custodian of the dog and unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended
by its owner or custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person
would believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious
physical injury or death to a person or a companion animal; or



      (2)   A dog that, without justification, bites a person and
does not cause serious physical injury.



   DEFECATION CONTROL. The immediate removal and sanitary disposal of
animal excrement from any property, public or private, including property of
the owner.



   DOG. All members of the family Canidae (Canine family).



   ENCLOSURE. A fence or structure of at least six feet in height, forming
or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and
suitable to confine a vicious or dangerous dog in conjunction with other
measures that may be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of the
vicious or dangerous dog within the enclosure. The ENCLOSURE shall be
securely enclosed and locked and designated to prevent the animal from
escaping from the enclosure. If the ENCLOSURE is a room within a residence,
it cannot have direct ingress from or egress to the outdoors unless it leads
directly to an enclosed pen and the door must be locked. A vicious or
dangerous dog may be allowed to move about freely within the entire residence
if it is muzzled at all times.



   FRANKFORT ID TAGS or ANIMAL TAGS or FRANKFORT TOWNSHIP ID TAGS. Tags
issued by the Village or Frankfort Township on the village’s behalf upon
the owner’s application which includes a current certification from a State
of Illinois licensed veterinarian that the animal has been fully and
currently inoculated against rabies and otherwise poses no medical condition
which would affect human beings or other animals.



   GUARD DOG. A dog used in a commercial business for the purposes of
patrol and protection security.



   GUIDE DOG. A dog trained by a recognized organization to lead the
legally blind, the hearing impaired or support dogs for the physically
handicapped person.



   HOME CONFINEMENT. Maintaining the animal within the residence of the
owner possessing the animal or on the property of the owner, as long as it is
controlled or confined.



   IMPOUNDED. Taken into the custody of the animal control facility.



   INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES. The injection of a rabies vaccine approved
by the Illinois Department of Agriculture and administered by a veterinarian
licensed by the State of Illinois in accordance with the vaccination
manufacturer’s recommendations for its use.



   INTACT ANIMAL. An animal that has not been spayed or neutered.



   LEASH and/or LEAD. A cord, rope, strap, or chain which shall be
securely fastened to the collar or harness of a dog or other animal and shall
be of sufficient strength to keep such dog or other animal under control.



   NUISANCE. Any animal(s) which runs at large, damages private or public
property or barks, whines, or howls in an excessive, continuous, or untimely
manner. For purposes of this chapter, barking, howling or whining on a
repetitive basis over a 20-minute period is a NUISANCE.



   OWNER. Any person having a right of property in an animal, or who
keeps, maintains, possesses or harbors an animal, or who has it in his or her
care, or acts as its custodian, or who knowingly permits a dog to remain on
any premises occupied by him or her.



   PARCEL. Any legally recorded piece of land.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, society,
association or other legal entity, any public or private institution, the
State of Illinois, municipal corporation or political subdivision of the
state, or any other business unit.



   PHYSICAL INJURY. The impairment of physical condition.



   POLICE ANIMAL. An animal owned or used by a law enforcement department
or agency in the course of the department or agency’s work.



   POUND. Any facility approved by the Animal Control Officer for the
purpose of enforcing this chapter and used as a shelter for seized stray,
homeless and abandoned animals.



   RUN LINE. A system of tying an animal with a collar and clasp of
adequate strength in a place with either a rope, cable or chain having a
tensile strength sufficient to fully restrain and control the animal within
the owner’s private property and when the run line is fully extended, it is
at least three feet from the adjoining property or any public property.



   RUNNING AT LARGE. Those animals which are not under control or confined
as defined in this section.



   SERIOUS PHYSICAL INJURY. A physical injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes death, serious disfigurement, protracted
impairment of health, impairment of the function of any bodily organ, or
plastic surgery.



   SEIZE. To enter upon public or private property, for the purpose of
impounding any dog, cat, or other animal considered by the Animal Control
Officer to be in violation of this chapter.



   STRAYING. A dog, cat or other animal not on the premises of the owner
or not controlled or confined as set forth in this chapter.



   VETERINARIAN. A doctor of veterinary medicine licensed by the State of
Illinois who engages in the practice of veterinary medicine.



   VICIOUS DOG.



      (1)   Any one of the following:



         (a)   Any dog that when unprovoked bites or attacks a
human being or other animal either on public or private property.



         (b)   Any dog which on at least one prior occasion
attempted to or did, without provocation or with a known propensity,
tendency, or disposition to attack, to cause injury to or to otherwise
endanger the safety of human beings or animals.



         (c)   Any dog that has a trait or characteristic
generally known for a reputation for viciousness, dangerousness, of making
unprovoked attacks upon human beings or other animals, unless handled in a
particular manner or with special equipment.



         (d)   Any dog which attacks a human being or domestic
animal without provocation.



         (e)   Any individual dog which has been determined by a
veterinarian or governmental animal control authority to be a dangerous dog
on three prior separate occasions.



      (2)   However, no dog shall be deemed vicious:



         (a)   If it bites, attacks or menaces a trespasser on
the property of its owner or anyone who has harmed, tormented or abused it; or



         (b)   It is a professionally trained dog used as a guard
dog or police animal.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-6-69; Am. Ord. 2414, passed 9-17-07)



§ 92.02  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.



   (A)   The owner of any animal shall provide:



      (1)   Sufficient quantity of good quality, wholesome, food and
water;



      (2)   Adequate shelter and protection from the weather;



      (3)   Veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering; and



      (4)   Humane care and treatment.



   (B)   No owner or person may beat, abuse, cruelly treat, torment,
starve, overwork or otherwise abuse any animal.



   (C)   No owner may abandon any animal.



   (D)   No owner shall confine any animal in a motor vehicle or
enclosure in such a manner that places it in a life or health threatening
situation by exposure to a prolonged period of extreme heat or cold or
without sufficient food or water.



(Ord. 1702, passed 6-1-98; Am. Ord. 2414, passed 9-17-07)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.03  DISTURBING THE PEACE.



   (A)   No owner shall allow an animal to disturb or disrupt the peace
or tranquility of any person.



   (B)   No owner shall allow any dog to repetitively bark during a
20-minute period in any area where the dog’s bark would carry to other
properties.



(Ord. 1702, passed 6-1-98; Am. Ord. 2414, passed 9-17-07)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.04  KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS RESTRICTED.



   No person shall house, keep, maintain any animal or allow to run at
large any domestic animal of the species known as horses, mules, cattle,
sheep, goats, swine, or domestic fowl of the species of geese, ducks,
turkeys, pigeons, and chickens, on any property located within the corporate
limits of the village except only such persons to whom a special temporary
permit shall be issued by the Board of Trustees of the village.



(Ord. 463, passed 10-3-55; Am. Ord. 2414, passed 9-17-07)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.05  HOUSING ANIMALS.



   No person shall cause or allow any stable or place where any animal is
or may be kept to become unclean or unwholesome, and it shall be unlawful to
keep any live swine or pigs anywhere in the village.



(Ord. 1702, passed 6-1-98; Am. Ord. 2414, passed 9-17-07)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.06  RUNNING AT LARGE.



   (A)   An owner shall not permit any animal to run at large upon
streets, sidewalk, alleys, parkway, or any unenclosed or other public places
or private property excluding the property of the owner or as otherwise
prohibited by law.



   (B)   An owner shall not allow an animal upon the private property
of another without the prior permission of the property owner or lessee of
the property.



   (C)   Dog packs. Any dog gathering in a dog pack is hereby declared
to be a nuisance and shall be taken up and impounded, and may be redeemed or
destroyed as provided by this chapter. Any owner of a dog whose dog shall be
found to be in a dog pack shall be punished as provided herein.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-6-69; Am. Ord. 1702, passed 6-1-98; Am. Ord. 2414,
passed 9-17-07)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Cross-reference:



   For circumstances under which dogs are considered nuisances, see §
92.20



§ 92.07  DOGS ON SCHOOL YARDS.



   An owner shall not allow any dog to be on school grounds unless
directly controlled by its owner.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-6-69; Am. Ord. 2414, passed 9-17-07)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.08  ANIMAL EXCREMENT.



   (A)   The owner of any animal shall not permit any animal to
defecate on any public place, public way or upon private property unless the
owner immediately removes and properly disposes of such excrements.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to fail to
immediately remove excrement left by the animal on property, whether public
or private, not owned or possessed by the person. The excrement shall be
removed to a proper receptacle located on property owned or possessed by the
owner.



   (C)   An owner of any animal shall not allow excrement to accumulate
in any yard, pen, or premises in or upon which the animal is confined.



   (D)   This provision does not apply to any person who is handicapped
and is utilizing a seeing eye dog.



(Ord. 1702, passed 6-1-98; Am. Ord. 2414, passed 9-17-07)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.09  NUMBER OF DOGS/CATS.



   No owner or person shall keep, maintain, harbor, permit or allow more
than three dogs or cats or any combination thereof, per dwelling unit.



(Ord. 2414, passed 9-17-07)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.10  VACCINATION (INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES).



   (A)   Duty; tag. The owner of any dog, cat or ferret over four
months of age, kept, maintained, possessed or harbored within the village
shall cause the dog, cat or ferret to receive from a veterinarian a rabies
vaccine once each year, or as otherwise required by law, and shall maintain
on its collar a tag, evidencing such current vaccination.



   (B)   Certificate. The vaccination of dogs, cats or ferrets as
required by this chapter shall be performed by a veterinarian duly licensed
to practice in Illinois. Upon administering such vaccination, such
veterinarian shall issue to the owner a certificate showing such fact and
shall also deliver to such owner or keeper a metallic or other suitable tag
to be attached to the collar of such dog.



   (C)   Duration. The vaccination performed under the provisions of
this chapter shall be effective until the expiration of one year from the
date the vaccination was performed or such extended effective period of the
vaccination as allowed by law.



   (D)   Exhibition of certificate. At any reasonable time upon the
request of the Animal Control Officer or other enforcement officer, the owner
of any unmuzzled dog shall exhibit a certificate, issued under the provisions
of this chapter, showing the vaccination of any dog owned or controlled by
him or her.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-6-69; Am. Ord. 2414, passed 9-17-07)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.11  DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS.



   (A)   After an investigation including sending within ten business
days of the Animal Control Officer becoming aware of the alleged infraction,
notification to the owner of the dog involved in the alleged infractions, the
fact of the initiation of an investigation, and affording the owner an
opportunity to meet with the Animal Control Officer prior to the making of a
determination; gathering of any medical or veterinary evidence; interviewing
witnesses; and making a detailed written report to deem a dog to be



be “dangerous.” No dog shall be deemed a “dangerous dog” or
“vicious dog” unless shown to be a dangerous/vicious dog by a
preponderance of evidence. The owner shall be sent immediate notification of
the determination by registered or certified mail that includes a complete
description of the appeal process.



   (B)   A dog shall not be declared dangerous if it is determined the
conduct of the dog was justified because:



      (1)   The threat was sustained by a person who at the time was
committing a crime or offense upon the owner or custodian of the dog or was
committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises or property
occupied by the owner of the animal;



      (2)   The threatened person was abusing, assaulting, or
physically threatening the dog or its offspring;



      (3)   The injured, threatened or killed companion animal was
attacking or threatening to attack the dog or its offspring; or



      (4)   The dog was responding to pain or injury or was
protecting itself, its owner, custodian, or a member of its household,
kennel, or offspring.



   (C)   If deemed dangerous or vicious, the Animal Control Officer
shall order:



      (1)   The dog to be spayed or neutered within 14 days at the
owner’s expense and micro-chipped, if not already; and



      (2)   One or more of the following as deemed appropriate under
the circumstances and necessary for the protection of the public:



         (a)   Direct supervision by an adult 18 years of age or
older whenever the animal is not confined or controlled on the owner’s
property.



         (b)   The Animal Control Officer may order a dangerous
dog to be muzzled whenever it is not confined or controlled on the owner’s
property.



         (c)   Vicious dogs will have additional compliance.



   (D)   Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for
the physically handicapped and police-owned dogs are exempt from this
section; provided an attack or injury to a person occurs while the dog is
performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption under this division
(D), each dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies in accordance with
law and performing duties as expected.



   (E)   An Animal Control Officer has the right to impound a dangerous
and vicious dog if the owner fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter and state law.



(Ord. 1702, passed 6-1-98; Am. Ord. 2414, passed 9-17-07)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.12  DISEASED ANIMALS.



   (A)   The owner of an animal afflicted with a contagious disease or
an infectious disease shall not permit such animal to run at large, or to be
exposed in any public place or on private property where a



person or other animal may be affected, nor shall such diseased animal be
shipped or removed from the premises of the owner thereof except under the
supervision of the Animal Control Officer.



   (B)   If directed by the Animal Control Officer, the owner shall
cause to secure the disposition of any diseased animal and premises as to
prevent the communication or spread of contagion or infection.



   (C)   The owner of a diseased animal shall secure the humane and
safe disposition of the animal and shall immediately fully clean and sanitize
all areas which were possible affected by the animal.



(Ord. 1702, passed 6-1-98; Am. Ord. 2414, passed 9-17-07)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.13  LICENSING (FRANKFORT ID TAGS).



   (A)   The owner of any dog or cat kept, maintained or located within
the village shall within 14 days of the dog or cat being within the village
and on or before January 1 of each year thereafter apply and pay for an
animal license to the Clerk of the village or Frankfort Township, Will
County, Illinois. As part of the application, the owner shall submit
certification from a veterinarian that the dog or cat sought to be licensed
has received all inoculations and vaccines as may be required by law,
including for rabies.



   (B)   License tag. On completion of all requirements under this
chapter and applicable law, the village or Frankfort Township shall issue a
license tag bearing the name of the Frankfort or Frankfort Township and the
year of issuance. The village and Frankfort Township shall keep a record of
all such licenses. The owner shall securely affix and maintain the tag on the
collar of the licensed dog or cat.



   (C)   Replacement license. If any license issued within five
business days by the village is lost, the owner shall apply to the village
for a duplicate license and submit all certifications required when
originally issued.



   (D)   The current village animal license fee is $5 for all or any
portion of a calendar year.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-6-69; Am. Ord. 892, passed 7-21-75; Am. Ord. 2414,
passed 9-17-07)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.14  IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS, CATS, AND OTHER ANIMALS.



   Upon receiving any dog, cat or other animal, the Animal Control Officer
shall immediately make a complete registry as may be required by law.



   (A)   Notice. In case of impounding, and where the address of the
owner of any animal is disclosed by any license tag worn by it, or is
otherwise known to be the Animal Control Officer or by inquiry can be
ascertained, the Animal Control Officer shall give notice by mail to the
owner of the impounding of the animal.



   (B)   Release from pound.



      (1)   Any animal impounded under the provisions of this
chapter or otherwise provided by law, unless sooner released, shall be held
for the period of seven days in order to afford opportunity to the owner
thereof to secure its release. Any such owner desiring to release his or her
impounded animal shall pay an apprehension fee of $50 for the animal’s
first impoundment. If any animal is impounded on more than one occasion, the
owner may be ordered to pay an apprehension fee up to the following amounts:



         (a)   Second impoundment - $ 100.



         (b)   Third impoundment - $ 150.



         (c)   Fourth or more impoundment - $ 200.



      (2)   In addition to the apprehension fee, the owner shall pay
the daily boarding costs to keep the animal impounded.



      (3)   If the animal is not currently vaccinated, the owner
shall pay all costs associated with having the animal vaccinated by some duly
licensed veterinarian as he or she shall elect and the pound keeper shall
forthwith cause the dog to be duly vaccinated. No dog shall be released which
does not have a current rabies vaccination or current Frankfort ID. Payment
is due for impoundment fee and daily board at time of release. Upon the
payment of the required charges, the dog shall thereupon be released to the
owner.



   (C)   Any dog, cat, or other animal impounded under the provision of
this section and not released to its owner within seven days of its impound
may be disposed of at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-6-69; Am. Ord. 2414, passed 9-17-07)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.15  INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS.



   No owner shall hinder or molest the Animal Control Officer while
engaged in seizing, capturing, and delivering any animal.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-6-69; Am. Ord. 2414, passed 9-17-07)  Penalty, see §
92.99



§ 92.16  LIABILITY OF OWNER OF DOG, CAT OR OTHER ANIMAL ATTACKING OR
INJURING PERSON OR ANIMAL.



   If a dog or other animal without provocation attacks or injures any
person or animal who is peaceably conducting himself, herself or itself in
any place where the person or animal may lawfully be, the owner of such dog
or other animal is liable for damages, to such person, for the full amount of
the injury sustained.



(Ord. 2414, passed 9-17-07)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.17  RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTIONS, APPREHENSION OF DOG, CATS OR OTHER
ANIMALS.



   For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the
Animal Control Officer may enter upon private premises to apprehend a stray
dog or other animal, a dangerous dog or other animal or a dog or other animal
thought to be infected with rabies.



(Ord. 2414, passed 9-17-07)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.18  ANIMAL TO ANIMAL BITES OR ABRASIONS.



   The owner of any animal shall report all animal bites or abrasions
inflicted on the owner’s animal to the Animal Control Officer.



(Ord. 2414, passed 9-17-07)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.19  ANIMAL TO HUMAN BITES OR ABRASIONS.



   The owner of any animal shall immediately report if the owner’s
animal bites any person or other animal to the Animal Control Officer as well
as the Will County Animal Control.



(Ord. 2414, passed 9-17-07)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.20  NUISANCES.



   No owner shall allow a dog to bark, howl or whine in an excessive,
continuous or untimely manner. Any dog which may in any manner disturb the
quiet of any person or neighborhood, shall destroy or in any manner injure
any animal, plant, shrub, or other property not on the premises of its owner
or keeper is hereby declared a nuisance. Such violation or declaration shall
constitute a public nuisance and be subject to a fine and/or impoundment and
may be redeemed or destroyed in the manner provided by this chapter. Licensed
kennel operators and dog dealers as defined in the Illinois Animal Welfare
Act are exempt from this section.



(Ord. 633, passed 10-6-69; Am. Ord. 2414, passed 9-17-07)  Penalty, see §
92.99



Cross-reference:



   Dog packs as nuisances, see § 92.06



§ 92.21  ENFORCEMENT; EXEMPTION FROM LIABILITY.



   The village, its Animal Control Officer, the village’s designees and
other persons authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall not
be held liable for the injury, death, or disease which may occur to any dog,
cat or other animal as a consequence of the enforcement of this chapter.



(Ord. 2414, passed 9-17-07)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   In addition to and not in lieu of any other penalties or remedies
available at law or equity, any person violating any provision of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine not less than $100 nor more than $750 for
each and every violation thereof, and every day the violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.



(Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02; Am. Ord. 2414, passed 9-17-07)



CHAPTER 93:  LITTER CONTROL



Section



   93.01   Definitions



   93.02   Littering prohibited



   93.03   Throwing litter from vehicle; transportation of litter



   93.04   Accumulation of litter on property



 



   93.99   Penalty



§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      LITTER.  Any discarded, used, or unconsumed substance, matter,
or waste. LITTER may include, but is not necessarily limited to, any garbage,
trash, refuse, rubbish, grass clippings, or other lawn waste, newspaper,
magazine, glass, metal, plastic, or any type of container or other packing or
construction material, wood, abandoned motor vehicle as defined by law, motor
vehicle parts, furniture, oil, carcass of a dead animal, any nauseous or
offensive matter of any kind, any object likely to injure any person or
create a traffic hazard, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary
matter which has been carried, abandoned, or otherwise disposed of improperly.



      MOTOR VEHICLE.  Every vehicle which is self-propelled and
includes, but is not limited to, mopeds, motorcycles, motorbikes, motor
scooters, and including automobiles, trucks, vans, recreational vehicles,
semi-trailer trucks, busses and also pedacycles which are equipped with
operational pedals for propulsion by human power and equipped with a power
drive shaft which functions directly or automatically only and not requiring
shifting by the operator while the drive cylinder is engaged.



      PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, or any
other legal entity or their legal agent, representative, or assign.



(Ord. 1036, passed 2-18-80)



§ 93.02  LITTERING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, leave, cause to
permit the dumping, depositing, dropping, throwing, discarding, or leaving of
litter upon any public or private property within the corporate limits of the
village, or upon or into any river, pond, stream or other body of water
unless the following situations exist.



   (A)   The property has been designated by the state or any of its
agencies or the village, for the disposal of litter and the litter is
disposed of on that property in accordance and compliance with all applicable
rules and regulations of the State Pollution Control Board or other
controlling governmental and regulatory board.



   (B)   The litter is placed into a receptacle or other container or
enclosed depository intended by the owner or tenant in lawful possession of
that property for the disposal of litter.



   (C)   The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the
property or has first obtained the express consent of the owner or tenant in
lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of
the owner or tenant and does not create a public health or safety hazard, a
public nuisance, or a fire hazard.



   (D)   The person is acting under the direction of proper public
officials directing special clean-up days.



   (E)   The person is lawfully acting in or reacting to an emergency
situation where health and safety is threatened and removal from the property
of such litter when the emergency situation no longer exists.



(Ord. 1036, passed 2-18-80)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.03  THROWING LITTER FROM VEHICLE; TRANSPORTATION OF LITTER.



   (A)   No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, leave, or
cause to permit the dropping, depositing, throwing, discarding, or leaving of
litter from any motor vehicle upon any public highway or public way or upon
any public or private property or upon or into any river, pond, stream, or
body of water within the corporate limits of the village, except as permitted
under § 93.02.



   (B)   No person shall transport by any means any litter, garbage, or
refuse from any dwelling, residence, place, farm, or other site and deposit
such material in, around, on, or on top of a trash barrel or other receptacle
placed along public highways or public ways or roadside rest area situated in
the corporate limits of the village.



   (C)   Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from
any motor vehicle not carrying passengers for hire, the presumption is
created that the operator of that motor vehicle has violated this section,
but this presumption may be rebutted.



(Ord. 1036, passed 2-18-80)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.04  ACCUMULATION OF LITTER ON PROPERTY.



   No person who is the owner or in possession of any real property shall
allow any litter to collect, accumulate, or be deposited upon such real
property in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance or in such a
manner that the litter may be blown or otherwise carried by natural elements
to the real property of another person.  For purposes of this chapter the
Board of Trustees of the village designate litter as herein defined as a
public nuisance if it is allowed to collect or accumulate on any real
property for more than seven days.



(Ord. 1036, passed 2-18-80)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who is convicted of violating any section of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $750 for each offense.
For purposes of this chapter, each day the violation continues shall be
deemed a separate and distinct offense.



   (B)   In addition to any fine imposed under this chapter the village
may request and the court may order that the person or persons convicted of
any violation of this chapter remove and properly dispose of the litter and,
if said person fails to so comply within a certain date the court may
authorize the village or its duly authorized agent, to supervise such removal
and disposal with all of the costs of such supervision, removal, and disposal
taxed against the person so convicted.



   (C)   The penalties prescribed in this section are in addition, and
not in lieu of any penalties, rights, remedies, duties, or liabilities
otherwise imposed or conferred by law.



(Ord. 1036, passed 2-18-80)



(Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02)



CHAPTER 94:  NUISANCES; WEEDS



Section



Noise



   94.01   Construction noise



Weeds



   94.10   Definitions



   94.11   Weeds and litter on property



   94.12   Certain weeds declared a nuisance



   94.13   Abatement procedure



   94.14   Notice of violation



   94.15   Lien for removal costs



   94.16   Lien for costs of removal, securing and enclosing on
abandoned residential property



Open Burning



   94.25   Burning of leaves



 



   94.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Excessive noise from operation of motor vehicle, see Ch. 75



NOISE



§ 94.01  CONSTRUCTION NOISE.



   (A)   Times.  The noise emanating from construction or maintenance
activities occurring within residential zoned districts of the village
including but not limited to noises such as hammering, sawing, drilling,
excavating, heavy construction vehicles and equipment operation, pumping, and
sandblasting is prohibited except when the noise occurs between the hours of
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, and 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Saturdays and Sundays; and the noise does not cause a public nuisance.



   (B)   Exemptions.  Noise emanating from village, county or state
authorized emergency, repair or maintenance projects occurring within
residential zoned districts are exempt from this provision.



(Ord. 1463, passed 6-20-94)  Penalty, see § 94.99



Cross-references:



   Dog packs as nuisances, see § 92.06



   For circumstances under which dogs are considered nuisances, see §
92.20



WEEDS



§ 94.10  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DEBRIS.  Scattered remains: ruins; discarded waste: litter.



   GARBAGE.  The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



   REFUSE.  Something rejected or discarded as worthless: trash.



   RUBBISH.  Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke, and other combustible materials; paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.



   TRASH.  Worthless, discarded material; junk.



   WEEDS.  Includes, but is not limited to, thistles, cockleburrs, Canada
thistles and all of its varieties, perennial sow thistles, European Bentwood,
Leafy Spurge, Russian Knapwood, Johnson Grass, Giant Foxtail, Hoary Cress,
Jimson, Burdock, Cockleburrs, Ragweed and similar weeds and all weeds which,
due to pollution are a menace to health, are, for purposes of this section,
deemed noxious weeds.



(Ord. 1103, passed 1-3-84; Am. Ord. 1581, passed 6-17-96)



§ 94.11  WEEDS AND LITTER ON PROPERTY.



   All record fee title owners, beneficiaries of any trust holding title
to any real estate, individual(s), partnership, firm, or corporation owning,
occupying, or in any way in possession of any property within the corporate
limits of the village shall fully comply with each of the following
requirements.



   (A)   All grasses used for landscaping purposes, excluding
ornamental grasses, shall not exceed six inches in height at any time of the
year and/or in any season of the year. All grasses grown wild on vacant
property shall not exceed eight inches in height at any time of the year
and/or in any season of the year.



   (B)   No person owning, leasing, occupying or controlling any plot
of real estate shall permit the growth of noxious weeds thereon.  All weeds
shall be pulled or otherwise destroyed by the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant
or person in control of real estate in the village.  Failure to destroy such
weeds within the designated period shall constitute a violation of this
section.



   (C)   Promptly remove and eliminate any debris, refuse, garbage,
rubbish, trash, materials new or discarded and deposits of deposed articles
or material.  Promptly remove all dead grass, dry leaves or similar
dangerous flammable material on the property.



   (D)   Promptly remove and eliminate any weeds or vegetation
specifically barred or in any other way prohibited by state statute or
regulation, including, but not limited to, marijuana.



(Ord. 1103, passed 1-3-84; Am. Ord. 1581, passed 6-17-96; Am. Ord. 2415,
passed 9-17-07)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.12  CERTAIN WEEDS DECLARED A NUISANCE.



   (A)   All weeds and vegetation which are not cut, removed, or
eliminated (as required herein) or all dead grass, dry weeds, or other
flammable material remaining on such property or debris, refuse, or deposits
of disposed or discarded materials which are subject to this subchapter are
deemed a public nuisance to the village.



   (B)   In addition to any other remedies provided herein, the village
may institute proceedings to abate such nuisances by appropriate judicial
proceedings.



(Ord. 1103, passed 1-3-84)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.13  ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   In addition to the penalty provision provided, in the event of
the refusal or neglect by the owner or owners and/or occupiers of the
property to cut, destroy and/or remove weeds and combustible material or
otherwise comply with the terms of § 94.11, the village at its sole option
and election, may enter upon said premises and correct the violations of this
subchapter at the expense of the owner or owners of the premises, with all
costs and charges associated with such work being the debt and obligation of
and payable to the village by such owner or owners and/or occupiers of said
premises.  The cost and expense incurred by the village, or by the person or
firm performing the service by authority of the village, in the removal or
cutting down of such weeds or grasses, removal and elimination of any debris,
refuse or deposits of disposed articles or material on such real property
including reasonable attorney's fees, shall constitute a lien upon the real
estate affected, and a lien shall be enforced as provided by statute.



   (B)   Any lien permitted by this subchapter may be enforced by
obtaining a judgment against the owner or owners and/or occupiers of said
property for such charges and costs of suit, or by filing a claim for lien
therefor in the County Recorder’s Office, giving the description of the
property, itemizing the charges and giving the date thereof, said claim for
lien to be supported by affidavit, and which said claim for lien may be
foreclosed in the manner provided by law for foreclosure of other statutory
liens.



   (C)   All remedies provided herein are deemed cumulative so that the
use or implementation of one remedy does not bar or preclude the use of any
other available remedy for such violators.



(Ord. 1103, passed 1-3-84; Am. Ord. 1581, passed 6-17-96)



§ 94.14  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   The Director of Code Enforcement or such other authorized village
official, or representative thereof, shall serve or cause to be served an
annual notice representing that it will be the only correspondence from the
village regarding this subchapter, and in the event of violation the village
will remedy the condition according to the terms of this subchapter upon any
person owning, leasing, occupying or controlling any vacant, unimproved real
estate in the village. Said notice shall contain language requiring such
person to remove or cut down the weeds, remove and eliminate any debris,
refuse, garbage, rubbish, trash or deposits of disposed articles or material
constituting such nuisance within seven days from the date of the notice, or
said notice may be given by any one of the four following described methods:



   (A)   By a written notice sent by United States regular and/or
certified mail, postage prepaid, to the last known person owning, leasing,
occupying or controlling the real estate, and as to the owner, the notice may
be addressed to the address shown on the most recent tax bill for the real
estate; or



   (B)   By a written notice personally delivered by the Director or
such other authorized village representative to the person owning, leasing,
occupying, or controlling the real estate; or



   (C)   By posting or tagging a written notice on the property of the
person owning, leasing, occupying, or controlling the real estate upon which
the violation exists. Said notice shall state the date of the posting or
tagging and shall provide that said weeds shall be destroyed not later than
seven days after the notice has been posted or tagged on said property.



   (D)   At the election of the village the person owning, leasing,
occupying or controlling any real estate in the village may be notified by
the village by regular or certified mail of the village's intent to serve an
annual notice. This notice shall contain the necessary language to conform
with this subchapter and also contain the language notifying the owner,
lessee, tenant, occupant or person in control of real estate in the village
that this will be the only correspondence from the village regarding this
subchapter and in the event of violation the village will remedy the
condition according to the terms of this subchapter.



(Ord. 1103, passed 1-3-84; Am. Ord. 1581, passed 6-17-96)



§ 94.15  LIEN FOR REMOVAL COSTS.



   (A)   If the village incurs a removal cost under §§ 94.10, 94.11,
94.12, 94.13, or 94.14 with respect to any underlying parcel, then that cost
is a lien upon that underlying parcel. This lien is superior to all other
liens and encumbrances, except tax liens and as otherwise provided in
division (C) below.



   (B)   (1)   To perfect a lien under this section, the village
must, within one year after the removal cost is incurred, file notice of lien
in the office of the Recorder in the county in which the underlying parcel is
located or, if the underlying parcel is registered under the Torrens system,
in the office of the Registrar of Titles of that county. The notice must
consist of a sworn statement setting out:



         (a)   A description of the underlying parcel that
sufficiently identifies the parcel;



         (b)   The amount of the removal cost; and



         (c)   The date or dates when the removal cost was
incurred by the village.



      (2)   If, for any one parcel, the village engaged in any
removal activity on more than one occasion during the course of one year,
then the village may combine any or all of the costs of each of those
activities into a single notice of lien.



   (C)   A lien under this section is not valid as to:



      (1)   Any purchaser whose rights in and to the underlying
parcel arose after the removal activity but before the filing of the notice
of lien; or



      (2)   Any mortgagee, judgment creditor, or other lienor whose
rights in and to the underlying parcel arose before the filing of the notice
of lien.



   (D)   The removal cost is not a lien on the underlying parcel unless
a notice is personally served on, or sent by certified mail to, the person to
whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the
taxable year immediately preceding the removal activities. The notice must be
delivered or sent after the removal activities have been performed, and it
must:



      (1)   State the substance of this section and the substance of
any ordinance of the village implementing this section;



      (2)   Identify the underlying parcel, by common description;
and



      (3)   Describe the removal activity.



   (E)   A lien under this section may be enforced by proceedings to
foreclose as in case of mortgages or mechanics liens. An action to foreclose
a lien under this section must be commenced within two years after the date
of filing notice of lien.



   (F)   Any person who performs a removal activity by the authority of
the village may, in his or her own name, file a lien and foreclose on that
lien in the same manner as the village under this section.



   (G)   A failure to file a foreclosure action does not, in any way,
affect the validity of the lien against the underlying parcel.



   (H)   Upon payment of the lien cost by the owner of the underlying
parcel after notice of lien has been filed, the village (or its agent under
division (F)) shall release the lien, and the release may be filed of record
by the owner at his or her sole expense as in the case of filing notice of
lien.



   (I)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      LIEN COST.  The removal cost and the filing costs for any notice
of lien under division (B).



      REMOVAL ACTIVITY.  Any activity for which a removal cost was
incurred.



      REMOVAL COST.  A removal cost as defined under § 94.13.



      UNDERLYING PARCEL. A parcel of private property upon which a
removal activity was performed.



      YEAR.  A 365-day period.



   (J)   This section applies only to liens filed after August 14, 2009
(the effective date of Public Act 96-462).



   (K)   This section shall not apply to a lien filed pursuant to §
94.16.



(Ord. 2718, passed 5-16-11)



§ 94.16  LIEN FOR COSTS OF REMOVAL, SECURING AND ENCLOSING ON ABANDONED
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.



   (A)   If the village elects to incur a removal cost pursuant to §§
94.10, 94.11, 94.12, 94.13, or 94.14 with respect to an abandoned residential
property, then that cost is a lien upon the underlying parcel of that
abandoned residential property. This lien is superior to all other liens and
encumbrances, except tax liens and as otherwise provided in this section.



   (B)   (1)   To perfect a lien under this section, the village
must, within one year after the cost is incurred for the activity, file
notice of the lien in the office of the Recorder in the county in which the
abandoned residential property is located or, if the abandoned residential
property is registered under the Torrens system, in the office of the
Registrar of Titles of that county, a sworn statement setting out:



         (a)   A description of the abandoned residential
property that sufficiently identifies the parcel;



         (b)   The amount of the cost of the activity;



         (c)   The date or dates when the cost for the activity
was incurred by the municipality; and



         (d)   A statement that the lien has been filed pursuant
to §§ 94.10, 94.11, 94.12, 94.13, or 94.14, as applicable.



      (2)   If, for any abandoned residential property, the village
engaged in any activity on more than one occasion during the course of one
year, then the village may combine any or all of the costs of each of those
activities into a single notice of lien.



   (C)   To enforce a lien pursuant to this section, the village must
maintain contemporaneous records that include, at a minimum:



      (1)   A dated statement of finding by the village that the
property for which the work is to be performed has become abandoned
residential property, which shall include:



         (a)   The date when the property was first known or
observed to be unoccupied by any lawful occupant or occupants;



         (b)   A description of the actions taken by the village
to contact the legal owner or owners of the property identified on the
recorded mortgage, or, if known, any agent of the owner or owners, including
the dates such actions were taken; and



         (c)   A statement that no contacts were made with the
legal owner or owners or their agents as a result of such actions;



      (2)   A dated certification by an authorized official of the
village of the necessity and specific nature of the work to be performed;



      (3)   A copy of the agreement with the person or entity
performing the work that includes the legal name of the person or entity, the
rate or rates to be charged for performing the work, and an estimate of the
total cost of the work to be performed;



      (4)   Detailed invoices and payment vouchers for all payments
made by the village for such work; and



      (5)   A statement as to whether the work was engaged through a
competitive bidding process, and if so, a copy of all proposals submitted by
the bidders for such work.



   (D)   A lien under this section shall be enforceable exclusively at
the hearing for confirmation of sale of the abandoned residential property
that is held pursuant to ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, § 15-1508(b) and shall be
limited to a claim of interest in the proceeds of the sale and subject to the
requirements of this section. Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on the
property, or any beneficiary or trustee who holds a deed of trust on the
property, may contest the lien or the amount of the lien at any time during
the foreclosure proceeding upon motion and notice in accordance with court
rules applicable to motions generally. Grounds for forfeiture of the lien or
the superior status of the lien granted by division (A) above shall include,
but not be limited to, a finding by the court that:



      (1)   The village has not complied with divisions (B) and (C)
above;



      (2)   The scope of the work was not reasonable under the
circumstances;



      (3)   The work exceeded the authorization for the work to be
performed under §§ 94.10, 94.11, 94.12, 94.13, or 94.14, as applicable; or



      (4)   The cost of the services rendered or materials provided
was not commercially reasonable. Forfeiture of the superior status of the
lien otherwise granted by this section shall, not constitute a forfeiture of
the lien as a subordinate lien.



   (E)   Upon payment of the amount of a lien filed under this section
by the mortgagee, servicer, owner, or any other person, the village shall
release the lien, and the release may be filed of record by the person making
such payment at the person's sole expense as in the case of filing notice of
lien.



   (F)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the
village may not file a lien pursuant to this section for activities performed
pursuant to §§ 94.10, 94.11, 94.12, 94.13, or 94.14, if:



      (1)   The mortgagee or servicer of the abandoned residential
property has provided notice to the village that the mortgagee or servicer
has performed or will perform the remedial actions specified in the notice
that the village otherwise might perform pursuant to §§ 94.10, 94.11,
94.12, 94.13, or 94.14 provided that the remedial actions specified in the
notice have been performed or are performed or initiated in good faith within
30 days of such notice; or



      (2)   The village has provided notice to the mortgagee or
servicer of a problem with the property requiring the remedial actions
specified in the notice that the village otherwise would perform pursuant to
§§ 94.10, 94.11, 94.12, 94.13, or 94.14, and the mortgagee or servicer has
performed or performs or initiates in good faith the remedial actions
specified in the notice within 30 days of such notice.



   (G)   This section shall apply only to activities performed, costs
incurred, and liens filed after the effective date of this amendatory Act of
the 96th General Assembly.



   (H)   For the purposes of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Any type of permanent residential
dwelling unit, including detached single family structures, and townhouses,
condominium units and multifamily rental apartments covering the entire
property, and manufactured homes treated under Illinois law as real estate
and not as personal property, that has been unoccupied by any lawful occupant
or occupants for at least 90 days, and for which after such 90-day period,
the village has made good faith efforts to contact the legal owner or owners
of the property identified on the recorded mortgage, or, if known, any agent
of the owner or owners, and no contact has been made. A property for which
the village has been given notice of the order of confirmation of sale
pursuant to ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, § 15-1508(b-10) shall not be deemed to be
an abandoned residential property for the purposes of this section.



      MERS PROGRAM. The nationwide Mortgage Electronic Registration
System approved by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae that has been
created by the mortgage banking industry with the mission of registering
every mortgage loan in the United States to lawfully make information
concerning each residential mortgage loan and the property securing it
available by Internet access to mortgage originators, servicers, warehouse
lenders, wholesale lenders, retail lenders, document custodians, settlement
agents, title companies, insurers, investors, county recorders, units of
local government, and consumers.



   (I)   Any entity or person who performs a removal, securing, or
enclosing activity pursuant to the authority of a village under this section
may, in its, his, or her own name, file a lien pursuant to division (B) above
and appear in a foreclosure action on that lien pursuant to division (D) of
this section in the place of the village, provided that the village shall
remain subject to division (C) above, and. such party shall be subject to all
of the provisions in this section as if such party were the village.



   (J)   All amounts received by the village for costs incurred
pursuant to this section for which the village has been reimbursed under
Section 7.31 of the Illinois Housing Development Act shall be remitted to the
State Treasurer for deposit into the Abandoned Residential Property
Municipality Relief Fund.



(Ord. 2718, passed 5-16-11)



OPEN BURNING



§ 94.25  BURNING OF LEAVES.



   (A)   The burning of leaves and grass clippings shall be prohibited
in the village, except as otherwise provided from time to time by village
resolution restricting the burning of the aforementioned items to specified
weekends during spring and fall.



   (B)   The Fire Protection District, the Police Department and the
Building Department shall have the right to go upon any private property to
enforce the provisions of this section and to extinguish any leaves that are
burning in violation of this section.



(Ord. 1536, passed 10-2-95; Am. Ord. 1815, passed 7-17-00)



Cross-reference:



   Open burning on public streets and ways, see § 96.01



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   In addition to all other remedies to the village at law or
equity, any person or entity who violates or fails to comply with §§ 94.01,
94.11 and 94.12 shall be fined not less than $50 or not more than $750 for
each offense.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during
or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.



   (B)   In addition to the penalties provided above, if any person
notified fails or refuses to comply with the notice, the village may cause
weeds to be removed or cut down, remove and eliminate any debris, refuse,
garbage, rubbish, trash or deposits of disposed articles or material in any
manner it designates and shall charge the costs of such removal to the person
owning, leasing, occupying or controlling the real estate.  The cost for
such cutting or removal shall be calculated on the basis of $10 per 1,000
square feet of real estate or fraction thereof or actual costs of services
whichever is greater, for the first offense, and $20 per 1,000 square feet of
real estate or actual costs of services whichever is greater, for all
subsequent offenses.  The cost and expense incurred by the village, or by
the person or firm performing the service by authority of the village, in the
removal or cutting following the refusal or failure of the responsible party
to remove or cut down such weeds, remove and eliminate any debris, refuse,
garbage, rubbish or deposits of disposed articles or material, and including
reasonable attorney's fees, shall constitute a lien upon the real estate
affected, and a lien shall be enforced as provided by statute.



(Ord. 1581, passed 6-17-96)



   (C)   In addition to all other remedies to the village at law or
equity, any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions
of § 94.25 shall be fined not less than $50 or not more than $750 for each
offense.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.  (Ord. 1536, passed
10-2-95)



(Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02)



CHAPTER 95:  PARADES AND PUBLIC GATHERINGS



Section



Parades



   95.01   Definition



   95.02   Compliance



   95.03   Permit required



   95.04   Application for permit



   95.05   Conditions for issuance of permit



   95.06   Denial of permit; appeal



   95.07   Alternating permit



   95.08   Information required within permit



   95.09   Public conduct during parades



Public Gatherings



   95.20   Definition



   95.21   Permit required



   95.22   Application for permit



   95.23   Proof of insurance required



   95.24   Bond required



   95.25   Structure to be free from fire hazards



   95.26   Unobstructed exits required on premises



   95.27   Construction of seats; number limitation



   95.28   Sanitary facilities required; ambulance



   95.29   Staff for event



   95.30   Permitted hours



   95.31   Certain sounds restricted



 



   95.99   Penalty



PARADES



§ 95.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



      PARADE.  Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant,
or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street,
park, or other public place in the village.



(Ord. 661, passed 6-1-70)



§ 95.02  COMPLIANCE.



   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances.



(Ord. 661, passed 6-1-70)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.03  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form, or start any
parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the Chief of
Police with the following exceptions.



   (A)   Funeral processions;



   (B)   Any educational function under the direction and supervision
of the proper school authorities;



   (C)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its authority.



(Ord. 661, passed 6-1-70)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.04  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application
with the Chief of Police on forms provided by such officer.



   (A)   Filing period.  An application for a parade permit shall be
filed with the Chief of Police not less than 48 hours nor more than 60 days
before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade.



   (B)   Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth
the following information.



      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person
seeking to conduct such parade;



      (2)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf
of, or by an organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads
of such organization;



      (3)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person
who will be the Parade Chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct;



      (4)   The date when the parade is to be conducted;



      (5)   The route to be traveled, the starting point, and the
termination point;



      (6)   The approximate number of persons who, and animals and
vehicles which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals, and
description of the vehicles;



      (7)   The hours when such parade will start and terminate;



      (8)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or
only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;



      (9)   The location by streets of any assembly areas for such
parade;



      (10)   The time at which units of the parade will begin to
assemble at any such assembly area or areas;



      (11)   If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf
of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit
shall file with the Chief of Police a communication in writing from the
person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for
the permit on his behalf; and



      (12)   Any additional information which the Chief of Police
shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a
permit should be issued.



   (C)   Late applications. The Chief of Police, where good cause is
shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application
hereunder which is filed less than 48 hours before the date such parade is
proposed to be conducted.



(Ord. 661, passed 6-1-70)



§ 95.05  CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The Chief of Police shall issue a permit as provided for
hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from such other
information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds the following.



      (1)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially
interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its
route;



      (2)   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at
assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and
police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such
assembly areas;



      (3)   The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the
movement of fire-fighting equipment en route to a fire;



      (4)   The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of
advertising any product, goods, or event, and is not designed to be held
purely for private profit.



   (B)   Upon issuance of a parade permit, the Chief of Police shall
send a copy thereof or otherwise notify the Village President.



(Ord. 661, passed 6-1-70)



§ 95.06  DENIAL OF PERMIT; APPEAL.



   (A)   The Chief of Police shall act upon the application for a
parade permit within five hours after the filing thereof. If the Chief of
Police disapproves the application, he shall mail to the applicant within
three days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of
his action, stating the reasons for his denial of the permit.



   (B)   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial
of a parade permit to the Board of Trustees. The appeal shall be taken within
14 days after notice. The Board of Trustees shall act upon the appeal within
21 days after its receipt.



(Ord. 661, passed 6-1-70)



§ 95.07  ALTERNATING PERMIT.



   The Chief of Police, in denying an application for a parade permit,
shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a
time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An
applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within 30 days after
notice of the action o¥ the Chief of Police, file a written notice of
acceptance with the Chief of Police. An alternate parade permit shall conform
to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a parade permit under,
this subchapter.



(Ord. 661, passed 6-1-70)



§ 95.08  INFORMATION REQUIRED WITHIN PERMIT.



   Each parade permit shall state the following information.



   (A)   Starting time;



   (B)   The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be
occupied by the parade;



   (C)   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions
thereof; and



   (D)   Such other information as the Chief of Police shall find
necessary to the enforcement of this subchapter.



(Ord. 661, passed 6-1-70)



§ 95.09  PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES.



   (A)   Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct,
or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly, or with any
person, vehicle, or animal participating or used in a parade.



   (B)   Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle, street car,
or trackless trolley shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a
parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously
designated as a parade.



   (C)   Parking on parade route. The Chief of Police shall have the
authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of
vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of
a parade. The Chief of Police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in
violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted
in violation of this subchapter.



(Ord. 661, passed 6-1-70)  Penalty, see § 95.99



PUBLIC GATHERINGS



§ 95.20  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MASS GATHERING.  Any public gathering of people numbering 500 or more,
or 25% or more of the population of the village according to the last
preceding federal census, whichever is less.



(Ord. 916, passed 6-21-76)



§ 95.21  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, no mass gathering may
be set up, conducted, held, arranged, or promoted unless a written permit has
been issued by the Board of Trustees of the village at least 14 days in
advance of the proposed date of the gathering. This subchapter does not apply
to mass gatherings which are conducted, sponsored, promoted, or managed by a
governmental unit or agency, legally held on publicly owned land or property,
or by any eleemosynary associations so long as the same is not conducted for
pecuniary profit.



(Ord. 916, passed 6-21-76)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.22  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   To obtain a permit to set up, hold, conduct, manage, arrange, or
promote any mass gatherings, the promoters must file written application
under oath on a form provided by the village which shall include the names
and addresses of the promoters, the location on which the mass gathering is
to be conducted, the nature or purpose of the mass gathering, the maximum
number of persons which the promoter plans to permit to assemble at any time,
the maximum number of tickets to be sold or given, and a statement that the
activities of the mass gatherings will not violate any village or county
zoning ordinances nor any village, county, or state health regulations. 
During the time and place where such mass gathering is to be held, the
promoters will provide suitable and adequate sanitary accommodations, medical
facilities, ambulance service, water supplies, safe and wholesome food, land
space, access and departure routes, parking, security and protection from
bodily harm and property damage to those expected to attend such mass
gathering.  The expenses for use of a reasonable number of policemen of the
village for control of traffic and persons attending the mass gathering, or
for the enforcement of the laws in connection herewith shall be paid by the
promoters prior to the issuance of a permit and shall file an application
with the Village Clerk together with an application fee of $100 at least 60
days prior to the proposed mass gathering.  At their next regularly
scheduled meeting of the Trustees of the village after the date of the filing
of said application, the Trustees will refer said application to the Chief of
Police and the Village Building Inspector for review to determine conformity
with this subchapter and written recommendations, including expenses for
policemen, which must be submitted to the Board of Trustees within 30 days
after such referral.



(Ord. 916, passed 6-21-76)



§ 95.23  PROOF OF INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   Prior to the issuance of a permit, the promoter shall furnish evidence
of health insurance for payment of any claims for personal injury including
death, property damage, or suits arising out of or in connection with such
mass gathering.  The minimum limits of such policy is to be $500,000 and
$1,000,000 and must name the village, its agents and representatives as
co-insured.



(Ord. 916, passed 6-21-76)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.24  BOND REQUIRED.



   Prior to the issuance of the permit, the person holding, managing,
conducting, or organizing such gathering shall provide and place on file with
the Village Clerk a corporate surety bond in the sum of $100,000, the surety
to be subject to approval of the village, which will indemnify, hold
harmless, and defend the village from any damages, costs, expenses,
attorney's fees caused or resulting from a violation of any ordinance of the
village by that person seeking to hold or conduct said gathering.



(Ord. 916, passed 6-21-76)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.25  STRUCTURE TO BE FREE FROM FIRE HAZARDS.



   No such gathering shall be held or promoted in any enclosed or
partially enclosed building, structure, or tent unless such premises have
been examined and approved by the Village Building Inspector and found to be
free from fire hazards and found to be suitable for such gatherings. No
structure enclosed by a roof shall be used unless same is constructed by
nonflammable material, provided, however, that tents or structures covered by
canvass or similar material may be used if the canvass or other material has
been properly treated to render it fire retardant.



(Ord. 916, passed 6-21-76)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.26  UNOBSTRUCTED EXITS REQUIRED ON PREMISES.



   Adequate unobstructed exits shall be provided on all premises used for
such gatherings to allow safe and rapid egress of all people attending, and
shall be at least three lineal feet of doorway or exit space for each 100
persons accommodated with a minimum of two separate exits located at least 30
feet from each other. All doors, gates, or points of egress shall open
outward. No such exit shall be constructed or locked so that egress from the
inside is prevented and no obstructions will be within 30 feet of each exit
way.



(Ord. 916, passed 6-21-76)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.27  CONSTRUCTION OF SEATS; NUMBER LIMITATION.



   (A)   All stands, seats, or rows of seating used for such gatherings
shall be so constructed as to be safe for the use designed and intended, and
shall be sufficiently strong to carry the same weight and stress as required
in the construction of seating and flooring for public stadium or auditorium
seats.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to admit to any such premises a number of
persons to exceed the actual number of seats maintained for their
accommodations at a gathering.



(Ord. 916, passed 6-21-76)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.28  SANITARY FACILITIES REQUIRED; AMBULANCE.



   (A)   No such gathering shall be permitted on any premises or site
not equipped with adequate separate sanitary facilities for males and
females. Such facilities may be of the mechanical type rather than connected
with the public water and sewer system, provided that each separate facility
is serviced at least once each day. For purposes of this subchapter, two
separate sanitary units for each 100 persons in attendance is considered
adequate.



   (B)   If the public gathering is over 1,000 individuals, a staffed
ambulance is also required to be at or adjacent to the site of the intended
gathering.



(Ord. 916, passed 6-21-76)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.29  STAFF FOR EVENT.



   The promoter shall, in addition hereto, arrange for and provide for all
security officers, ticket takers, and parking attendants commensurate with
the size of the indicated activities.



(Ord. 916, passed 6-21-76)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.30  PERMITTED HOURS.



   Any such mass gathering shall be terminated no later than midnight. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remain on the premises between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., provided that employees whose duties
necessitate it may remain on the premises for the performance of such duties.



(Ord. 916, passed 6-21-76)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.31  CERTAIN SOUNDS RESTRICTED.



   No sounds shall be emitted from any place of mass gathering in such
manner that said sound shall be audible  beyond the property lines of the
premises whereon the place of mass gathering is located. At no time shall
noise or sound emanate which, either by mechanical or electrical devices or
live performance, in any manner disturbs, annoys, injures, endangers, or
tends to disturb, annoy, injure, or endanger the comfort, repose, health,
peace, tranquility, or safety of persons or the public in general.



(Ord. 916, passed 6-21-76)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   (A)    Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the
provisions of §§ 95.01 through 95.09 shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not
less than $5 nor exceeding $750; or shall be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding 30 days; or be both fined and imprisoned. 



(Ord. 661, passed 6-1-70)



   (B)   A violation of any terms or provisions of §§ 95.20 through
95.31 may subject the person to a fine of not less than $25 nor more than
$750 for every violation of these sections.  Each day that a violation of
these sections shall be permitted shall constitute a separate offense. 
Separate action may be commenced against each person organizing, managing,
conducting, controlling, and promoting said gathering including action
against said promoter and sureties to forfeit bond for all damages and
expenses incurred by the village for violation. 



(Ord. 916, passed 6-21-76)



(Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02)



CHAPTER 96:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



General Provisions



   96.01   Open burning prohibited on public streets and ways



   96.02   Encroachments upon U.S. Route 45 right-of-way prohibited



   96.03   Encroachments upon U.S. Route 30 right-of-way prohibited



Skateboards on Public Rights-of-Way



   96.15   Skateboards on public rights of way



   96.16   Parental responsibility



   96.17   Resistance to police officer



 



   96.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 96.01  OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC STREETS AND WAYS.



   It shall be unlawful to burn or incinerate any wood, brush, refuse,
garbage, paper, leaves or any other combustible material on any public
street, roadway, parking area, alley, parkway, sidewalk or street
right-of-way in the village.



(Ord. 1272, passed 9-5-89)  Penalty, see § 96.99



Cross-reference:



   Burning of leaves, see § 94.25



§ 96.02  ENCROACHMENTS UPON U.S. ROUTE 45 RIGHT-OF-WAY PROHIBITED.



   No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall install, place,
maintain or construct any structure that encroaches upon the State of
Illinois right-of-way on the U.S. Route 45 roadway within the village limits.



(Ord. 1326, passed 10-15-90; Am. Ord. 1662, passed 10-20-97; Am. Ord. 2525,
passed 10-20-08)



§ 96.03  ENCROACHMENTS UPON U.S. ROUTE 30 RIGHT-OF-WAY PROHIBITED.



   No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall install, place,
maintain or construct any structure that encroaches upon the State of
Illinois right-of-way on the U.S. Rouge 30 roadway from Wolf Road to IL Route
43 within the limits of the Village of Frankfort.



(Ord. 2500, passed 8-18-08; Am. Ord. 2705, passed 3-21-11)



SKATEBOARDS ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY



§ 96.15  SKATEBOARDS ON PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY.



   (A)   Definition.  The term SKATEBOARD, as used herein, shall
designate a platform supported by wheels intended to carry and support a
human foot and to be propelled by human foot power. It includes vehicles
containing a handle bar and sometimes referred to as scooters.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate, ride
upon, or propel a skateboard on any sidewalk located adjacent to any public
street or roadway, or upon any portion of any public street or roadway in the
following designated area:



      (1)   Nebraska Street from White Street to Hickory Street.



      (2)   Kansas Street from White Street to Hickory Street.



      (3)   Elwood Street from White Street to Oak Street.



      (4)   White Street from Nebraska Street to Elwood Street.



      (5)   Ash Street from Nebraska Street to Kansas Street.



      (6)   Oak Street from Nebraska Street to Elwood Street.



      (7)   Hickory Street from Nebraska Street to Kansas Street.



      (8)   Public Parking Area located at the corner of Oak Street
and Kansas Street.



      (9)   Public Parking Area located at the corner of Hickory and
Nebraska.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate, ride
upon, or propel a skateboard on or over any jumping device or ramp, or
similar structure on any public sidewalk, street or roadway, or public right
of way not so designated for such use by the Village Board of Trustees,
within the village.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate, ride upon
or propel a skateboard on or over any jumping device or ramp, or similar
structure on any portion of Breidert Green and the adjacent parking lot, or
on the Prairie Park parking lot, or on any other private property as posted
by a proprietor.



(Ord. 1264, passed 6-19-89; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02)  Penalty, see §
96.99



§ 96.16  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any provisions of
§ 96.15.  Any parent or guardian knowingly authorizing or permitting a
violation shall upon conviction thereof be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall
be punished in accordance with the provisions provided for in § 96.99.



(Ord. 1264, passed 6-19-89)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.17  RESISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to resist or obstruct any police
officer in enforcement of this subchapter.



(Ord. 1264, passed 6-19-89)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of § 96.01
shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $750 for each offense.



(Ord. 1272, passed 9-5-89)



   (B)   The penalty for the violation of §§ 96.15 through 96.17
shall be not less than $15 nor more than $750 for each such offense.



(Ord. 1264, passed 6-19-89)



(Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02)



CHAPTER 97: OFF-ROAD RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



Section



General Provisions



   97.01   Definitions



Registration



   97.20   Operation of unregistered and unnumbered off-road vehicles
is prohibited



   97.21   Registration with the village



   97.22   Procedure for registration



   97.23   License fee



   97.24   Identification number display



   97.25   Exceptions from numbering display requirement



Off-Road Vehicle Equipment



   97.35   Equipment required



Control Provisions



   97.45   Operation



   97.46   Hours of operation



   97.47   Obedience to traffic regulations



   97.48   Youthful operators



   97.49   Prohibited acts



Enforcement



   97.60   Inspections authorized



   97.61   Resistance to police officer



 



   97.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 97.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COWLING.  The forward portions of the off-road vehicle surrounding the
motor and clutch assembly.



   DANGEROUS DRUG refers to any drug defined as a depressant or stimulant
substance in the "Illinois Controlled Substances Act," Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch.
56½, Par. 1100-1602 (1985).



   HIGHWAY means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular traffic.



   INTOXICATING BEVERAGE shall include spirits, wine, beer, ale and every
other liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer capable of
being consumed as a beverage by human beings.



   OFF-ROAD VEHICLE refers to a rubber tired self-propelled device
designed for travel over natural terrain, snow or ice operation on either
two, three or four wheels, specifically meaning including vehicles commonly
known as all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) or all-terrain cycles (ATCs) and dirt
bikes.  Off-Road Vehicles shall not include snowmobiles as defined in
Ordinance No. 1249.



   OPERATE.  To ride in or on, use or control the operation of an
off-road vehicle in any manner, whether or not said vehicle is underway.



   OPERATOR refers to every person who operates or is in actual physical
control of an off-road vehicle.



   OWNER.  A person, other than a lienholder, having title to an off-road
vehicle. The term includes a person entitled to the use or possession of an
off-road vehicle subject to an interest in another person, reserved or
created by agreement and securing payment or performance of an obligation,
but the term includes a lessee under a lease not intended as security.



   PERSON.  An individual, partnership, firm, corporation or association.



   REGISTER.  The act of assigning a registration number to an off-road
vehicle.



   ROADWAY refers to that portion of a street or highway improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder.



   VILLAGE refers to the Village of Frankfort, Will County, Illinois.



(Ord. 1220, passed 6-20-88)



REGISTRATION



§ 97.20  OPERATION OF UNREGISTERED AND UNNUMBERED OFF-ROAD VEHICLES IS
PROHIBITED.



   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall operate any off-road
vehicle within the village unless such vehicle has been registered and
numbered in accordance with this chapter.



(Ord. 1220, passed 6-20-88)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.21  REGISTRATION WITH THE VILLAGE.



   Any resident of the village owning or acquiring an ownership interest
in an off-road vehicle stored, maintained or operated as provided herein
within the village, and any owner of an off-road vehicle operated as provided
herein within the village shall register the off-road vehicle each year that
said vehicle is stored, maintained or operated in the village on or before
the 30th day of June, A.D. 1989, or within ten days of the date of
acquisition of such vehicle, and shall do so on or before the 30th day of
June of each and every year thereafter, and on payment of the registration or
license fee hereinafter provided to the village, the Village Clerk shall
issue or cause to be issued a registration certificate or license authorizing
the storage, maintenance and/or operation of said vehicle within the village
until the expiration of such license. All registration certificates or
licenses shall expire on the first day of July of each year.



(Ord. 1220, passed 6-20-88)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.22  PROCEDURE FOR REGISTRATION.



   Said residents and/or owners shall register the off-road vehicle with
the village on a form provided by the Village Clerk which shall contain (1)
the name of the registrant, (2) the registrant's address, (3) the
registrant's social security number, (4) the registrant's telephone number,
(5) a description of the vehicle being registered, and (6) the primary
operators of said vehicle.



(Ord. 1220, passed 6-20-88)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.23  LICENSE FEE.



   The registration or license fee to be paid annually to the village
shall be $25 per off-road vehicle.



(Ord. 1220, passed 6-20-88)



§ 97.24  IDENTIFICATION NUMBER DISPLAY.



   The owner shall paint on or securely attach to both sides of the
cowling of the off-road vehicle the identification number issued by the
village which shall be of block characters at least three inches in height. 
The characters shall read from left to right, be of contrasting color to
their background, and he maintained in a legible condition.



(Ord. 1220, passed 6-20-88)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.25  EXCEPTIONS FROM NUMBERING DISPLAY REQUIREMENT.



   An off-road vehicle shall not be required to be numbered as provided in
§ 97.24 if it is:



   (A)   Owned and used by the United States, another state, or a
political subdivision thereof; but such off-road vehicles shall display the
name of the owner on the cowling thereof.



   (B)   Covered by a valid registration or license of another state,
province or country which is the domicile of the owner of the snowmobile and
is not operated within this state on more than 30 consecutive days in any
calendar year.



   (C)   Owned and operated on lands owned by the owner or operator or
on lands to which he has a contractual right other than as a member of a club
or association, provided the off-road vehicle is not operated elsewhere
within the state.



(Ord. 1220, passed 6-20-88)  Penalty, see § 97.99



OFF-ROAD VEHICLE EQUIPMENT



§ 97.35  EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.



   All off-road vehicles operating within the municipality shall be
equipped with:



   (A)   At least one white headlamp having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to exhibit a white light plainly visible from a distance
of at least 500 feet ahead during hours of darkness under normal atmospheric
conditions.



   (B)   At least one red taillamp having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible from a distance
of 500 feet to the rear during hours of darkness under normal atmospheric
conditions.



   (C)   A brake system in good mechanical condition.



   (D)   Reflective material of a minimum area of 16 square inches
mounted on each side of the cowling.  Identifying numbers may be included in
computing the required 16 square inch area.



   (E)   Adequate sound suppression equipment. No off-road vehicle
shall be operated within the village, unless it is equipped with sound
suppression devices that limit total machine noise in accordance with noise
pollution standards established pursuant to the Environmental Protection Act.



   (F)   All off-road vehicles, while being operated within the
village, shall have attached to the rear thereof, at a convenient point, a
pole made of wood, metal, fiberglass, plastic, or similar material of
suitable nature eight feet in length which pole shall have attached to the
free end thereof a flag or pennant containing at least one square foot of a
bright or reflective material and visible at a distance of at least 100 feet.



(Ord. 1220, passed 6-20-88)  Penalty, see § 97.99



CONTROL PROVISIONS



§ 97.45  OPERATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any off-road
vehicle in the following ways:



   (A)   At a rate of speed in excess of 10 miles per hour while
operating an off-road vehicle within the village.



   (B)   At a rate of speed too fast for conditions; the fact that the
speed of the off-road vehicle does not exceed the applicable maximum speed
limit allowed does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed as
may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle or object
within legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.



   (C)   In a careless, reckless or negligent manner.



   (D)   While under the influence of intoxicating beverages or
narcotic or dangerous drugs.



   (E)   At any time without at least one lighted headlamp and one
lighted taillamp on the off-road vehicle.



   (F)   On the tracks or right-of-way of any railroad.



   (G)   In any tree nursery or planting in a manner which damages or
destroys growing stock, or creates a substantial risk thereto.



   (H)   On private property, without the operator of the off-road
vehicle obtaining the written consent of the owner or lessee of the property
prior to operating the off-road vehicle upon lands of another shall stop and
identify himself upon the request of the landowner or his duly authorized
representative, and, if requested to do so by the landowner, shall promptly
remove the off-road vehicle from the premises.  Failure to post signs does
not imply consent for off-road vehicle use upon the property of the owner or
lessee.



(Ord. 1220, passed 6-20-88)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.46  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   Off-road vehicles may be operated within the village only between the
hours of 10:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. each day of the week.  No such vehicle
may be operated within the village between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 9:00
a.m. on any day.  This section shall not prohibit the operation of off-road
vehicles between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. in cases of emergency
when the operator has specific authorization from the village, the Police
Department, or the Fire Department.



(Ord. 1220, passed 6-20-88)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.47  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The maximum speed limit for operation of an off-road vehicle
within the village is ten miles per hour.



   (B)   Operators of off-road vehicles shall obey and abide by all
regulations prescribed for the operation of motor vehicles and shall be
subject to the same penalties for violation thereof, except as otherwise
provided herein.



(Ord. 1220, passed 6-20-88)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.48  YOUTHFUL OPERATORS.



   (A)   No person under 14 years of age may operate an off-road
vehicle.



   (B)   Persons at least 6 years of age and less than 14 years of age
may operate an off-road vehicle within the village only if they are either
accompanied on the vehicle by a parent or guardian or a person at least 18
years of age designated by the parent or guardian.



   (C)   Violations of this section done with the knowledge of a parent
or guardian shall be deemed a violation by the parent or guardian and
punishable under § 97.99.



(Ord. 1220, passed 6-20-88)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.49  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   No person, except persons permitted by law, shall operate or
ride any off-road vehicle with any firearm in his possession unless it is
unloaded and enclosed in a carrying case, or any bow unless it is unstrung in
a carrying case.



   (B)   No person shall operate any off-road vehicle emitting
pollutants in accordance with standards established pursuant to the
Environmental Protection Act.



   (C)   No person shall deposit from an off-road vehicle on the snow,
ice, or ground surface, trash, glass, garbage, insoluble material, or other
offensive matter.



   (D)   No person shall use an off-road vehicle to take, pursue,
chase, harass or disturb wildlife and other animals, including dogs and cats,
within the village.



   (E)   No person except persons provided by law shall operate or ride
an off-road vehicle on, upon or across any public street, alley, right of
way, road, highway, parkway, sidewalk or other public property within the
corporate limits of the Village of Frankfort.



(Ord. 1220, passed 6-20-88)  Penalty, see § 97.99



ENFORCEMENT



§ 97.60  INSPECTIONS AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   Duly authorized police officers may stop and inspect any
off-road vehicle at any time for the purpose of determining if the provisions
of this chapter are being complied with.  If the inspecting officer or agent
discovers any violation of the provisions of this chapter, he must issue a
summons to the operator of such vehicle requiring that the operator appear
before the proper court.



   (B)   Every off-road vehicle operated within the village, if under
way and upon being hailed by a designated law enforcement officer, must stop
immediately.



(Ord. 1220, passed 6-20-88)



§ 97.61  RESISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICER.



   It is unlawful for any person to resist or obstruct any police in
enforcement of this chapter.



(Ord. 1220, passed 6-20-88)



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $750, and shall be
fined for a second conviction not less that $300 nor more than $750.



(Ord. 1220, passed 6-20-88; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02)



CHAPTER 98: SNOWMOBILES



Section



General Provisions



   98.01   Definitions



Registration



   98.20   Operation of unregistered and unnumbered snowmobiles is
prohibited



   98.21   Registration with the village



   98.22   Procedure for registration



   98.23   License fee



   98.24   Identification number display



   98.25   Exceptions from numbering display requirement



Snowmobile Equipment



   98.35   Equipment required



Control Provisions



   98.45   Operation



   98.46   Operation on highways



   98.47   Hours of operation



   98.48   Snowmobile trails



   98.49   Obedience to traffic regulations



   98.50   Youthful operators



   98.51   Prohibited acts



Enforcement



   98.60   Inspections authorized



   98.61   Resistance to police officer



 



   98.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 98.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COWLING.  The forward portions of a snowmobile surrounding the motor
and clutch assembly.



   DANGEROUS DRUG refers to any drug defined as a depressant or stimulant
substance in the "Illinois Controlled Substances Act," III. Rev. Stat. Ch.
56½, par. 1100-1602 (1985).



   HIGHWAY.  The entire width between the boundary lines of every federal
and state numbered public way maintained when any part thereof is open to the
use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic.



   INTOXICATING BEVERAGE shall include spirits, wine, beer, ale and every
other liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer capable of
being consumed as a beverage by human beings.



   OPERATE.  To ride in or on, use or control the operation of a
snowmobile in any manner, whether or not the snowmobile is underway.



   OPERATOR refers to every person who operates or is in actual physical
control of a snowmobile.



   OWNER.  A person, other than a lienholder, having title to a
snowmobile.  The term includes a person entitled to the use or possession of
a snowmobile subject to an interest in another person, reserved or created by
agreement and securing payment or performance of an obligation, but the term
includes a lessee under a lease not intended as security.



   PERSON.  An individual, partnership, firm, corporation or association.



   REGISTER.  The act of assigning a registration number to a snowmobile.



   ROADWAY refers to that portion of a street or highway improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder.



   SNOWMOBILE.  A self-propelled device designed for travel over snow or
ice or natural terrain steered by skis or runners, and supported in part by
skis, belts or cleats.



   VILLAGE refers to the Village of Frankfort, Will County, Illinois.



   STREET.  The entire width of a public right-of-way used or planned for
use for vehicular traffic and maintained by the local jurisdiction of the
county, township or municipality.



(Ord. 1249, passed 12-5-98)



REGISTRATION



§ 98.20  OPERATION OF UNREGISTERED AND UNNUMBERED SNOWMOBILES IS PROHIBITED.



   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall operate any snowmobile
within the village unless such snowmobile has been registered and numbered in
accordance with the provisions of the Illinois "Snowmobile Registration and
Safety Act", Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 95½, sec. 601-1 et seq. (1985), and the
provisions hereinafter set forth and unless the Certificate of Number awarded
to such snowmobile is in full force and effect.



(Ord. 1249, passed 12-5-98)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.21  REGISTRATION WITH THE VILLAGE.



   Any owner and/or operator of a snowmobile within the village shall
register the snowmobile each year that the snowmobile is operated in the
village beginning on a date not more than 30 days from the date of adoption
of this ordinance and shall do so an or before the 30th day of June of each
and every year thereafter, or within ten days of the date of acquisition of a
snowmobile, and on payment of the registration of license fee hereinafter
provided to the village, the Village Clerk shall issue or cause to be issued
a registration certificate or license authorizing the operation of such
license.  All registration certificates or licenses shall expire on the 1st
day of July of each year.



(Ord. 1249, passed 12-5-98)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.22  PROCEDURE FOR REGISTRATION.



   Said residents and/or owners shall register the snowmobile with the
village on a form provided by the Village Clerk which shall contain (1) the
name of the registrant, (2) the registrant's address, (3) the registrant's
social security number, (4) the registrant's telephone number, (5) a
description of the snowmobile being registered, (6) the number awarded to the
snowmobile by the Department of Conservation and contained on the Certificate
of Number issued by said Department, (7) the primary operators of said
snowmobile, and (8) proof of insurance for liability and property damage.



(Ord. 1249, passed 12-5-98)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.23  LICENSE FEE.



   The registration or license fee to be paid annually to the village
shall be $25 per snowmobile.



(Ord. 1249, passed 12-5-98)



§ 98.24  IDENTIFICATION NUMBER DISPLAY.



   The owner shall paint on or securely attach to both sides of the
cowling of the snowmobile the identification number, as set forth on the
Certificate of Number, which shall be of block characters at least three
inches in height.  The characters shall read from left to right, be of
contrasting color to their background, and be maintained in a legible
condition.  The Certificate of Number shall be available at all times or
inspection on the snowmobile for which it was issued, whenever the snowmobile
is in operation.  In addition, the operator must wear a vest with a matching
number to the I.D. number issued for the snowmobile.



(Ord. 1249, passed 12-5-98)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.25  EXCEPTIONS FROM NUMBERING DISPLAY REQUIREMENT.



   A snowmobile shall not be required to be numbered as provided in §
98.24 if it is:



   (A)   Owned and used by the United States, another state, or a
political subdivision thereof; but such snowmobiles shall display the name of
the owner on the cowling thereof.



   (B)   Used only on international or national competition circuits in
events for which written permission has been obtained by the sponsoring or
sanctioning body from the governmental unit having jurisdiction over the
location of any event held in this state.



(Ord. 1249, passed 12-5-98)



SNOWMOBILE EQUIPMENT



§ 98.35  EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.



   All snowmobiles operating within the municipality shall be equipped
with:



   (A)   At least one white headlamp having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to exhibit a white light plainly visible from a distance
of at least 500 feet ahead during hours of darkness under normal atmospheric
conditions.



   (D)   At least one red taillamp having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to exhibit a red light plainly visible from a distance
of 500 feet to the rear during hours of darkness under normal atmospheric
conditions.



   (C)   A brake system in good mechanical condition.



   (D)   Reflective material of a minimum area of 16 square inches
mounted on each side of the cowling.  Identifying numbers may be included in
computing the required 16 square inch area.



   (E)   Adequate sound suppression equipment. No snowmobile shall be
operated within the village, unless it is equipped with sound suppression
devices that limit total machine noise in accordance with noise pollution
standards established pursuant to The Environmental Protection Act. 
Operation during repair of a snowmobile shall be excepted from this
subsection.



   (F)   All snowmobiles, while being operated within the village,
shall have attached to the rear thereof, at a convenient point, a pole made
of wood, metal, fiberglass, plastic, or similar material of suitable nature
eight feet in length which pole shall have attached to the free end thereof a
flag or pennant containing at least one square foot of bright or reflective
material and visible at a distance of at least 100 feet.



(Ord. 1249, passed 12-5-98)  Penalty, see § 98.99



CONTROL PROVISIONS



§ 98.45  OPERATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any snowmobile
in the following ways:



   (1)   At a rate of speed no greater than the minimum speed required
to maintain forward movement of the snowmobile, which is considered to be
less than 10 m.p.h. operating a snowmobile within the village.



   (2)   At a rate of speed too fast for conditions; the fact that the
speed of the snowmobile does not exceed the applicable maximum speed limit
allowed does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed as may be
necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle or object within
legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.



   (3)   In a careless, reckless or negligent manner.



   (4)   While under the influence of intoxicating beverages or
narcotic or dangerous drugs.



   (5)   At any time without at least one lighted headlamp and one
lighted taillamp on the snowmobile.



   (6)   On the tracks or right-of-way of an operating railroad.



   (7)   In any tree nursery or planting in a manner which damages or
destroys growing stock, or creates a substantial risk thereto.



   (8)   On private property, within the village corporate limits or an
public or private properties adjacent to the corporate boundaries of the
village.



   (9)   Within 40 feet of a residential dwelling between 9:00 a.m. and
11:00 p.m. at a speed no greater than the minimum speed required to maintain
forward movement of the snowmobile, which is considered to be less than 10
m.p.h.



   (10)   On the frozen waters within the village in a manner
inconsistent with the Rules and Regulations of the Illinois Department of
Conservation.



   (11)   To operate a snowmobile within the village when, immediately
during said period of time, the accumulation of snow existing on the ground
during that time is less than the depth of two inches as measured by the
village and reported on cable television, Channel 10.



(Ord. 1249, passed 12-5-98)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.46  OPERATION ON HIGHWAYS.



   It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate any snowmobile on a
highway in the village except as follows:



   (A)   On highways other than tollways, interstate highways and fully
or limited access-controlled highways, snowmobiles may make a direct crossing
provided:



      (1)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90
degrees to the direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction
prevents a quick and safe crossing; and



      (2)   The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before
crossing a roadway; and



      (3)   The operator yields the right-of-way to all oncoming
traffic which constitutes a hazard.



   (B)   On highways other than tollways, interstate highways, and
fully or limited access-controlled highways snowmobiles may be operated not
less than 20 feet from the roadway and in the same direction as traffic
except as hereinafter provided.



   (C)   On highways other than tollways, interstate highways, and
fully or limited access-controlled highways snowmobiles may be operated on
roadways when it is necessary to cross a bridge or culvert or when it is
impracticable to gain immediate access to an area adjacent to a highway where
a snowmobile is to be operated.



(Ord. 1249, passed 12-5-98)



§ 98.47  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   Snowmobiles may be operated within the village hereinabove provided
only upon the snowmobile trails hereinafter designated and only between the
hours of  5:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and 9:00 a.m. and
11:00 p.m. Saturday, Sunday, holidays and school closings.  No snowmobile
may be operated within the village between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 9:00
a.m. on any day.  This section shall not prohibit the operation of
snowmobiles between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. in cases of
emergency when the operator has specific authorization from the village, the
Police Department, or the Fire Department.



(Ord. 1249, passed 12-5-98)



§ 98.48  SNOWMOBILE TRAILS.



   (A)   The following street right of ways or parts thereof in the
village are designated as snowmobile trails within the village and are the
only authorized trails upon which snowmobiles may be operated within five
feet of either side of the roadway edge and in the same direction as traffic:



      (1)   Colorado, Indiana and Cedar between Route 43 and Route
30.



      (2)   Elsner Road between Route 30 and Route 45.



      (3)   92nd Ave Row and Larch St. between Route 30 and Sauk
Trail.



      (4)   Route 30 and Route 45.



      (5)   Nebraska St. between Larch and Route 45.



      (6)   Center Road South of Nebraska St.



      (7)   Sauk Trail east of Center Road.



   (B)   Only those public right of ways or parts thereof, herein
designated as snowmobiles trails shall be used for the operation of
snowmobiles in the village, and no snowmobile shall be operated on any other
street within the village.



(Ord. 1249, passed 12-5-98)



§ 98.49  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The maximum speed limit for operation of a snowmobile within
the village is at a speed no greater than the minimum required to maintain
forward movement of the snowmobile, considered to be less than 10 m.p.h.



   (B)   Operators of snowmobiles shall obey and abide by all traffic
regulations prescribed for the operation of motor vehicles and shall be
subject to the same penalties for violation thereof, except as otherwise
provided herein.



(Ord. 1249, passed 12-5-98)



§ 98.50  YOUTHFUL OPERATORS.



   (A)   No person under ten years of age may operate a snowmobile.



   (B)   Persons at least ten years of age and less than 12 years of
age may operate a snowmobile within the village only if they are either
accompanied on the snowmobile by a parent or guardian, or a person at least
18 years of age designated by the parent or guardian.



   (C)   Persons at least 12 and less than 16 years of age may operate
a snowmobile only if they are either accompanied on the snowmobile by a
parent or guardian or a person at least 16 years of age designated by a
parent or guardian, or such operator is in possession of a certificate issued
by the Illinois Department of Conservation authorizing the holder to operate
snowmobiles.



   (D)   Any person who operates a snowmobile on a highway as provided
in § 98.46 or on the snowmobile trails designated in § 98.48 shall possess
a valid motor vehicle driver's license or a safety certification issued by
the Illinois Department of Conservation.



   (E)   Violations of this section done with the knowledge of a parent
or guardian shall be deemed a violation by the parent or guardian and
punishable under § 98.99.



(Ord. 1249, passed 12-5-98)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.51  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   No person, except persons permitted by law, shall operate or
ride any snowmobile with any firearm in his possession.



   (B)   No person shall operate any snowmobile emitting pollutants in
accordance with standards established pursuant to the Environmental
Protection Act.



   (C)   No person shall deposit from a snowmobile on the snow, ice, or
ground surface, trash, glass, garbage, insoluble material, or other offensive
matter.



   (D)   No person shall use a snowmobile to take, pursue, chase,
harass or disturb wildlife and other animals, including dogs and cats.



(Ord. 1249, passed 12-5-98)  Penalty, see § 98.99



ENFORCEMENT



§ 98.60  INSPECTIONS AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   Duly authorized police officers may stop and inspect any
snowmobile at any time for the purpose of determining compliance with this
chapter.  If the inspecting officer or agent discovers any violation of the
provisions of this chapter, the officer shall issue a summons to the operator
of such snowmobile requiring that the operator appear before the proper court.



   (B)   Every snowmobile operated within the village, if under way and
upon being hailed by a designated law enforcement officer, must stop
immediately.



(Ord. 1249, passed 12-5-98)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.61  RESISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICER.



   It is unlawful for any person to resist or obstruct any police in
enforcement of this chapter.



(Ord. 1249, passed 12-5-98)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.99  PENALTY.



   Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $750 and shall be
fined for a second conviction not less than $300 nor more than $750.  A
third arrest will result in confiscation of the snowmobile with a third
conviction prohibiting the operator from licensing the vehicle for a period
not to exceed two years.



(Ord. 1249, passed 12-5-98; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02)



CHAPTER 99: FIREWORKS



Section



   99.01   Definitions



   99.02   Prohibited conduct



   99.03   Pyrotechnic displays



   99.04   Permit application and procedures



   99.05   Notice to the village



   99.06   Record of permits issued



 



   99.99   Penalty



§ 99.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions contained in the
Fireworks Use Act (ILCS Ch. 425, Act 35, §§ 1 et seq.) and the Pyrotechnic
and Consumer Display Permitting Rules (41 Ill. Adm. Code 235.10 et seq.)
shall apply unless the context otherwise requires.



(Ord. 2286, passed 6-5-06)



§ 99.02  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision
of the Fireworks Use Act or any rule or regulation promulgated by the State
Fire Marshal pursuant to the Fireworks Use Act. Except as hereinafter
provided, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, co-partnership or
corporation to knowingly possess, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at
retail or use or explode any display fireworks, flame effects or consumer
fireworks.



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the
manufacture, storage or use of signals or fuses necessary for the safe
operation of railroads, trucks, aircraft or other instrumentalities of
transportation.



(Ord. 2286, passed 6-5-06)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.03  PYROTECHNIC DISPLAYS.



   (A)   Pyrotechnic displays shall only be conducted pursuant to a
permit obtained from the village.



   (B)   All pyrotechnic displays require the services of a licensed
lead pyrotechnic operator and a licensed pyrotechnic distributor. A licensed
lead pyrotechnic operator shall be present during any pyrotechnic display and
shall personally supervise all assistants, including all phases of the
pyrotechnic display. The lead pyrotechnic operator must be in possession of
and able to produce his or her license upon request at all times during the
delivery, set-up and performance of the display.



   (C)   All 1.3G fireworks displays and storage shall be conducted in
accordance with National Fire Protection Association 1123 (2000), Code for
Fireworks Display. Storage of display fireworks (1.3G and above) shall comply
with the storage requirements sent forth by the Federal Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives at 27 C.F.R. 555.1 et seq., or by the
Illinois Department of Natural Resources pursuant to Article 3 of the
Illinois Explosive Act, ILCS Ch. 225, Act 210. Should there be a conflict
between the requirements established by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,
Firearms and Explosives and by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources,
those requirements that are more specific, more stringent or impose
requirements for which no like requirements are contained in the other
agency's requirements shall control.



   (D)   No pyrotechnic displays shall be conducted within 600 feet of
any hospital, asylum or infirmary.



   (E)   Pyrotechnic displays shall not be conducted indoors.



(Ord. 2286, passed 6-5-06)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.04  PERMIT APPLICATION AND PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Each applicant for a pyrotechnic display permit shall submit a
completed application form and such information as required by the Village
Clerk at least 15 days in advance of the date of the pyrotechnic display. The
application shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant.



      (2)   The date, location and beginning and ending times of the
proposed display.



      (3)   The name and address of the lead pyrotechnic operator,
along with proof that said operator possesses a valid license from the State
of Illinois.



      (4)   The names and addresses of all assistants to the lead
pyrotechnic operator, along with proof that said persons are at least 18
years of age.



      (5)   The name and address of the pyrotechnic distributor,
along with proof that said distributor possesses a valid license from the
State of Illinois.



      (6)   Proof of liability insurance in a sum not less than
$1,000,000. Such insurance shall be carried with an insurer authorized to do
business in the State of Illinois and insure the applicant against
liabilities, judgments, costs, damages and expenses that may accrue against,
be charged to or be recovered from the applicant on the reason of damage to
property or injury to or death of any person arising from the pyrotechnic
display or flame effect display. Such insurance coverage shall be an
occurrence based policy, and it shall cover all periods of time when
pyrotechnic materials, including flame effect materials, are in the insured's
actual or constructive possession, including those times when the materials
are being stored, transported, handled, used, discharged and displayed.



   (B)   No permit shall be issued unless the Chief of the Frankfort
Fire Protection District, or his or her designee, has inspected the site and
determined that the display can be performed in full compliance with the
rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal and that the display shall not be
hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons. Permits must be
signed by the Chief of the Frankfort Fire Protection District, or his or her
designee.



   (C)   After a permit has been granted, sales, possession, use and
distribution of display fireworks for the display shall be lawful for that
purpose only.



   (D)   No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable.



(Ord. 2286, passed 6-5-06)



§ 99.05  NOTICE TO THE VILLAGE.



   (A)   Permit holders shall notify the village within 24 hours after
any fire, injury to any person resulting from the display or damage to
property in excess of $500, in the aggregate, resulting from the display. The
village shall notify the State Fire Marshal by telephone or in writing within
three days after learning of incident.



   (B)   Licensed pyrotechnic distributors and licensed lead
pyrotechnic operators shall report the theft or loss of fireworks to the
Police Department in accordance with Section 230.180 of the Pyrotechnic
Distributor and Operator Licensing Rules (41 Adm. Code 230.180), the Illinois
Department of Natural Resources and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms
and Explosives.



(Ord. 2286, passed 6-5-06)



§ 99.06  RECORD OF PERMITS ISSUED.



   The village shall maintain a copy of each display permit issued for a
minimum of four years from the date of the display. Any reports of fire,
injury, property damage, theft or loss of fireworks that are submitted to the
village shall be maintained with the copy of the display permit.



(Ord. 2286, passed 6-5-06)



§ 99.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, any rule or
regulation promulgated hereunder, the Fireworks Use Act or any rule or
regulation promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a lawsuit seeking an
injunction and/or a fine of not less than $300 nor more than $1,000 per
violation. Each day that such violation exists shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense.



(Ord. 2286, passed 6-5-06)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   BUSINESS LICENSING



      111.   AMUSEMENTS



      112.   ELEVATORS



      113.   INTOXICATING LIQUOR



      114.   PERSONAL PROPERTY SALES



      115.   SOLICITORS, HAWKERS, AND PEDDLERS; CHARITABLE
SOLICITATION



      116.   SEXUAL CONDUCT IN BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS



      117.   LONG-TERM CARE FACILITIES



      118.   CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS



      119.   TOBACCO



      120.   PRE-OWNED MERCHANDISE



      121.   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES



CHAPTER 110:  BUSINESS LICENSING



Section



   110.01   License program intent; operating business without a
license prohibited



   110.02   Business license classifications



   110.03   License fee structure and term



   110.04   License application procedure



   110.05   License application review and inspection



   110.06   Penalties for noncompliance



   110.07   Business license suspension; revocation



   110.08   License not assignable



   110.09   Change in business



 



   110.99   Penalty



§ 110.01  LICENSE PROGRAM INTENT; OPERATING BUSINESS WITHOUT A LICENSE
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It is the intent of this chapter to require that all
businesses in the village obtain a license to operate. The intent of the
business license program is to provide the village with complete identifying
information concerning businesses and their owners and the owners of the
premises upon which the businesses are located in order to protect the
business in case of emergency; and to protect the public and other businesses
in case of complaints alleging village code violations.



   (B)   No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in any business
activity in the village without having obtained a business license, as
provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 1290, passed 1-2-90)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.02  BUSINESS LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS.



   There are seven types of business license classifications:



   (A)   Class A.  Shall apply to food and food-related establishments
that consist exclusively and/or partially of the following activities:
restaurants, fast-food or convenience foods, grocery stores, or other similar
retail or wholesale operations.



   (B)   Class B.  Shall apply to all retail establishments, other
than those referred to above as “A” licenses, which regularly invite the
public into their establishments for the purpose of providing goods.



   (C)   Class C.  Shall apply to all office establishments where no
goods are transferred within said office.



   (D)   Class D.  Shall apply to all temporary businesses of any type.



   (E)   Class E.  Shall apply to all establishments that have as
their primary business activity: Manufacturing and industrial activities,
wholesale and warehouse activities, fabrication, processing, assembly,
disassembly, and packaging.



   (F)   Class F.  Shall apply to long-term care facilities, as
provided for in Chapter 117.



   (G)   Class G.  Reserved.



   (H)   Class H.  Shall apply to all home businesses.



(Ord. 1290, passed 1-2-90; Am. Ord. 2698, passed 2-22-11)



§ 110.03  LICENSE FEE STRUCTURE AND TERM.



   (A)   All annual licenses shall be valid for operative businesses
only.  The license year for the village  shall commence on May 1 of each
year and shall terminate on April 30 of the following year, where no
provision to the contrary is made.



   (B)   Application fee for new business license to be set from time
to time by the Board of Trustees.  The application fee of $100 shall be
established concurrently with passage of Ordinance 2698 on February 22, 2011.



   (C)   No license fee shall be due during the first term of an annual
license, unless the first term is permitted for more than 12 months.



(NOTE:  For clarity purposes, the rates established by Ordinance 1502 passed
March 20, 1995 for Class A through E licenses, are hereby re-stated and
remain in effect and unchanged.)



   (D)   Class A.  License fee to be set from time to time by the
Board of Trustees and duration of one year.



   (E)   Class B.  License fee to be set from time to time by the
Board of Trustees and duration of one year.



   (F)   Class C.  License fee to be set from time to time by the
Board of Trustees and duration of one year.



   (G)   Class D.  License fee to be set from time to time by the
Board of Trustees.  No more than three such licenses shall be issued to any
business at any location, per calendar year. Upon written request the Village
Board may waive the license fee for a business involved in a community
function such as the Fall Festival, Business Expo, and the like.



   (H)   Class E.  License fee to be set from time to time by the
Board of Trustees and duration of one year.



   (I)   Class F.  License fee of $500 and duration of one year.



   (J)   Class H.  License fee of $15 or no fee with a valid state
license and duration of one year.



   (K)   The required fee for each license shall be collected in full
at the time the application for a license, or the renewal thereof, is filed
with the village.



(Ord. 1290, passed 1-2-90; Am. Ord. 1502, passed 3-20-95; Am. Ord. 2698,
passed 2-22-11)



§ 110.04  LICENSE APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Applications for all licenses shall be made to the village in
writing on the form provided for that purpose. The form is attached and may,
from time to time, be amended by the village.  Each application shall
contain:



      (1)   Business name;



      (2)   A description of the type of business;



      (3)   The location or proposed location of the business;



      (4)   Business telephone number;



      (5)   Business owner; and



      (6)   Evidence that the required State Retailer’s Occupation
Tax, Service Occupation Tax, or Use Tax as appropriate, has been paid for the
preceding year.



   (B)   In addition, each application shall contain:



      (1)   If the applicant is an individual (sole proprietorship),
the application shall contain the applicant’s name, residence address, and
residential telephone number.



      (2)   If the applicant is a partnership or other non-corporate
business entity, the application shall contain the name and residential
address, and residential telephone number of each partner, principal, or
member thereof.



      (3)   If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall
contain the name, residential address, and residential telephone number of
each principal officer and the registered agent thereof.



      (4)   If the applicant is an unincorporated association, the
application shall contain the name, residential address, and residential
telephone number of the spokesman.



   (C)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall make the determination what
type of license is required for each respective applicant. This determination
shall be made after review of the information provided in each application.
The determination of the Code Enforcement Officer may be appealed to the
Community Development Director, and then to the Village Administrator.  If
no resolution is reached, the determination may be appealed to the Village
President whose decision shall be final.



   (D)   All establishments desiring a business license shall file an
application with the village not less than 30 days prior to the time said
establishments desire to commence operation. Thereafter, prior to continued
operation of the establishment in subsequent years, a renewal application
shall be filed not less than 30 days prior to expiration of the license. In
the event such renewal application is not filed by this date, a late charge
to be set by the Board of Trustees shall be charged. Delinquency can result
in suspension or revocation of a business license.



   (E)   It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to cause
a written notice to be mailed by regular or electronic mail to each licensee
advising the licensee when a license expires, advising that a renewal is
required, and shall specify the amount of the license fee and the penalty for
failure to procure a license in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.



   (F)   All Class A license holders shall have a monthly pest control
program performed by a certified state of Illinois pest control
exterminator.  Class A business license holders shall show proof that they
have a pest control contract, for a period no less than 12 months, with a
certified state of Illinois pest control exterminator.



(Ord. 1290, passed 1-2-90; Am. Ord. 1502, passed 3-20-95; Am. Ord. 2698,
passed 2-22-11)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.05  LICENSE APPLICATION REVIEW AND INSPECTION.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a new license, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall provide the applicant 15 days notice to schedule an
inspection of the business premises, unless the application does not comply
with requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. The Officer will make a
determination whether the business premises complies with the provisions of
the village’s Building Code, Property Maintenance Code, Zoning Ordinance,
and other applicable ordinances and regulations of the village. The Code
Enforcement Officer must find the business premises compliant with each code
identified herein within a six-month period prior to the renewal of an annual
license.  Unresolved violations reported by the Will County Health
Department, the Frankfort Fire Protection District, or other authority of
competent jurisdiction, shall be deemed sufficient reason to preclude license
renewal, provided, however, that reasonable notice and time are provided to
correct each item of violation.



   (B)   Following the inspection, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
provide the applicant a written report listing any code violations and
establishing a time-table for compliance and correction of each item of
violation.



   (C)   No license shall be issued until any code violations that
constitute a clear and present danger to the public health, safety, and
general welfare are completely rectified. Licenses can be issued if minor
code violations exist and a timetable for their correction is in place.



   (D)   No business license shall be issued to any establishment whose
owners are indebted to the village.



   (E)   Each license issued by the village shall bear the corporate
seal of the village. Each license shall be dated, shall state to whom it is
issued, for what purpose, the location at which such business is to be
conducted, and the date when the license is to expire.



   (F)   When a license certificate is delivered to any licensee which
has designated a premises in which the licensed business is to occur, it
shall be the duty of such licensee to post the license certificate in a
conspicuous location upon the licensed premises within five days of receipt
of same.



(Ord. 1290, passed 1-2-90; Am. Ord. 2698, passed 2-22-11)  Penalty, see §
110.99



§ 110.06  PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE.



   (A)   If the timetable established for correction of code violations
has expired without the correction as determined by the Code Enforcement
Officer during a follow-up inspection, the respective business licensee shall
be subject to the penalty in § 110.99. 



   (B)   In addition, if compliance is not attained as mentioned above,
the respective business license may be subject to suspension pending
revocation as detailed in § 110.07.



(Ord. 1290, passed 1-2-90)



§ 110.07  BUSINESS LICENSE SUSPENSION; REVOCATION.



   (A)   When the condition of any business premises shall constitute a
clear and present danger to the public health, safety, or general welfare,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall be authorized to suspend the business
license and close the premises until the danger no longer exists.



   (B)   Within seven days after a license is suspended and a business
ordered closed, the Village President and Board of Trustees, upon
recommendation of the Village Administrator, shall call a hearing for the
purpose of determining whether the license should be revoked.



   (C)   The Village President and Board of Trustees shall conduct a
hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the license should be
revoked in accordance with the following guidelines:



      (1)   Notice of the hearing for a revocation of a license or
permit shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds of
the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice may be hand
delivered or mailed by certified mail return receipt requested, to the
licensee to his last known address at least five days prior to the date of
the hearing.



      (2)   An attorney designated by the corporate authorities may
represent the village during the hearing. The licensee shall be permitted
counsel and have the right to submit evidence and cross-examine witnesses.
The Village President shall serve as the hearing officer and shall render the
decision, with the advice and counsel of the Village Board.  The decision
shall be final.



   (D)   Unless otherwise provided, any license issued under this
chapter may be revoked by the Village President after notice and hearing, as
provided for below, for any of the following causes:



      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement
contained in the application for the license.



      (2)   Any violation by the licensee of this code or other
village ordinances relating to the license.



      (3)   Failure of the licensee to pay any indebtedness, charge,
fine, or penalty owing to the village.



      (4)   Refusal to permit inspections or interference with the
Code Enforcement Officer while in the performance of his duties in making
license inspections.



   (E)   The revocation, if ordered, shall not be in lieu of any other
provision imposing a penalty for the violation of any provision of this code
or any other ordinances of the village.



   (F)   No new license shall be issued to business who has had a
license revoked.



(Ord. 1290, passed 1-2-90)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.08  LICENSE NOT ASSIGNABLE.



   (A)   No license or permit may be assigned, sold, loaned,
transferred, used as collateral, or otherwise encumbered. No person, firm, or
corporation shall use or display any license certificate which has been
improperly acquired.



   (B)   No person, firm, or corporation shall alter, deface, forge, or
counterfeit any license issued by the village.



(Ord. 1290, passed 1-2-90)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.09  CHANGE IN BUSINESS.



       Other than changing location, when any licensee, by increasing
the size of his place of business, or by making any change of any kind in his
business which places him in a class where the provisions of this chapter
require him to pay a higher license fee, he shall pay the higher license fee
due to the change or increase, based on the annual license fee prorated
monthly to the nearest full month for the balance of the license period, and
shall be entitled to receive a new license.



(Ord. 1290, passed 1-2-90)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation, who shall violate any provision of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less
than $25 nor more than $750.  Each day that a violation continues after due
notice has been served, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof,
shall be deemed a separate offense.



(Ord. 1290, passed 1-2-90; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02)



CHAPTER 111:  AMUSEMENTS



Section



Amusement Devices



   111.01   Definition



   111.02   License required



   111.03   Applications for licenses



   111.04   License investigator; duties



   111.05   Examination of background and experience



   111.06   Granting and issuance of licenses



   111.07   License fee



   111.08   Rebate of fee



   111.09   Term of license



   111.10   License renewal



   111.11   Transfer of license prohibited



   111.12   Revocation or suspension of license



   111.13   Compliance with building and zoning regulations



   111.14   Proof of current inspection by County Health Department



   111.15   License certificate or insignia; loss; alteration or removal



 



   111.99   Penalty



AMUSEMENT DEVICES



§ 111.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.



   DOING, CONDUCTING, ENGAGING IN, MAINTAINING, OPERATING, CARRYING ON, OR
MANAGING A BUSINESS, OCCUPATION OR ACTIVITY.  Any person who holds himself
forth as being engaged in the business, occupation or activity, or who
solicits patronage therefor, either actively or passively, or who performs or
attempts to perform any part of such business, occupation or activity in the
village.



(Ord. 1068, passed 11-2-81)



§ 111.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to
conduct, engage in, maintain, operate, carry on or manage a business,
occupation or activity, either by himself, or through an agent, employee or
partner, for which a license is required by any provision of this subchapter
without first having obtained a license for such activity.



(Ord. 1068, passed 11-2-81)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.03  APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES.



   (A)   All applications for licenses required under this subchapter
shall be made in writing to the Village Clerk on a form provided for that
purpose, accompanied by the applicable license fee. Each application should
be made prior to 30 days before the same is requested to be issued to allow a
period for a proper examination and investigation to allow proper
determination of whether the application should be granted.



   (B)   Every application for a license shall contain the name,
residence address, phone number and social security or employer’s
identification number of the applicant; state whether the applicant is an
individual, partnership or corporation, and if a partnership, the names and
residence addresses of the general partners, and if a corporation, the names
and residence addresses of its principal officers and if closely held, its
principal stockholders; the type or kind of license desired; the location or
proposed location of the business; the occupation or activity for which the
license is sought; the state sales tax number of the applicant; the fee to be
paid; and such other information as may be reasonably required.



   (C)   The Village Clerk shall be the custodian of all applications
for licenses which, under the provisions of this subchapter, are required to
be made to her.



(Ord. 1068, passed 11-2-81)



§ 111.04  LICENSE INVESTIGATOR; DUTIES.



   (A)   The Chief of Police of the village shall be designated and
appointed license investigatory and shall report all investigations to the
Village Board of Trustees.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the License Investigator to examine or
cause to be examined all persons and places of business subject to license
hereunder for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not such licenses should
be issued.



(Ord. 1068, passed 11-2-81)



§ 111.05  EXAMINATION OF BACKGROUND AND EXPERIENCE.



   The Chief of Police shall conduct a thorough examination into the
background and experience of all persons seeking licenses under the
provisions of this chapter. If such examination results in findings of fact
which the Chief of Police believes may disqualify the applicant as a
licensee, he shall report his findings to the Village President. If the
Village President shall find that the license applicant should not be issued
a license, he shall notify the applicant of this fact. The Village President
may instruct the Village Clerk not to issue a license for any one of the
following reasons:



   (A)   That the applicant lacks good character and reputation in the
community, which character and reputation may be determined by previous
arrest record, association with persons known to lack good moral character,
acts of moral turpitude, or other conduct contrary to good morals.



   (B)   That the applicant has previously been charged and convicted
with a violation of other ordinances of the village or the statutes of the
state, except for traffic violations.



   (C)   That the applicant has outstanding judgments against him, or
is otherwise determined to be not financially able to carry out the
activities for which a license is sought.



(Ord. 1068, passed 11-2-81)



§ 111.06  GRANTING AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSES.



   In all cases where licenses are to be obtained and ordinance compliance
is met, such license shall originally be granted by the Village Board of
Trustees and shall bear the seal of the village, the name and business
address of the licensee, the nature or kind of business, occupation or
activity licensed, the amount of fee paid, the license term and such other
material information as is required. All licenses shall be subject to the
provisions of that ordinance which may be in force at the time of the
issuance thereof or which may subsequently be passed by the Village Board of
Trustees.



(Ord. 1068, passed 11-2-81)



§ 111.07  LICENSE FEE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
engage in conduct or carry on a business or activity on a licensed premises
without having first obtained a license for the following accessory amusement
devices:



      (1)   Amusement devices, including but not limited to
electronic games:  $50 per device



      (2)   Pool tables: $25 per device



   (B)   The number of devices permitted shall be limited to one device
per 1,000 square feet of establishment floor space.  However, in no event
shall there be more than six amusement devices or four pool tables per
licensed premises.  Games of chance that are apparently used for gambling
purposes are prohibited.



(Ord. 1068, passed 11-2-81; Am. Ord. 1433, passed 11-1-93; Am. Ord. 1899,
passed 6-3-02)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.08  REBATE OF FEE.



   In no event shall any rebate or refund be made of any license fee or
part thereof by reason of the death of the licensee or by reason of nonuse of
such license, or by reason of a change in the location of the business,
occupation or activity of such licensee.



(Ord. 1068, passed 11-2-81)



§ 111.09  TERM OF LICENSE.



   All licenses required by this subchapter shall be for a full year
commencing January 1, unless otherwise specifically provided, and the full
license fee shall be paid unless at the time the first application is made
there are less than six months in the license year remaining, in which case
the fee shall be ½ the annual fee prescribed herein. All licenses required
by this subchapter shall expire on December 31, next after issuance, unless
previously revoked.



(Ord. 1068, passed 11-2-81)



§ 111.10  LICENSE RENEWAL.



   (A)   The Village Clerk shall send written notification of license
renewal and investigation to be received by licensee prior to December 1 for
the following year. Investigation for license renewal will be made from
December 1 through December 15 of current year.



   (B)   The Village Clerk is authorized to issue license requested
hereunder if the investigation reveals there is no change in status,
circumstance or disqualification as enumerated in § 111.05 for the preceding
year. If the investigation reveals any change for the prior year, the Board
of Trustees shall determine if a license should issue.



(Ord. 1068, passed 11-2-81)



§ 111.11  TRANSFER OF LICENSE PROHIBITED.



   No licensee may assign, sell or transfer his license to any other
person, even if such other person intends to conduct the same business,
occupation or activity as the licensee at the location used by the licensee.
The license is issued to the premises described therein and for no other
location. Such other person must apply and pay the fee for a new license in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.  (Ord. 1068, passed
11-2-81)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.12  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.



   The Village President may revoke or suspend any license issued
hereunder if it shall appear to his satisfaction from the report of the
License Enforcement Officer or any village officer making an inspection or
investigation or from any other available information, that the licensee is
violating any law or ordinance, or is operating in a manner not conductive to
the public health, morals or safety.



(Ord. 1068, passed 11-2-81)



§ 111.13  COMPLIANCE WITH BUILDING AND ZONING REGULATIONS.



   No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, occupation
or activity if the premises and building to be used for such purpose do not
fully comply with all applicable provisions of all other ordinances of the
village, including the fire prevention, building and zoning regulations.



(Ord. 1068, passed 11-2-81)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.14  PROOF OF CURRENT INSPECTION BY COUNTY HEALTH DEPARTMENT.



   All licensees must possess proof of current inspection by the County
Health Department.



(Ord. 1068, passed 11-2-81)



§ 111.15  LICENSE CERTIFICATE OR INSIGNIA; LOSS; ALTERATION OR REMOVAL.



   (A)   In case any licensee who has been furnished a license
certificate or license insignia, in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter, shall lose the same, it shall be within the discretion of the
Village Clerk to authorize the issuance of a duplicate certificate or
insignia upon the making of an affidavit of loss by such person and the
payment of a fee to be set by the Board of Trustees to the Village Clerk.



   (B)   (1)   No person shall add to, alter, deface, forge or
counterfeit any license certificate or sticker or other insignia which has
been or is being issued by the village.



      (2)   No person shall destroy, obliterate, take, remove or
carry away without the consent of the owner any license certificate or
sticker or other insignia which has been issued by the village, except that
said certificate or said sticker or other insignia may be removed after the
licensed business, occupation or activity has been discontinued or the
licensed premises have been abandoned.



(Ord. 1068, passed 11-2-81)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $750 for each
offense.  It shall be deemed a separate offense on each day during which a
violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 1068, passed 11-2-81; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02)



CHAPTER 112:  ELEVATORS



Section



   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   Construction of elevators; permit required



   112.03   Licensing and inspection of elevators



   112.04   Fees



 



   112.99   Penalty



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ELEVATOR.  Any mechanical lift operated by any source of power,
designed, intended or used to carry or transport individuals or products
between floors of any building, which system may be operated by any method
including hydraulically, cable or gear or cog mechanism.



   PUBLIC ELEVATOR.  Any elevator located within the corporate limits of
the village, except it shall not apply to elevators located in occupied
single-family residences.



(Ord. 1191, passed 9-21-87)



§ 112.02  CONSTRUCTION OF ELEVATORS; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No elevator shall be constructed in the village without an elevator
construction permit.  Prior to the construction of any elevator within the
corporate limits of the village, the owner of the premises upon which
construction is intended shall submit a complete set of plans, drawings and
specifications to the village for review and approval.  The village shall
cause such plans to be reviewed within 60 calendar days from date of
receipt.  If the plans and specifications are rejected, the village shall as
part of its review advise the owner/applicant in writing of the specific
conditions resulting in such denial.  Upon approval of all plans and
specifications the village will issue the owner/applicant a permit for
elevator construction.



(Ord. 1191, passed 9-21-87)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.03  LICENSING AND INSPECTION OF ELEVATORS.



   All public elevators in the village shall be licensed.  The village
shall semi-annually inspect and upon passing such inspection issue a license
allowing the operation of such elevator.  The inspection and licensing of
elevators shall be for the purpose of determining the safe operation of these
devices and shall, among other things, include a review and inspection of
door mechanisms, slides, controls, lighting, structural soundness and
mechanical condition using standards accepted by the elevator industry.  If
the inspection reveals safety deficiencies the elevator shall immediately be
closed to public use until it is fully repaired and has passed
reinspection.  Upon passing inspection and payment of fees as required
herein the village will issue a license for a six-month period.



(Ord. 1191, passed 9-21-87)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.04  FEES.



   (A)   The fee for inspection and approval of construction plans and
initial post-construction inspection shall be set by the Board of Trustees.



   (B)   The fee for semi-annual elevator inspection and license shall
be set by the Board of Trustees.



   (C)   Fees for each additional required inspection shall be set by
the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 1191, passed 9-21-87)



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   In addition to any other remedies available at law or equity, any
individual or firm, corporation, trust, partnership or any owning, leasing or
occupying of any property or building which is subject to this chapter shall
on violation of any of the provisions of this chapter be fined not less than
$50 nor more than $750 for each offense with each day the offense takes place
considered a separate offense.



(Ord. 1191, passed 9-21-87; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02)



CHAPTER 113:  INTOXICATING LIQUOR



Section



General Provisions



   113.01   Scope



   113.02   Definitions



   113.03   Possession of alcoholic beverages in public places



   113.04   Consumption of alcoholic beverages on private property



License Regulations



   113.15   License personal privilege



   113.16   Application for license; specific forms



   113.17   Restrictions on issuance of license



   113.18   Classification of licenses; fees



   113.18.1  License fee



   113.18.2  Live entertainment



   113.19   Issuance of license



   113.20   Limitation on number of licenses



   113.20.1   License notification requirements



   113.21   Duration of license; proration of fee



   113.22   Renewal



   113.23   Posting of license



   113.24   Change of location



   113.25   Suspension or revocation of license



   113.26   Unlawful denial of use of accommodations and privileges by
agents or employees of licensee



Retail Sales



   113.35   Responsibility for proper operation of business



   113.36   Hours of sales



   113.37   Closing hours for licensed premises



   113.38   Premises to be kept in sanitary condition



   113.39   Contagious diseases among employees



   113.40   Use of slot machines, pinball machines, and other devices



   113.41   Live entertainment; undesirable elements or disorderly
conduct prohibited



   113.42   Sales near churches, school and the like



   113.43   Sales in certain premises prohibited



   113.44   Sale to minors or intoxicated persons; exception



   113.45   Sealing and removal of open wine bottles



Persons 21 Years and Under



   113.55   Display of notice



   113.56   Prohibiting persons under age of 21 to remain on licensed
premises



   113.57   Written evidence of age and identity required



   113.58   Misrepresentation of age



   113.59   Purchase or possession of alcoholic liquor; exception



   113.60   Tending bar by underage persons prohibited



   113.61   Sale, gift or delivery to minor



   113.62   Possession or consumption of alcohol by a gathering
including minor at residence



   113.63   Parental responsibility



Fall Festival



   113.75   Permit required; application



   113.76   Application fee



   113.77   Approval or denial of application



   113.78   Duration



   113.79   Balustrades; construction and requirements



   113.80   (Reserved)



   113.81   Outdoor beer garden/cafe construction and requirements



Administration and Enforcement



   113.90   Local Liquor Control Commissioner



   113.91   Records of licenses to be kept



   113.92   Right of entry for inspection



   113.93   Hearings before Local Liquor Control Commissioner



 



   113.98   Violations



   113.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Public intoxication, see § 132.08



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 113.01  SCOPE.



   This chapter shall be liberally construed to the end that the health,
safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the village shall be protected and
temperance in the consumption of alcoholic liquors shall be fostered and
promoted by careful control and regulation of the sale of alcoholic liquors.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)



§ 113.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.  Spirits, wine, beer, ale and every other liquid or
solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer capable of being consumed as
a beverage by human beings.



   BAR.  A counter over and upon which alcoholic beverages are prepared
and where consumers of alcoholic beverages sit or stand to receive and/or
consume such beverages.



   CLUB.  A not-for-profit corporation organized under the laws of this
state solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquor, and which conforms to the definition of a
club in section 2.24 of An Act relating to alcoholic liquors or as the same
may be hereafter amended.



   FLOOR AREA.  Of the area open to the general public inside a retail
establishment, that portion which is designed and used exclusively for the
display of merchandise for sale.



   FRANKFORT HISTORICAL DISTRICT.  That territory in the village situated
within and bounded on the south by Nebraska Street including that parcel
situated on the southeast corner of Ash Street and Nebraska Street and
bounded on the east by a strip of land 475 feet east of White Street and
bounded on the north by Elwood Street running to Smith Street, then at this
junction 88 feet north of Elwood Street west some 225 feet and bounded on the
west by a line 160 feet west of Hickory Street, all of which is indicated and
defined by the Historical District Map of the village.



   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION.  A benevolent, nationally chartered or
recognized, not-for-profit corporation of a national scope, such as the
Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW), the American Legion, and the Elks Club.



   LICENSEE.  Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or club holding
a license under the provisions of this chapter.



   LIVE ENTERTAINMENT.  A person acting, singing, playing an instrument
or otherwise performing in person for compensation or profit.



   LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.  The Local Liquor Control
Commissioner and any committee or agency appointed by the Commissioner to
assist with the discharge of the Commissioner’s duties hereunder.



   MICROBREWERY/DISTILLERY/WINERY WITH SAMPLING AREA.  A facility in
which beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages are brewed, fermented, or
distilled for distribution and off-site consumption and/or limited on site
consumption and which possesses the appropriate license from the State of
Illinois. Retail sales and on site consumption of products is permitted.



   MOVIE THEATER.  A building over 50,000 square feet with at least six
rooms, each measuring over 2,000 square feet and outfitted with a screen and
projector, that are specifically designed for the purpose of showing motion
pictures to the public as the principal business.



   NOT-FOR-PROFIT CORPORATION.  A corporation organized under the
Illinois Not For Profit Corporation Act for any of the purposes set forth in
Article 3, §§ 105/103.05(a) of that Act.



   RESTAURANT.  Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and
held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are
actually served without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided
with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining equipment and capacity and
having employed therein a sufficient number of employees to prepare, cook and
serve suitable food for its guests.



   SALE.  Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means
whatsoever, including the transfer of alcoholic liquors by and through the
transfer or negotiation of warehouse receipts or certificates, and includes
and means all sales made by any person, whether principal, proprietor, agent,
servant or employee.



   SELL AT RETAIL and SALE AT RETAIL.  Sales for use and consumption and
not for resale in any form.



   SERVICE BAR.  A counter over and upon which alcoholic liquor is served
separating the area within which alcoholic drinks are prepared from the area
where a waitress or other employee of the dram shop receives said alcoholic
beverages for delivery to customers seated at tables or elsewhere within the
dram shop other than the SERVICE BAR.



   TO SELL.  To solicit or receive an order for, or keep or expose for
sale and to keep with intent to sell.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83; Am. Ord. 1429, passed 9-7-93; Am. Ord. 2274,
passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. 3017, passed 3-21-16; Am. Ord. 3039, passed 7-18-16)



§ 113.03  POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   Except at events which have obtained a valid Class I liquor license or
block party permit and which fully comply with all village ordinances, no
person shall be in possession of an alcoholic beverage in or upon any public
place within the corporate limits of the village, unless the alcoholic
beverage is in its original container with the seal unbroken. For the
purposes of this section, a public place shall include, but is not limited
to, any public street, alley, parking area, sidewalk, easement or common area
and any drive, parking area or common area serving a commercial establishment
or multi-family residential structure. Wine that is resealed in accordance
with the provisions of § 113.45 and not tampered with shall not be deemed in
violation of this section.



(Ord. 876, passed 10-7-74; Am. Ord. 2275, passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. 2395,
passed 6-18-07)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.04  CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall open private property to the general public
and, without obtaining a liquor license for said property from the village,
permit the consumption, use, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages upon
said property. Any person consuming, using, selling or distributing alcoholic
beverages upon unlicensed private property that has been opened to the
general public shall be guilty of an offense.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to a block party which has
obtained a valid permit therefor from the village and which fully complies
with all village ordinances.



(Ord. 2275, passed 4-3-06)  Penalty, see § 113.99



LICENSE REGULATIONS



§ 113.15  LICENSE PERSONAL PRIVILEGE.



   A license shall be purely a personal privilege, valid for a period not
to exceed one year, unless sooner revoked as in this chapter provided, and
the same shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to
attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or be subject to being encumbered
or hypothecated.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)



§ 113.16  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; SPECIFIC FORMS.



   Application for a license shall be made to and filed with the Village
President, shall be in writing, under oath and signed by the applicant, if an
individual, by at least two partners if a partnership or the president or
manager and the secretary if a corporation or limited liability company. Such
application shall be presented not less than ten days prior to the date
issuance is desired and shall be substantially in one of the following forms
hereby adopted and referred to in this chapter by reference:



   (A)   Application for new retailer's liquor license.



   (B)   Application for renewed retailer's liquor license.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83; Am. Ord. 2274, passed 4-3-06)



§ 113.17  RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   No such license shall be issued to:



      (1)   A person who is not a resident of the village;



      (2)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in
the community in which he or she resides;



      (3)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;



      (4)   A person who had been convicted of a felony under any
federal or state law, unless the Commission determines that such person has
been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after considering
matters set forth in such person's application and the Commission's
investigation. The burden of proof of sufficient rehabilitation shall be on
the applicant;



      (5)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or
is keeping a house of ill fame;



      (6)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other
crime or misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;



      (7)   A person whose license issued under the laws of the
state or this chapter has been revoked for cause;



      (8)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of
any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a
first application;



      (9)   A copartnership, if any general partnership thereof, or
any limited partnership thereof, owning more than 5% of the aggregate limited
partner interest in such copartnership would not be eligible to receive a
license hereunder for any reason;



      (10)   A corporation or limited liability company, if any
member, officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or
stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock of such
corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any
reason other than citizenship and residence within the village;



      (11)   A corporation or limited liability company unless it is
incorporated or organized in state, or unless it is a foreign corporation or
foreign limited liability company which is qualified under the Illinois
Business Corporation Act of 1983 or the Limited Liability Company Act to
transact business in the state;



      (12)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a
manager or agent, unless the manager or agent possesses the same
qualifications required by the licensee;



      (13)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of a
federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of
alcoholic liquor, subsequent to February 1, 1934 or has forfeited his or her
bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation;



      (14)   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for
which a license is sought or does not have a lease thereon for the full
period for which the license is to be issued;



      (15)   Any law enforcing public officials, including members
of the Village Liquor Control Commission, the President of the Village Board
of Trustees, any member of the Village Board of Trustees or any president or
member of the County Board; and no such official shall have a direct interest
in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor, except that a
license may be granted to such official in relation to premises which are not
located within the territory subject to the jurisdiction of that official if
the issuance of such license is approved by the State Liquor Control
Commission and except that a license may be granted to any member the Village
Board of Trustees in relation to premises that are located within the village
if the sale of alcoholic liquor pursuant to the license is incidental to the
selling of food, the issuance of the license is approved by the State
Commission, the issuance of the license is in accordance with all applicable
ordinances of the village, and the trustee granted a license does not vote on
alcoholic liquor issues pending before the Village Board of Trustees.
Notwithstanding any provision of this paragraph to the contrary, a member of
the Village Board of Trustees other than the President of the Village Board
of Trustees or a member of the County Board other than the President of the
County Board may have a direct interest in the manufacture, sale or
distribution of alcoholic liquor as long as he or she is not a law enforcing
public official. To prevent any conflict of interest, the elected official
with the direct interest in the manufacture, sale or distribution of
alcoholic liquor cannot participate in any meetings, hearings or decisions on
matters impacting the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor;



      (16)   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business
to be operated by the licensee;



      (17)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense
as proscribed by any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(11) of Section 28-1.1
or 28-3 of the "Criminal Code of 1961," approved July 28, 1961, as heretofore
or hereafter amended, or as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the
aforesaid statutory provisions;



      (18)   A person or entity to whom a Federal Wagering Stamp has
been issued by the Federal Government for the current tax period, unless the
person or entity is eligible to be issued a license under the Raffles Act or
the Illinois Pull Tabs and Jar Games Act;



      (19)   A person who intends to sell alcoholic liquors for use
or consumption on his or her licensed retail premises who does not have
liquor liability insurance coverage for that premises in an amount that is at
least equal to the maximum liability amounts set out in subsection (a) of
Section 6-21 of the Liquor Control Act of 1934.



   (B)   No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at
retail of any alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where
the majority of customers are minors of school age or where the principal
business transacted consists of school books, school supplies, food, lunches
or drinks for such minors.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83; Am. Ord. 2274, passed 4-3-06)



§ 113.18  CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES; FEES.



   Every person, partnership, firm or corporation engaged in the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor in the village shall pay an annual license fee. Such
licenses shall be divided into the following classes:



   (A)   (1)   Class A-1 — Tavern permitting bar and carry-outs.
Class A-1 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for
consumption upon the specified premises at or over a bar, a service bar
and/or at tables including the sale at retail of alcoholic liquors in their
original containers, with seals unbroken, for consumption elsewhere than upon
the premises (carry-outs).



      (2)   Class A-2 — Microbrewery/Distillery/Winery permitting
sampling area and carry-outs. Class A-2 licenses shall authorize the
production, retail sale, and limited on site consumption of alcoholic liquor
upon the specified premises. Retail sales shall include alcoholic liquors in
their original containers, with seals unbroken, and two liter or smaller
growler type bottles of draft beer and ale with unbroken tamper evident seal
affixed by the licensee for consumption elsewhere than upon the premises of
the facility that manufactures the beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages.
In addition to all other requirements imposed by law, a Class A-2 license is
subject to the following additional terms and conditions:



         (a)   Alcohol consumed and sold at retail on the
premises shall be limited to beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages
manufactured on site.



         (b)   All alcohol samples shall be served to customers
over a service counter as defined in § 113.02. Dedicated wait staff and
tableside service is prohibited.



         (c)   Customer seating at the service counter is
prohibited.



         (d)   Amusement devices and televisions are not
permitted.



         (e)   Live entertainment is prohibited unless permitted
via a temporary use permit.



         (f)   Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours
of 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.



         (g)   Sampling areas shall not exceed 25% of the gross
floor area or 1,000 square feet whichever is less.



         (h)   Retail displays of packaged alcohol shall not
exceed 10% of the customer floor area.



   (B)   (1)   Class B-1 — Tavern permitting bar and no
carry-outs. Class B-1 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor for consumption upon the specified premises at or over a bar, a
service bar and/or at tables. The sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption
off the premises where they are sold (carry-outs) is expressly prohibited.



      (2)   Class B-2 — Movie Theater permitting bar and no
carry-outs. Class B-2 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor for consumption upon the specified premises at or over a bar, a
service bar and/or at tables. The sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption
off the premises where they are sold (carry-outs) is expressly prohibited.



   (C)   (1)   Class C-1 — Full service restaurant, permitting
bar, no carry-outs. Class C-1 licenses shall authorize the retail sale upon
the premises specified of alcoholic liquor in conjunction with the operation
of a full service restaurant as herein defined. Sales at or over a bar, a
service bar and/or at tables are permitted. The sale of alcoholic liquors for
consumption off the premises where they are sold (carry-outs) is expressly
prohibited, provided that partially consumer bottles of wine may be sealed
and removed as provided in § 113.45. No C-1 liquor license shall be issued
unless the restaurant is found consistent with the following standards:



         (a)   Bar and lounge areas within the restaurant shall
not contain more than 25% of the total number of seats located within the
premises nor shall they exceed 25% of the total customer floor area.



         (b)   Bar and lounge areas within the restaurant shall
be reasonably delineated from the dining area by a wall, partition or similar
permanent physical improvement.



         (c)   Electronic video displays and their accompanying
audio, including but not limited to televisions and projection screens, shall
not be located or transmitted outside of the dedicated bar and/or lounge area.



         (d)   All menu items shall be available until one hour
prior to closing and shall be prepared by an on-site kitchen staff.



      (2)   Class C-2 — Restaurant/tavern, permitting bar, no
carry-outs. Class C-2 licenses shall authorize the retail sale upon the
premises specified of alcoholic liquor in conjunction with the operation of a
restaurant as herein defined. Sales at or over a bar, a service bar and/or at
tables are permitted. Food sales comprise the majority of all revenues
generated by the business. The sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption off
the premises where they are sold (carry-outs) is expressly prohibited,
provided that partially consumer bottles of wine may be sealed and removed as
provided in § 113.45. No C-2 liquor license shall be issued unless the
restaurant is found consistent with the following standards:



         (a)   Bar and lounge areas within the Restaurant/tavern
shall not contain more than 40% of the total number of seats located within
the premises nor shall they exceed 40% of the total customer floor area.



         (b)   Amusement devices may be provided in accordance
with Chapter 111 of this Code.



         (c)   A full menu, including entrees and side dishes
prepared and cooked by an on-site kitchen staff, shall be available to
customers until 10:00 p.m. daily. After 10:00 p.m., and in the event a full
menu is no longer provided, a reduced menu that includes appetizers,
sandwiches, snacks, hors d'oeuvres or other similar foods, shall be available
to customers until one hour prior to close.



   (D)   (1)   Class D-1 - Restaurant, permitting bar and limited
carry-outs.



         (a)   Class D-1 licenses shall authorize the retail sale
upon the premises of alcoholic liquor in conjunction with but ancillary to
the operation of a restaurant, sale over a bar, service bar and/or at tables
is permitted. The sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption off the premises
where they are sold (carry-outs) is expressly prohibited except for the
retail sale only of wine, beer, and ale so long as in their original bottles
with seal unbroken, two litter or smaller growler type bottles of draft beer
and ale with unbroken tamper evident seal affixed by the licensee and
partially consumed bottles of wine sealed and removed from the premises are
provided in § 113.45.



         (b)   Because this license contemplates very limited
carry-out sales and area used for the retail sales of the licensed carry-out
beverages, a Class D-1 licensed premises shall have no more than 16 square
feet of floor space and 32 square feet of shelving/racks/display for retail
sales of licensed beverages for off premises consumption.



      (2)   Class D-2 - Restaurant/Brew Pub, permitting bar and
limited carry-outs.



         (a)   Class D-2 licenses shall authorize the retail sale
upon the premises of alcoholic liquor in conjunction with but ancillary to
the operation of a restaurant. Class D-2 license holders must also hold a
brew pub license issued by the State of Illinois. Sale of alcoholic liquor
over a bar, service bar and/or tables is permitted. Sale of alcoholic liquor
for consumption off the premises where they are sold (carry-outs) is
expressly prohibited except for the retail sale only of beer and/or ale
manufactured on the premises, provided it is packaged as a keg, a two liter
or smaller growler bottle, or other retail packaging with unbroken tamper
evident seal affixed by the licensee. Partially consumed bottles of wine
sealed and removed from the premises as provided in § 113.45.



         (b)   In addition to all other requirements imposed by
law, a Class D-2 license is subject to the following additional terms and
conditions:



            1.   Manufacture of alcoholic liquors must occur
during locally permitted business hours and shall be clearly subordinate to
the operation of a restaurant to engage in the sale of alcoholic liquor.



            2.   Should the licensee engage in state
authorized distribution activities, the licensee shall cause there to be no
more than one distribution vehicle trip to service the premises per day.



            3.   Bar and lounge areas within the restaurant
shall not contain more than 40% of the total number of seats located within
the premises nor shall they exceed 40% of the total customer floor area.



            4.   A full menu, including entrees and side
dishes prepared and cooked by an on-site kitchen staff, shall be available to
customers until 10:00 p.m. daily. After 10:00 p.m., and in the event a full
menu is no longer provided, a reduced menu that includes appetizers, snacks,
hors d'oeuvres or other similar foods, shall be available to customers until
one hour prior to close.



            5.   Retail displays of packaged alcohol shall not
exceed, in total, 10% of the customer floor area.



   (E)   Class E — Restaurant, prohibiting bar and carry-outs.



      (1)   Class E-1 — Restaurant, prohibiting bar and
carry-outs. Class E-1 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor in conjunction with a restaurant as herein defined. The sale of
alcoholic liquors across a bar is expressly prohibited, but a service bar or
bars are permitted. The sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption off the
premises (carry-outs) is expressly prohibited, provided that partially
consumed bottles of wine may be sealed and removed as provided in § 113.45.



      (2)   Class E-2 — Restaurant, prohibiting bar and carry-outs
- beer and margaritas only. Class E-2 licenses shall only authorize the
retail sale of beer and margaritas only and no other alcoholic drinks or
alcoholic liquors in conjunction with a restaurant as herein defined. The
sale of beer and margaritas across a bar or for consumption off the premises
(carry-outs) is expressly prohibited, but a service bar is permitted. (Note:
For purposes of this license class, MARGARITA means a drink which uses
tequila as its primary but not necessary exclusive alcoholic liquor
component).



      (3)   Class E-3 — Restaurant, prohibiting bar and carry-outs
- beer and wine only.  Class E-3 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
beer and wine only, and no other alcoholic drinks or alcoholic liquors in
conjunction with a restaurant as herein defined. The sale of beer and wine
across a bar or for consumption off the premises (carry-outs) is expressly
prohibited, but a service bar is permitted.



   (F)   (1)   Class F-1 — Packaged liquor store (carry-outs).
Class F-1 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors in
their original packages with seals unbroken for consumption at places other
than upon the licensed premises. Except for the sale of minor ancillary
items, the entire premises shall be devoted to the sale of alcoholic liquors.
The consumption of alcoholic liquors upon such premises is expressly
prohibited.



      (2)   Class F-2 — Grocery store (carry-outs).  Class F-2
licenses shall authorize the retail sale by grocery stores of alcoholic
liquors in their original packages with seals unbroken for consumption at
places other than upon the licensed premises. The consumption of alcoholic
liquors upon such premises is expressly prohibited. For the purpose of this
division, “grocery store” shall mean a retail establishment with a floor
area of more than 5,000 square feet offering for sale a full line of
groceries and household items. Alcoholic liquors shall not occupy more than
10% of the floor area.



      (3)   Class F-3 — Convenience store (carry-outs).  Class
F-3 licenses shall authorize the retail sale by convenience stores of
alcoholic liquors in their original packages with seals unbroken for
consumption at places other than upon the licensed premises. The consumption
of alcoholic liquors upon such premises is expressly prohibited. For the
purpose of this division, "convenience store" shall mean a retail
establishment with a floor area of 5,000 square feet or less offering for
sale a limited line of groceries and household items intended for the
convenience of the neighborhood. Alcoholic liquors shall not occupy more than
10% of the floor area. Except in refrigerated areas, displays of merchandise
for sale shall not exceed five feet in height.



      (4)   Class F-4 — Beer and wine (carry-outs).  Class F-4
licenses shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine in their original
packages with seals unbroken for consumption at places other than upon the
licensed premises. The consumption of alcoholic liquors upon such premises is
expressly prohibited. Beer and wine shall not occupy more than 10% of the
floor area. Except in refrigerated areas, displays of merchandise for sale
shall not exceed five feet in height.



      (5)   Class F-5 - Grocery Store (carry-outs and in-store cafe).



         (a)   Class F-5 licenses shall authorize the following
types of sales within a grocery store:



            1.   Carry-outs.  The retail sale of alcoholic
liquors in their original packages with seals unbroken for consumption at
places other than the licensed premises.



            2.   In-store cafe.  The retail sale of
individual servings by the glass of beer, wine or sake only for on-premises
consumption, solely in a designated serving/seating area of a cafe, where a
selection of both hot and cold foods such as sushi, tapas, or other “small
plates,” appetizers, sandwiches, salads, soups, pastries and baked goods
are freshly prepared and regularly served and available for purchase and
carry out.



         (b)   In addition to all other requirements imposed by
law, a Class F-5 license is subject to the following additional terms and
conditions:



            1.   For purposes of this F-5 license
classification, a grocery store shall mean a retail establishment with a
minimum gross floor area of not less than 40,000 square feet in the business
of selling a full line of grocery products, including staples, foodstuffs,
meats, fish, produce, dairy products, deli, bakery and household items and
supplies.



            2.   Not more than 10% of the grocery store floor
area will be used for carry-out liquors and not more than 5% of its gross
floor area used for cafe food preparation and serving/seating area.



            3.   Since the service of alcoholic liquor in the
cafe is merely an adjunct operation of the grocery store, the cafe shall not
be advertised, otherwise held out to be, or its business conducted as though
it is a drinking establishment.



            4.   At anytime liquor is available for sale in
the cafe, the licensee shall have a sufficient number of staff in the cafe to
assure, among other things, liquor is only being consumed in the designated
cafe serving/seating area and by a person of legal age.



            5.   Alcoholic liquor sold in their original
packages intended for consumption at places other than the licensed premises
shall not be opened or consumed on the premises, including the in-store cafe
and its serving/seating area.



   (G)   Class G — The sale of draft beer and draft ale only, no
carry-outs. Class G licenses shall authorize the retail sale upon the
licensed premises for the consumption of the beverage commonly known as draft
beer and/or draft ale only. Draft beer and draft ale are defined for purposes
hereof as beer or ale in bulk, under pressure, in a barrel or similar
pressurized type container, the size of which shall not be less than a
quarter barrel or equivalent thereto and drawn from the same via a spigot or
faucet for individual servings, in not larger than pitcher amounts, as
opposed to beer or ale which is in a can, bottle or any other type of
container and poured from the same. Sales at or over a service bar and/or at
tables are permitted. The sale of alcoholic liquors for consumption off the
premises where they are sold (carry-out) is expressly prohibited.



   (H)   Class H — Sale of beer and wine only, no carry-outs. Class H
licenses shall authorize the retail sale upon the premises of the beverages
commonly known as beer and wine. Only sale of beer and wine at or over a
service bar and/or at eating tables is permitted. The sale of alcoholic
liquors for consumption off the premises where they are sold (carry-outs) is
expressly prohibited.



   (I)   Class I — Outing Permits.



      (1)   Class I-1 — Outing Permits - single event. Class I-1
licenses shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquors at the place specified
in the application, for picnics or other public outings, for periods not to
exceed three days, or for a period of not to exceed five days for Fall
Festival.



      (2)   Class I-2 — Outing Permits - public premises events
only; service, delivery and sales permitted; full bar, and no carry outs.
Class I-2 licenses shall authorize the sale and delivery of alcoholic liquors
as may be permitted in § 6-15 of the Liquor Control Act of 1934 (ILCS Ch.
235, Act 5, § 6-15) or Illinois law in buildings or on property owned,
belonging to or under the control of any political subdivision which are
within the corporate limits of the village. The terms, conditions,
limitations and restrictions contained in the enabling statute for the
political subdivision, including § 6-15 of the Liquor Control Act of 1934
(ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-15) and applicable sections of the Administrative
Code of Illinois, if any, as from time to time amended are incorporated as
requirements for the issuance of a Class I-2 License.



      (3)   Class I-3 — Outing Permits - public premises events
only; service, delivery and sales permitted; beer and wine only, and no carry
outs. Class I-3 licenses shall authorize the sale and delivery of beer and
wine only as may be permitted in § 6-15 of the Liquor Control Act of 1934
(ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-15) or Illinois law in buildings or on property
owned, belonging to or under the control of any political subdivision which
are within the corporate limits of the village. The terms, conditions,
limitations and restrictions contained in the enabling statute for the
political subdivision, including § 6-15 of the Liquor Control Act of 1934
(ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-15) and applicable sections of the Administrative
Code of Illinois, if any, as from time to time amended are incorporated as
requirements for the issuance of a Class I-3 License. In addition to and not
in lieu of the compliance with all requirements of the State of Illinois,
each Class I-2 and Class I-3 Licensee for the licensed event is subject to
each of the following provisions:



         (a)   The political subdivision applicant must comply
with and subject to all application and other requirements of the Village of
Frankfort’s liquor control ordinances.



         (b)   The governing board of the political subdivision
owning or controlling the building or property where an event will be held
must approve each event.



         (c)   Any Class I-2 and Class I-3 License shall be in
effect for not more than two consecutive days per event with not more than
six events on the property owned or controlled by the political subdivision
per calendar year. Hours of operation shall be limited to 11:00 p.m. (Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Sunday) and 1:00 a.m. (Friday and Saturday).



         (d)   The political subdivision represents to the
village that its governing body has adopted adequate procedures and policies,
including public safety, control of the sale, distribution and sensible
consumption of authorized liquor at events at its facilities.



         (e)   Alcoholic liquor only can be sold, distributed,
delivered or consumed in a restricted area accessible for the event only; not
for general public access.



         (f)   Any persons managing, supervising the event or
selling, distributing, providing or delivering alcoholic beverages must be at
least 21 years of age and have successfully completed a State of Illinois
approved Basset training program within two years of the event. The political
subdivision shall maintain adequate records, including copies of Basset
certificates to establish compliance with this requirements.



         (g)   The political subdivision shall have or require
dram shop insurance coverage for the event.



         (h)   The political subdivision shall require alcoholic
liquor to be controlled to prevent sale, distribution or consumption by
persons under 21 and prohibit alcoholic liquor from being taken from the
restricted area which is not accessible to the general public during the
event.



   (J)   Class J — Club License. Class J licenses shall authorize the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor on the specified premises by the club as
defined in § 113.02 to which it is issued, to members of the club, to
not-for-profit organizations which are conducting dances or other public
gathers upon the premises and to such organization’s invitee, to private
persons conducting private gatherings and their invitee.  The sale of
alcoholic beverages to members of the general public is expressly forbidden. 



   (K)   Class K — Fraternal organization license.  Class K licenses
shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors on the specified
premises by the Fraternal Organization to members of the Fraternal
Organization, to not-for-profit organizations conducting dances or other
public gatherings upon the premises and to such organizations’ invitees,
and to private persons conducting private gatherings and their invitees, but
not to members of the general public.



   (L)   Class L — Beer and wine (carry-outs, limited consumption
permitted).  Class L licenses shall authorize the retail sale of beer and
wine in their original packages with seals unbroken.  Except for the sale of
minor ancillary items, the entire premises shall be devoted to the sale of
beer and/or wine.  Consumption of alcohol on premises shall be limited to
one tasting room as provided for in the village zoning ordinance.



   (M)   Class M — Restaurant, prohibiting bar and permitting limited
carry-outs. 



      (1)   Class M license shall authorize the retail sale upon the
premises of beer an wine only, in conjunction with but ancillary to the
operation of a restaurant. Sale over a bar is prohibited; however, sale to
customers at tables is permitted. The retail sale of beer and wine for
consumption off the premises (carry-outs) is permitted so long as in their 
original bottles with seal unbroken and partially consumed bottles of wine
sealed and removed form the premises as provided in § 113.45.



      (2)   Because this license contemplates very limited carry-out
sales and area used for the retail sales of the licensed carry-out beverages,
a Class M licensed premises shall have no more than 16 square feet of floor
space and 32 square feet of shelving/racks/display for retail sales of
licensed beverages for off premises consumption.



   (N)   Class N-Private banquet event facilities; private events only,
bar and table service, delivery and sales permitted; full bar; and no
carry-outs.



      (1)   Class N licenses shall authorize bar and table service
of alcoholic liquors, as may be permitted in § 6-15 of the Liquor Control
Act of 1934 (ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-15) or Illinois law, in private
banquet event facilities, including but not limited to banquet halls, and in
conjunction with a private party, private banquet, or any other scheduled
private event not for entry of the general public. The terms, conditions,
limitations and restrictions contained in the Liquor Control Act of 1934
(ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-15) and applicable sections of the Administrative
Code of Illinois, if any, as from time to time amended are incorporated as
requirements for the issuance of a Class N License.



      (2)   In addition to and not in lieu of the compliance with
all requirements of the State of Illinois, each Class N Licensee is subject
to each of the following provisions:



         (a)   Alcoholic liquor only can be distributed,
delivered or consumed in an area which is not accessible to the general
public.



         (b)   Any persons managing, supervising the event or
selling, distributing, providing or delivering alcoholic beverages must be at
least 21 years of age and have successfully completed a State of Illinois
approved Basset training program within two years of the event. The private
banquet event facility shall maintain adequate records, including copies of
Basset certificates to establish compliance with this requirements.



         (c)   The private banquet event facility shall have or
require dram shop insurance coverage for the event.



         (d)   Hours of operation shall be limited to 11:00 p.m.
(Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Sunday) and 1:00 a.m. (Friday and
Saturday).



         (e)   The private banquet event facility shall require
alcoholic liquor to be controlled to prevent sale, distribution or
consumption by persons under 21 and prohibit alcoholic liquor from being
taken from the restricted area which is not accessible to the general public
during the event.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83; Am. Ord. 1261, passed 5-15-89; Am. Ord. 1381,
passed 6-15-92); Am. Ord. 1429, passed 9-7-93; Am. Ord. 1703, passed 6-1-98;
Am. Ord. 2274, passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. 2395, passed 6-18-07; Am. Ord. 2545,
passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord. 2644, passed 3-15-10; Am. Ord. 2726, passed 6-20-11;
Am. Ord. 2745, passed 10-3-11; Am. Ord. 2800, passed 8-20-12; Am. Ord. 2826,
passed 1-7-13; Am. Ord. 2875, passed 10-21-13; Am. Ord. 2879, passed
11-18-13; Am. Ord. 2958, passed 12-15-14; Am. Ord. 3017, passed 3-21-16; Am.
Ord. 3039, passed 7-18-16; Am. Ord. 3063, passed 10-17-16; Am. Ord. 3126,
passed 12-18-17)



§ 113.18.1  LICENSE FEE. 



   License fees for all classes are set forth below and as subsequently
amended from time to time by the President and Board of Trustees.



 


CLASS

 

FEE





A-1, A-2
 
$1,700


B-1, B-2
 
$1,700


C-1, C-2
 
$1,700


D-1, D-2
 
$1,700


E-1, E-2, E-3
 
$1,600


F-1, F-2, F-3, F-4, F-5
 
$1,600


G
 
$0


H
 
$1,500


I-1
 
$0


I-2, I-3
 
$1,600


J
 
$500


K
 
$200


L
 
$1,600


M
 
$1,600


N
 
$1,600


Entertainment
 
$200




 



(Am. Ord. 2958, passed 12-15-14; Am. Ord. 3017, passed 3-21-16; Am. Ord.
3025, passed 4-25-16; Am. Ord. 3039, passed 7-18-16; Am. Ord. 3063, passed
10-17-16; Am. Ord. 3126, passed 12-18-17)



§ 113.18.2  LIVE ENTERTAINMENT.



   No live entertainment may be present upon any premises where alcoholic
liquor is sold or offered for sale at retail with the exception that it may
be permitted under Classes A-1, B-1, C, D-1, D-2, E, G, H and I-1, I-2, I-3,
M, and N provided, however, that the applicant desiring to present live
entertainment at the time of the making of application hereunder for any such
class of license shall disclose on the application therefore, the fact that
such entertainment shall be presented, the type and nature of such
entertainment and shall pay an additional fee which shall be set from time to
time by the Board of Trustees. In the event the Liquor Commissioner shall in
his or her sole discretion desire to permit live entertainment on such
premises, he or she shall so indicate in writing and any such license issued
shall on the face thereto indicate that “live entertainment is
permitted.”  In the even the Liquor Commission shall in his or her sole
discretion deny such application for live entertainment, he or she shall so
indicate in writing on the application and the applicant shall be so advised
within a reasonable period of time.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, live
entertainment on any licensed premises in the Frankfort Historical District
shall, if permitted, be restricted to the following days and times:



   (A)   On Wednesdays and Thursdays, live entertainment will be
permitted upon the premises of the licensee until 10:30 p.m. On Friday and
Saturday live entertainment will be permitted until 1:00 a.m.;



   (B)   On Sundays, live entertainment will be permitted upon the
premises of the licensee until 8:00 p.m.; and



   (C)   No live entertainment will be permitted in the Frankfort
Historical District on Mondays and Tuesdays; nor will live entertainment
heard from the outside of the premises of the licensee be permitted on Sunday
evenings during presentation of Frankfort’s Concerts-on-the-Green.



   (D)   Whenever live entertainment is permitted, the level of noise
shall not exceed 55 decibels prior to 10:30 p.m. and 45 decibels from 10:30
p.m. until time of closing.



   (E)   All public address systems broadcasting outdoors must be
turned off in conformity with the live entertainment.



(Am. Ord. 2958, passed 12-15-14; Am. Ord. 3017, passed 3-21-16; Am. Ord.
3025, passed 4-25-16; Am. Ord. 3039, passed 7-18-16; Am. Ord. 3063, passed
10-17-16; Am. Ord. 3126, passed 12-18-17)



§ 113.19  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   When the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall approve any
application, the applicant shall be issued a license upon the payment in
advance of the required fee, which license shall be in writing over the name
and under the seal of the village and executed by the President of the
Village and attested by the Village Clerk.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)



§ 113.20  LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF LICENSES.



   (A)   There shall be available for issuance the following number of
licenses for each of the following classifications:



      (1)   There shall be issued in the village not more than one
Class A-1 license and not more than zero Class A-2 license.



      (2)   There shall be issued in the village not more than one
Class B-1 and not more than one Class B-2 licenses.



      (3)   There shall be issued in the village not more than nine
Class C-1 licenses and not more than six Class C-2 licenses.



      (4)   There shall be issued in the village not more than one
Class D-l licenses and not more than one Class D-2 licenses.



      (5)   There shall be issued in the village not more than three
Class E-l licenses, one Class E-2, and two Class E-3 licenses.



      (6)   There shall be issued in the village not more than zero
Class F-1 licenses, three Class F-2 licenses, zero Class F-3 licenses, three
Class F-4 licenses, and one Class F-5 license.



      (7)   There shall be issued in the village not more than zero
Class G licenses.



      (8)   There shall be issued in the village not more than one
Class H license.



      (9)   There is no limitation upon the number of Class I-1
licenses, but their issuance is entirely within the reasonable discretion of
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner; not more than zero Class I-2 and zero
Class I-3.



      (10)   There shall be issued in the village not more than one
Class J license.



      (11)   There shall be issued in the village not more than one
Class K license.



      (12)   There shall be issued in the village not more than zero
Class L license.



      (13)   There shall be issued in the village not more than zero
Class M licenses.



      (14)   There shall be issued in the village not more than zero
Class N licenses.



   (B)   No more than ten liquor licenses shall be issued to persons,
firms or corporations to sell or offer for sale at retail, alcoholic liquor
within the Frankfort Historical District. The classification and number of
liquor licenses which may be issued for use in the Frankfort Historical
District are as follows:



      (1)   Not more than one Class A-l license.



      (2)   Not more than one Class B-l license.



      (3)   Not more than three Class C-l licenses and two C-2
licenses.



      (4)   Not more than one Class D-2 license.



      (5)   Not more than one Class E-l license and one E-3 license.



      (6)   Not more than zero Class F licenses.



      (7)   Not more than zero Class G licenses.



      (8)   Not more than zero Class H licenses.



      (9)   There is no limitation upon the number of Class I
licenses; not more than zero Class I-2 and zero Class I-3 licenses.



      (10)   Not more than zero Class J licenses.



      (11)   Not more than zero Class K licenses.



      (12)   Not more than zero Class L licenses.



      (13)   Not more than zero Class M licenses.



      (14)   Not more than zero Class N licenses.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83; Am. Ord. 1141, passed 8-19-85; Am. Ord. 1177,
passed 4-6-87; Am. Ord. 1261, passed 5-15-89; Am. Ord. 1429, passed 9-7-93;
Am. Ord. 1569, passed 4-15-96; Am. Ord. 1703, passed 6-1-98; Am. Ord. 1805,
passed 5-15-00; Am. Ord. 1900, passed 6-17-02; Am. Ord. 2076, passed 5-17-04;
Am. Ord. 2089, passed 6-21-04; Am. Ord. 2123, passed 10-18-04; Am. Ord. 2191,
passed 9-6-05; Am. Ord. 2274, passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. 2293, passed 6-5-06;
Am. Ord. 2373, passed 3-5-07; Am. Ord. 2382, passed 4-2-07; Am. Ord. 2406,
passed 8-6-07; Am. Ord. 2440, passed 1-22-08; Am. Ord. 2476, passed 6-2-08;
Am. Ord. 2516, passed 9-15-08; Am. Ord. 2564, passed 2-2-09; Am. Ord. 2577,
passed 3-26-09; Am. Ord. 2604, passed 7-20-09; Am. Ord. 2617, passed 10-5-09;
Am. Ord. 2622, passed 11-2-09; Am. Ord. 2644, passed 3-15-10; Am. Ord. 2647,
passed 4-12-10; Am. Ord. 2661, passed 7-6-10; Am. Ord. 2669, passed 8-2-10;
Am. Ord. 2687, passed 12-6-10; Am. Ord. 2722, passed 5-16-11; Am. Ord. 2726,
passed 6-20-11; Am. Ord. 2728, passed 7-5-11; Am. Ord. 2731, passed 7-18-11;
Am. Ord. 2745, passed 10-3-11; Am. Ord. 2751, passed 10-17-11; Am. Ord. 2762,
passed 1-9-12; Am. Ord. 2800, passed 8-20-12; Am. Ord. 2801, passed 8-20-12;
Am. Ord. 2808, passed 10-1-12; Am. Ord. 2814, passed 11-5-12; Am. Ord. 2824,
passed 12-17-12; Am. Ord. 2826, passed 1-7-13; Am. Ord. 2827, passed 1-7-13;
Am. Ord. 2830, passed 1-22-13; Am. Ord. 2864, passed 9-3-13; Am. Ord. 2869,
passed 9-16-13; Am. Ord. 2879, passed 11-18-13; Am. Ord. 2886, passed
12-16-13; Am. Ord. 2892, passed 1-21-14; Am. Ord. 2893, passed 1-21-14; Am.
Ord. 2896, passed 2-18-14; Am. Ord. 2932, passed 7-21-14; Am. Ord. 2948,
passed 11-3-14; Am. Ord. 2959, passed 1-5-15; Am. Ord. 2963, passed 1-20-15;
Am. Ord. 2981, passed 9-8-15; Am. Ord. 3000, passed 11-2-15; Am. Ord. 3018,
passed 3-21-16; Am. Ord. 3062, passed 10-3-16; Am. Ord. 3063, passed
10-17-16; Am. Ord. 3071, passed 11-21-16; Am. Ord. 3088, passed 3-24-17; Am.
Ord. 3099, passed 6-19-17; Am. Ord. 3107, passed 8-7-17;  Am. Ord. 3118,
passed 10-2-17; Am. Ord. 3123, passed 11-20-17; Am. Ord. 3126, passed
12-18-17; Am. Ord. 3128, passed 1-16-18; Am. Ord. 3132, passed 2-5-18) 
Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.20.1  LICENSE NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   Not later than the day of:



   (A)   The cessation of a business licensed under this chapter; or



   (B)   The cessation of the sale of alcoholic liquor by a business
licensed under this chapter; or



   (C)   The sale, transfer, assignment or alienation of any interest
in a business licensed under this chapter, the liquor licensee shall
immediately notify the Village of Frankfort Liquor Control Commissioner, the
Village Clerk and the Village Administrator of the event in writing by either
personal service or by certified U.S. Mail (return-receipt requested),
separately addressed to each at the Village of Frankfort Administrative
Center.



(Ord. 2710, passed 4-18-11)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.21  DURATION OF LICENSE; PRORATION OF FEE.



   (A)   No license shall be issued under this chapter for a period of
less than one calendar year, unless the same is issued pursuant to
application made subsequent to the first day of any calendar year, in which
event the license shall be issued for the remaining period of the year, and
no license shall be issued for a period of more than one year. Unless
otherwise provided by law, all licenses issued hereunder shall be valid from
January 1 or the date of issuance, whichever comes later, to December 31 of
each year.



   (B)   For all licenses issued and in effect on or before June 30 of
each year, the full fee shall be paid. For all licenses issued on or after
July 1 of each year, the fee shall be 50% of the annual fee as hereinbefore
established. All license fees shall be paid to the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner at the time the application is made and shall be forthwith
turned over to the Village Treasurer. The required fee shall be submitted
with the application. If the license is granted, then the fee shall be
deposited in a general corporate fund or in such other funds as shall have
been designated by the Village Board of Trustees by proper action.



   (C)   Upon a business licensed under this chapter either:



      (1)   Closing or otherwise ceasing to do business; or



      (2)   Discontinuing or ceasing the sale of alcoholic liquor,
the liquor license issued to its licensee shall automatically terminate and
become null and void and the number of available liquor licenses authorized
in the classification (class) of the terminated license shall automatically
be reduced by one.



   (D)   Upon the sale, transfer, assignment or any other alienation of
any interest of any business licensed under this chapter, the liquor license
issued to its licensee shall automatically terminate and become null and void
and the number of available liquor licenses authorized in the classification
(class) of the terminated license shall automatically be reduced by one.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83; Am. Ord. 2274, passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. 2710,
passed 4-18-11)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.22  RENEWAL.



   Any licensee may apply to renew his license at the expiration thereof,
provided he is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which
such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purposes, and provided
further that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed
as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the President and Board of
Trustees of the village from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued
within the village.  However, when the number of applications made for a
liquor license, or for any class of license, exceeds the number of licenses
permitted under this chapter, prior licenses shall be given preference over
new applicants provided such prior licenses otherwise qualify for such
license.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)



§ 113.23  POSTING OF LICENSE.



   The license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be posted in a
prominent place within the licensed premises.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.24  CHANGE OF LOCATION.



   Licenses issued hereunder shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor
only in the premises described in the application for license.  Such
location may be changed only upon the written permit to make such change,
issued by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.  No change of location
shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the laws of the state and the
ordinances of this village.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.25  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   In addition to all other fines and penalties, the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner may suspend or revoke the retail liquor dealer’s
license for any violation of this chapter.



   (B)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may suspend for not more
than 30 days (ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 4-4) or may revoke for cause, any
license issued by him if he determines that the licensee has violated any of
the provisions of “the Liquor Control Act of 1934,” ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5,
1-1 et seq., as it now exists and may hereafter be amended or the provisions
of this chapter or any rule or regulation established by the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner or State Liquor Commissioner, which is not inconsistent
with law, all in the manner and as provided in ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 7-5.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)



§ 113.26  UNLAWFUL DENIAL OF USE OF ACCOMMODATIONS AND PRIVILEGES BY AGENTS
OR EMPLOYEES OF LICENSEE.



   No licensee under the provisions of this chapter shall deny or permit
his agents and employees to deny any person the full and equal enjoyment of
the accommodations, advantagements, facilities, and privileges on any
premises in which alcoholic liquors are authorized to be sold subject only to
the conditions and limitations established by law and applicable alike to all
citizens.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)  Penalty, see § 113.99



RETAIL SALES



§ 113.35  RESPONSIBILITY FOR PROPER OPERATION OF BUSINESS.



   The licensee and its associates, members, representatives, agents,
officers and employees, shall at all times be personally responsible for the
proper operation of the business, including compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and the observation of all laws and regulations applicable
thereto.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)



§ 113.36  HOURS OF SALES.



Note:   The normal hours of operation for a business within the village
are 7:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m. Establishments with operating hours outside of
these normal operating hours must be approved as a special use according to
the regulations of Article 3, Section E of the Zoning Ordinance. (Excerpted
from the Village of Frankfort Zoning Ordinance 2001, Article 6, Section C,
Part 2, paragraph q, Hours of Operation.)



   (A)   No licensee shall keep open or allow his or her place of
business to remain open or sell or offer for sale at retail, or offer to give
away on any licensed premises, any alcoholic liquor in the village between
the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. The sale of alcoholic liquors shall
cease immediately at the aforesaid hour of 1:00 a.m.



   (B)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may, in his or her
discretion, further reasonably restrict the above general hours during which
any licensee may keep open or allow his or her place of business to remain
open, or sell, offer for sale or give away any alcoholic liquor on any
licensed premises when, in the Local Liquor Control Commissioner's judgment,
a further restriction would be in the best interest of the public and the
village and in furtherance of the general welfare and safety thereof. Any
license so further restricted as to time shall, when issued, indicate on the
face thereof the hours during which the licensee thereunder may keep open or
allow his or her place of business to remain open as aforesaid.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83; Am. Ord. 2274, passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. 2545,
passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord. 2826, passed 1-7-13; Am. Ord. 2831, passed
2-19-13)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.37  CLOSING HOURS FOR LICENSED PREMISES.



   (A)   No member of the general public shall remain in or upon the
licensed premises after the hour of 1:00 a.m. Should any person be found upon
or leaving the licensed premises after the hour of 1:00 a.m., the village
shall have the right to presume that such person was served alcoholic liquor
after the hour of 1:00 a.m. and such presumption may be raised in any court
in a proceeding for violation of the terms of this chapter or at any hearing
concerning the revocation of the license issued to the licensee of the
premises in question. Further, with regard to any license restricted by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner to a closing time different than the
general hours set forth in § 113.36 hereof, the above and foregoing
provisions of this section shall apply and shall be construed to mean the
closing time indicated on said license which is so further restricted as to
time.



   (B)   Nothing in division (A) of this section shall apply to the
licensee, members of his or her family or his or her employees, agents or
servants if found upon or leaving the licensed premises after the hour of
1:00 a.m., nor shall division (A) of this section apply to premises which
have been granted a Class F-2 or F-3 or F-5 liquor license.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83; Am. Ord. 2274, passed 4-3-06; Am. Ord. 2826,
passed 1-7-13)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.38  PREMISES TO BE KEPT IN SANITARY CONDITION.



   All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or for the
storage of such liquor for such sale, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall be kept in full compliance with the ordinances regulating
the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human
consumption.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.39  CONTAGIOUS DISEASES AMONG EMPLOYEES.



   It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the sale of
alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier of any
contagious, infectious or venereal disease; and it shall be unlawful for any
person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such diseases to work in or
about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or
distribution of such liquor.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.40  USE OF SLOT MACHINES, PINBALL MACHINES, AND OTHER DEVICES.



   It shall be unlawful to keep, have, use or permit to be used in any
premises in the village, used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, any
slot machine, pinball machine, video game or other instrument device upon
which money is staked or hazarded or into which money is paid or played upon
chance, or upon the result of the action of which money or other valuable
thing is staked, bet, won or lost.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)  Penalty, see § 113.99



2009 S-15



§ 113.41  LIVE ENTERTAINMENT; UNDESIRABLE ELEMENTS OR DISORDERLY CONDUCT
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No live entertainment may be present upon any premises where
alcoholic liquor is sold or offered for sale at retail with the exception
that it may be permitted under Classes A-l, B-l, C, D-l, D-2, E, F, G, H I-1,
I-2, I-3, M, and N provided, however, that the applicant desiring to present
live entertainment at the time of the making of application hereunder for any
such class of license shall disclose on the application therefore, the fact
that such entertainment shall be presented, the type and nature of such
entertainment and shall pay an additional fee which shall be set from time to
time by the Board of Trustees.



   (B)   In the event the Liquor Commissioner shall in his sole
discretion desire to permit live entertainment on such premises, he shall so
indicate in writing and any such license issued shall on the face thereto
indicate that “live entertainment is permitted.”  In the event the
Liquor Commission shall in his sole discretion deny such application for live
entertainment, he shall so indicate in writing on the application and the
applicant shall be so advised within a reasonable period of time.



   (C)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, live entertainment on any
premises in the Frankfort Historical District shall, if permitted, be
restricted to the following days and times:



      (1)   On Wednesdays and Thursdays, live entertainment will be
permitted upon the premises of the licensee until 10:30 p.m.  On Friday and
Saturday live entertainment will be permitted until 1:00 a.m.



      (2)   On Sundays, live entertainment will be permitted upon
the premises of the licensee until 8:00 p.m.



      (3)   No live entertainment will be permitted in the Frankfort
Historical District on Mondays and Tuesdays; nor will live entertainment
heard from outside of the premises of the licensee be permitted on Sunday
evenings during presentation of Frankfort’s Concerts-on the-Green.



      (4)   Whenever live entertainment is permitted, the level of
noise shall not exceed 55 decibels prior to 10:30 p.m. and 45 decibels from
10:30 p.m. until time of closing.



      (5)   All public address systems broadcasting outdoors must be
turned off in conformity with the live entertainment.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83; Am. Ord. 1703, passed 6-1-98; Am. Ord. 2545,
passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord. 3039, passed 7-18-16; Am. Ord. 3063, passed
10-17-16; Am. Ord. 3126, passed 12-18-17)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.42  SALES NEAR CHURCHES, SCHOOL AND THE LIKE.



   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor within 100 feet of any church, school, other than an institution of
higher learning, hospital, home for the aged or indigent persons or for
veterans, their spouses or children or any military or naval station,
provided that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant
service, regularly organized clubs or to restaurants, food shops or other
places where sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried
on, if such place of business so exempted shall have been established for
such purposes prior to the taking effect of this chapter; nor to the renewal
of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within
100 feet of any church or school where such church or school shall be
measured to the nearest part of any building used for worship services or
educational programs and not to property boundaries.  Nothing in this
section shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a church or private
school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor if any such sales are limited to
periods when groups are assembled on the premises solely for the promotion of
some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.43  SALES IN CERTAIN PREMISES PROHIBITED.



   No license shall be issued for the purpose of selling or offering for
sale at retail any intoxicating liquor in any dwelling, house, flat or
apartment building.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.44  SALE TO MINORS OR INTOXICATED PERSONS; EXCEPTION.



   No licensee nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent
or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to
any person under the age of 21 years, or to any intoxicated person, or to any
person known by him to be a habitual drunkard, spendthrift, insane, mentally
ill, mentally deficient or in need of mental treatment.  No person after
purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor shall sell, give or
deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of 21 years,
except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.45  SEALING AND REMOVAL OF OPEN WINE BOTTLES.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a restaurant
licensed to sell alcoholic liquor in the village may permit a patron to
remove one unsealed and partially consumed bottle of wine for off- premise
consumption provided that the patron has purchased a meal and consumed a
portion of the bottle of wine with the meal on the restaurant premises. A
partially consumed bottle of wine that is so removed from the premises
pursuant to this section shall be securely sealed by the licensee or an agent
of the licensee prior to removal from the premises and placed in a
transparent one-time use tamper-proof bag. The licensee or agent of the
licensee shall provide a dated receipt for the bottle of wine to the patron.



(Ord. 2395, passed 6-18-07)  Penalty, see § 113.99



PERSONS 21 YEARS AND UNDER



§ 113.55  DISPLAY OF NOTICE.



   In every tavern or other place in the village where alcoholic liquor is
sold there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place a printed
card which shall read substantially as follows:



   WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 21



   It is unlawful for you to purchase alcoholic liquor or misrepresent
your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.56  PROHIBITING PERSONS UNDER AGE OF 21 TO REMAIN ON LICENSED
PREMISES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retail liquor
dealer’s license or his agent or employee, to suffer or permit any person
under the age of 21 to be or remain in any room or compartment adjoining or
adjacent to or situated in the room or place where such licensed premises is
located; provided that this division shall not apply to any person under the
age of 21 who is accompanied by his parent or guardian or to any licensed
premises which derives its principal business from the sale of other
commodities or services than the sale of alcoholic liquor.



   (B)   No licensee, nor any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of such licensee who knows, or in the
exercise of reasonable care should know, that a person under the age of 21
years possesses or is consuming alcoholic liquor while on the premises shall
allow such minor to remain on such premises.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83; Am. Ord. 1177, passed 4-6-87; Am. Ord. 1254,
passed 3-6-89; Am. Ord. 1703, passed 6-1-98) 



Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.57  WRITTEN EVIDENCE OF AGE AND IDENTITY REQUIRED.



   (A)   For the purpose of preventing violation of this chapter, any
licensee or his agent or employee may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic
liquor to any person who is unable to produce adequate written evidence of
identity or of the fact that he is over the age of 21 years.



   (B)   Adequate written evidence of age and identity of the person is
a document issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government or
subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not limited to a motor vehicle
operators license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal
Selective Service Act or an identification card issued to a member of the
armed forces.  Proof that the defendant, licensee or his employees or agent
demanded, was shown and reasonably relied upon such written evidence in any
transaction forbidden by this chapter is competent evidence and may be
considered in any prosecution therefor or to any proceedings for the
suspension or revocation of any license based thereon.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)



§ 113.58  MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE.



   (A)   Any person who sells, gives or furnishes to any person under
the age of 21 years, any false or fraudulent written, printed or photostatic
evidence of the age and identity of such person or who sells, gives or
furnishes to any person under the age of 21 years, evidence of age and
identification or any other person is guilty of a violation of this chapter.



   (B)   Any person under the age of 21 years who presents or offers to
any licensee, his agent or employee written, printed or photostatic evidence
of age and identity which is false, fraudulent or not actually his own, for
the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase or otherwise
procuring or attempting to procure serving of any alcoholic liquor or who has
in his possession any false or fraudulent written, printed or photostatic
evidence of age and identity is guilty of a violation of this chapter.



   (C)   Any person under the age of 21 years, who has any alcoholic
liquor in his possession on any street or highway or in any public place open
to the public is guilty of a violation of this chapter.  This does not apply
to a person under the age of 21 years making a delivery of alcoholic liquor
in pursuance of the order of his parent or in pursuance of his employment.



   (D)   Whoever violates provisions of this section shall be guilty of
a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.59  PURCHASE OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic
liquor is prohibited because of age shall not purchase or accept a gift of
such alcoholic liquor or have such alcoholic liquor in his possession.  If a
licensee or his agents or employees believes or has reason to believe that
the sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the
nonage of the prospective recipient, he shall before making such sale or
delivery demand presentation of some form of positive identification
containing proof of age.  No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an
identification card, use the identification card of another, carry or use a
false or forged identification  card or obtain an identification  by 
means of false  information.  No person  shall  purchase,  accept 
delivery or  have possession of alcoholic liquor in violation of this
section.  The consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person under the age of
21 years is forbidden.  Whoever violates provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a violation of this chapter.



   (B)   Possession and dispensing or consumption by a minor of
alcoholic liquor in a performance of a religious service or ceremony or the
consumption by a minor under the direct supervision and approval of the
parent or parents of such minor in the privacy of a home is not prohibited by
this section.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.60  TENDING BAR BY UNDERAGE PERSONS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to attend
any bar, dispense, draw, pour, mix or sell any alcoholic liquor in any
licensed retail premises.  It shall be unlawful for any licensee, officer,
member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee to allow any
person under the age of 21 to attend any bar, dispense, draw, pour, mix or
sell any alcoholic liquor in the licensed retail premises.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83; Am. Ord. 1263, passed 6-19-89; Am. Ord. 2822,
passed 12-3-12)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.61  SALE, GIFT OR DELIVERY TO MINOR.



   (A)   No licensee nor any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or
deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21 years, or to any
intoxicated person or to any person known by him to be under legal disability
or in need of mental treatment.



   (B)   No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic
liquor, shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person
under the age of 21 years, except in the performance of a religious ceremony
or service.



   (C)   Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic
liquor is prohibited because of age shall not purchase, or accept a gift of
such alcoholic liquor or have such alcoholic liquor in his possession.



(Ord. 1177, passed 4-6-87; Am. Ord. 1254, passed 3-6-89)



§ 113.62  POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL BY A GATHERING INCLUDING
MINOR AT RESIDENCE.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly permit a gathering at a residence
which he occupies of two or more persons where any one or more persons is 
under 21 years of age and the following factors also apply:



      (1)   The person occupying the residence knows that any such
person under the age of 21 is in possession of or is consuming any alcoholic
beverage;



      (2)   The possession or consumption of the alcohol by the
person under 21 years of age is not otherwise permitted by this chapter; or



      (3)   The person occupying the residence knows that the person
under the age of 21 leaves the residence in an intoxicated condition.



   (B)   It is unlawful for a parent or guardian to permit his or her
residence to be used by an invitee of the parents’ child or the
guardian’s ward, if the invitee is under the age of 21, in a manner that
constitutes a violation of this chapter.  A parent or guardian is deemed to
have permitted his or her residence to be used in violation of this chapter
if he or she knowingly authorizes, enables or permits such use to occur by
failing to control access to either the residence or the alcoholic liquor
maintained in the residence.  (Ord. 1177, passed 4-6-87; Am. Ord. 1254,
passed 3-6-89; Am. Ord. 1703, passed 6-1-98)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.63  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit any child
under the age of 21 of which he is parent or guardian, to violate any
provision of this chapter.



(Ord. 1177, passed 4-6-87; Am. Ord. 1254, passed 3-6-89)  Penalty, see §
113.99



FALL FESTIVAL



§ 113.75  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   Any holder or owner of a Class A, Class B, Class C, Class D, Class E,
Class G or Class H liquor license may apply for a permit to erect a
balustrade abutting, adjoining or contiguous with the premises operated by
the licensee subject to the following terms of this subchapter.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)



§ 113.76  APPLICATION FEE.



   An application under this subchapter shall be prepared and submitted by
a licensee as defined in this chapter and accompanied by a fee to be set by
the Board of Trustees, which shall be refunded if the application is denied.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)



§ 113.77  APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF APPLICATION.



   Subject to all applicable provisions of this chapter, the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner shall review and approve or deny any application.  If
approved, a permit incorporating the terms of this subchapter will be issued
to the licensee.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)



§ 113.78  DURATION.



   The licensee shall only be permitted to occupy the area which a
permitted balustrade during the days the Village Fall Festival is being held
or for such shorter time as the Local Liquor Control Commissioner deems
necessary.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)



§ 113.79  BALUSTRADES; CONSTRUCTION AND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The licensee, at its sole cost and expense, shall erect,
construct and maintain a balustrade or an area cordoned off from general
public use and access for the sole purpose of providing an area for the
public to consume alcoholic liquors during the Village Fall Festival.



   (B)   All balustrades shall meet all requirements for public safety,
including providing suitable ingress for Police Department, Fire Department
and other public safety personnel.



   (C)   A diagram of the area and its proposed construction and
location in relation to the licensed premises shall accompany the permit.



   (D)   If the balustrade is to be erected or constructed on a
sidewalk or other public way, the licensee shall not damage any public
property in constructing, erecting or maintaining the balustrade and shall
further provide the village with an endorsement for insurance insuring the
village for any and all liability which may be occasioned on the premises in
an amount not less than $500,000/$1,000,000 and also execute an agreement to
indemnify and hold the village harmless from all matters associated with the
use of the area enclosed by the balustrade.



   (E)   If the balustrade is proposed to be constructed on a sidewalk
or other public way, the area within the balustrade shall not exceed the
length of the sidewalk actually abutting the licensed premises times the
width of that sidewalk.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83; Am. Ord. 1703, passed 6-1-98)  Penalty, see §
113.99



§ 113.80  (RESERVED).



§ 113.81  OUTDOOR BEER GARDEN/CAFE CONSTRUCTION AND REQUIREMENTS.



   Any holder of a Class A, Class B, Class C, Class D, Class E or Class H
liquor license may apply to the Liquor Commissioner for a permit to serve
liquor in an outdoor beer garden/cafe adjoining or contiguous to the premises
operated by the licensee subject to the following conditions:



   (A)   The owner shall submit a site plan depicting the layout of the
outdoor beer garden/cafe, including ingress, egress and occupant load. 
Canopies, screening and/or tents shall meet the flame spread ratings required
by the code and shall be safely secured.  Permanent structures shall be
designed and constructed according to applicable village code.



   (B)   Screening, canopies and/or roof structures shall be maintained
in accordance with the 1996 BOCA National Property Maintenance Code.  By
October 31 of the permitting year, the owner shall remove all fixtures
“table, chairs etc.,” from the outdoor beer garden/cafe area and all
screening and/or canopies shall also be removed.



   (C)   All alcohol must be served by a waitress/waiter.



   (D)   No alcohol to be served before 11:30 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m.,
except Friday and Saturday when liquor may be served until 12:00 midnight.



   (E)   The outdoor beer garden/cafe must be closed by 11:00 p.m.,
except Friday and Saturday when closing shall be 12:00 midnight.  At 12:00
midnight, all tables and the cafe area must be cleaned by closing.



   (F)   Any Special Events using the outdoor beer garden/cafe or
alteration of business hours will require a Special Permit, which can be
obtained from the village, with concurrence from the Liquor Commissioner.



   (G)   An annual permit fee of $15 is required to operate an outdoor
beer garden/cafe.



   (H)   A Special Event fee of $15 per event is required for use of an
outdoor beer garden/cafe after 11:00 p.m. weekdays and 12:00 midnight Friday
and Saturday.  A Special Permit will also be required for any use of outdoor
cooking, (except regular weekend barbecues), group activities such as wedding
parties or any activity deemed by the village as not consistent with the
normal function of an outdoor cafe.



   (I)   No outdoor band or musical equipment is permitted without a
Special Event Permit.



   (J)   The beer garden is to be taken down no later than October 31
of the year in which the permit is issued.



   (K)   No permit for an outdoor beer garden/cafe shall be issued
until each proposed beer garden/cafe has been inspected and approved for use
by the village.



(Ord. 1703, passed 6-1-98; Am. Ord. 1900, passed 6-17-02)



ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 113.90  LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.



   The Village President is hereby designated the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner and is charged with the administration of this chapter and the
Liquor Control Act, ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 1-2, as the same now exists or
may be hereafter amended, and of such other ordinances and resolutions
relating to alcoholic liquor as may be needed.  The Village President may
appoint persons to assist him in the exercise of the power and performances
of the duties provided for such Local Liquor Control Commissioner.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)



§ 113.91  RECORDS OF LICENSES TO BE KEPT.



   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall keep or cause to be kept a
complete record of all such licenses issued by him and shall furnish the
Village Clerk, the Village Treasurer and the Chief of Police each with a copy
thereof upon the issuance of any new license and shall notify each of the
said officers, in writing, upon the issuance of any new licenses or
revocation of any old licenses, within 24 hours of its issuance or revocation.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)



§ 113.92  RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION.



   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner is hereby given the power to
enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time upon any
premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of
this chapter, “An act relating to alcoholic liquor,” ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5,
§§ 1-1 et seq., or any rules or regulations adopted by him or by the State
Liquor Commissioner have been or are being violated and at such time to
examine the premises of said licensee in connection therewith.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)



§ 113.93  HEARINGS BEFORE LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.



   Any hearing before the Local Liquor Control Commissioner is transcribed
by a certified court or shorthand reporter.  Any appeal of the decision of
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall be based solely on the record
from said hearing and not a de novo review of the case.



(Ord. 1703, passed 6-1-98)



§ 113.98  VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership or
club to sell or offer for sale at retail within the village any alcoholic
liquor without having a retail liquor dealers license, or in violation of the
terms of such license or in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83)  Penalty, see § 113.99



§ 113.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, in addition to suspension or revocation of
license as provided in this chapter, be fined not more than $750 for each
offense.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
and on which a violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 1105, passed 12-5-83; Am. Ord. 1177, passed 4-6-87; Am. Ord. 1254,
passed 3-6-89; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02)



   (B)   In addition to and not in lieu of any other remedies available
to the village under § 113.18(C), any person or entity found to have
violated any provision of § 113.18(C) shall be fined not less than $250 nor
more than $750, with each day of violation constituting a separate offense. 
(Ord. 2745, passed 10-3-11)



   (C)   In addition to and not in lieu of any other remedies available
to the village under § 113.18(E), any person or entity found to have
violated any provision of § 113.18(E) shall be fined not less than $250, not
more than $500, with each day of violation constituting a separate offense. 
(Ord. 2726, passed 6-20-11)



   (D)   In addition to and not in lieu of any other remedies available
to the village under § 113.20, any person or entity found to have violated
any provision of § 113.20 shall be fined not less than $250, not more than
$750, with each day of violation constituting a separate offense.  (Ord.
2800, passed 8-20-12; Am. Ord. 2932, passed 7-21-14)



   (E)   Any business or person found to have violated any provision of
§§ 113.20.1 or 113.21 shall be fined not less than $250 for the first
offense and not less than $500 for each subsequent offense.  (Ord. 2710,
passed 4-18-11)



CHAPTER 114:  PERSONAL PROPERTY SALES



Section



   114.01   Intent



   114.02   Permit required



   114.03   Application for permit



   114.04   Permit fee



   114.05   Conditions for issuance of permit



   114.06   Permit required for all sales at resident’s address



   114.07   Number of sales permitted



   114.08   Duration of permit



   114.09   Display of permit



   114.10   Sale of items to belong to occupant of premises



   114.11   Garage sale signs



   114.12   Right of inspection; arrest authority of inspector



 



   114.99   Penalty



§ 114.01  INTENT.



   It is the intent  of this chapter to regulate the term and frequency
of a personal property sale so as not to disturb or disrupt the residential
environment of the area.  It is not the intent of this chapter to seek
control of private sales by individuals selling a few of their household or
personal items which are sold at the residence.



(Ord. 1112, passed 3-19-84)



§ 114.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Any person or organization desirous of holding a public auction or a
personal property sale, which includes but is not limited to garage,
basement, yard and porch sale, for the sale or resale of used household,
clothing or any other personal property items which are owned all or in part
by the occupants of the premises, shall  prior to such sale obtain a permit
from the village.



(Ord. 1112, passed 3-19-84)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.03  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   A village resident shall apply for the permit with the Village Zoning
Enforcement Officer on forms furnished by the village.



(Ord. 1112, passed 3-19-84)



§ 114.04  PERMIT FEE.



   Each application for a permit shall be submitted with a permit fee to
be set by the Board of Trustees.  The application fee covers charges
associated with processing the application to determine if a permit should be
issued.



(Ord. 1112, passed 3-19-84)



§ 114.05  CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The village will issue a sale permit only upon proper showing
and finding by the village that all safety and environmental precautions
necessary or convenient for such sale have been met.



   (B)   The applicant shall agree to abide by all conditions imposed
by the village as enumerated in this chapter.



(Ord. 1112, passed 3-19-84)



§ 114.06  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ALL SALES AT RESIDENT’S ADDRESS.



   A permit is required for all sales.  Permits are issued to a resident
of the village, which permits the sale at the resident’s address.



(Ord. 1112, passed 3-19-84)



§ 114.07  NUMBER OF SALES PERMITTED.



   No sale shall be conducted nor will a sale permit be issued within 90
days from the last permitted sale date on the premises.



(Ord. 1112, passed 3-19-84)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.08  DURATION OF PERMIT.



   Permits are valid for any two consecutive days between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.  No permits will be issued allowing sales during the
Labor Day - Village Fall Festival weekend.



(Ord. 1112, passed 3-19-84)



§ 114.09  DISPLAY OF PERMIT.



   Permits shall be conspicuously displayed on the sale premises so as to
be seen by the public and village officials and employees.  (Ord. 1112,
passed 3-19-84)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.10  SALE OF ITEMS TO BELONG TO OCCUPANT OF PREMISES.



   The items to be sold must, for the most part, be owned by the occupant
of the sale premises.  However, the sale may include property owned by other
participating village residents.



(Ord. 1112, passed 3-19-84)



§ 114.11  GARAGE SALE SIGNS.



   (A)   Upon issuance of the sale permit the village will furnish the
applicant three garage sale signs.  No other signs may be displayed within
the corporate limits of the village.



   (B)   Garage sale signs shall not be displayed more than one day
prior to the commencement of the sale and must be removed no later than one
day following the conclusion of the permitted sale.



   (C)   One of the signs shall be displayed at the front lot line on
the premises on which the sale is conducted.



   (D)   No signs shall be placed on village property at the
intersections of U.S. Route 45 and Route 30, U.S. Route 45 and White Street,
or White Street and Nebraska Street.  No signs shall be placed in the
village flower beds. 



(Ord. 1112, passed 3-19-84)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.12  RIGHT OF INSPECTION; ARREST AUTHORITY OF INSPECTOR.



   A police officer or any official designated by any village ordinance to
make inspections under the licensing or regulating ordinance or to enforce
the same, shall have the right of entry to any premises showing evidence of a
personal property sale for the purpose of enforcement or inspection and may
close the premises from such a sale or arrest any person who violates any
provision of this chapter.



(Ord. 1112, passed 3-19-84)



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   Any individual, partnership, firm, corporation or organization
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, in addition to
revocation of license as above provided, be fined not less than $25 nor more
than $750 for each offense.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during and on which a violation occurs or continues.



(Ord. 1112, passed 3-19-84; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02)



CHAPTER 115: SOLICITORS, HAWKERS, AND PEDDLERS; CHARITABLE SOLICITATION



Section



Peddlers, Solicitors and Canvassers



   115.01   Definitions



   115.02   License required



   115.03   Registration of peddlers and solicitors of books,
periodicals and publications



   115.04   Application for peddlers solicitors and canvassers



   115.05   Term of license



   115.06   Limit of one license per calendar year



   115.07   Investigation; denial of permit



   115.08   Fraud



   115.09   Hours of operation



   115.10   Notice regulating soliciting, peddling and canvassing



   115.11   Signs at village limits



   115.12   Licenses and identification badges



   115.13   Revocation



   115.14   No soliciting on a public way



Charitable Solicitation; Tag Days



   115.25   Definitions



   115.26   Tag days rules and regulations



   115.27   Requirements for the charitable organization



   115.28   Filing of application



   115.29   Verification of statement concerning receipts and
distributions of money required



   115.30   Identification; uniform and insignia; coin container



   115.31   Obstructing traffic while soliciting funds prohibited



   115.32   Tag day permit required



Charitable Game Events



   115.40   Registration and application for license



   115.41   License process



   115.42   Event license



 



   115.99   Penalty



PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND CANVASSERS



§ 115.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING ENTITY.  Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation who
has or engages peddler, solicitor or canvasser in its behalf.



   CANVASSER.  Any person, business entity, firm or corporation, who goes
to residential dwelling units, without prior appointment or pre-arrangement
to meet with persons, firms, or corporations for the purpose of soliciting
funds or donations of property, or for conducting surveys, or for conducting
polls or for obtaining endorsements for any product or service.



   PEDDLER.  Any person, business entity, firm or corporation, who goes
to residential dwelling units without prior appointment or prearrangement to
at retail sell, offer for sale, sell and deliver, barter or exchange any
goods, products or services. It shall not include a serviceman who is
responding to a prior call.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or entity who
is 16 years of age.



   SOLICITOR.  Any person, business entity, firm or corporation, who goes
to residential dwelling units without prior appointment of pre-arrangement
with the customer, to take orders for future delivery at retail of any
merchandise, or other article, or thing, or any service.



(Ord. 1412, passed 4-19-93)



§ 115.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No business entity or person shall cause or engage in the business or
activity of a peddler, solicitor, or canvasser within the village without
first obtaining a license therefore as provided in this subchapter; provided
that no such license shall be required for peddlers and solicitors dealing
only in books, periodicals and publications, however, such persons shall be
registered as provided in § 115.03. The fee for such licenses shall be as
from time to time established by the President and Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 1412, passed 4-19-93)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.03  REGISTRATION OF PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS OF BOOKS, PERIODICALS AND
PUBLICATIONS.



   No business entity or person shall engage in the business or activity
of a peddler or solicitor of books, periodicals and publications within the
village without first registering with the village police department. Such
registration shall include the name, address, social security and driver’s
license numbers of such person, the name and address of the employer and
supervisor of such person, the name and address of the publisher and the
names of the books, periodicals and publications involved. Such registration
shall be valid for a period of not more than three consecutive days. The
times for such activities are regulated by § 115.09



(Ord. 1412, passed 4-19-93)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.04  APPLICATION FOR PEDDLERS SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS.



   (A)   An application for a peddler’s, solicitor’s, or
canvasser’s license shall be made by each business entity, as well as each
person causing, or intending to solicit, peddle, or canvass within the
village to the village police department in conformity with the general
requirements of this code and any other ordinances of the village relating to
the application for license.



   (B)   The application herein required shall be fully completed and
signed under oath and contain the following information:



      (1)   Business entity application.  The application for the
business entity which shall be completed under oath and signed by an officer
or executive shall include:



         (a)   Full name, address, telephone number of the
business entity;



         (b)   Number of years in existence;



         (c)   Names, addresses and titles of all officers of the
entity;



         (d)   Whether the business entity is a charitable
organization and, if so, whether it is recognized as such by the Internal
Revenue Service and the state;



         (e)   Name, address and telephone numbers of persons
representing the entity who will directly supervise the peddlers, canvassers,
or solicitors in the village;



         (f)   A description of the merchandise, or goods to be
peddled, or offered for sale, or order, or the purpose and nature of the
materials to be canvassed;



         (g)   Whether a license to the business entity has ever
been suspended, or revoked;



         (h)   A written representation by the business entity,
that it has instructed persons conducting the peddling, soliciting, and
canvassing on its behalf not to perform such activities at any residence or
business which has a sign posted in the following or similar words, “No
Solicitors,” “No Solicitors, Peddlers, or Canvassers;”



         (i)   Name, address, telephone, social security and
driver’s license number and the date of birth of all persons who will be
conducting the solicitation, canvassing or peddling on behalf of the business
entity in the village;



         (j)   A written statement which is specifically
designated to be relied upon by the village and its residents that within a
month prior to submitting its application the business entity has personally
and fully conducted an investigation on the background of each person the
entity purposes to conduct the canvas, solicitation, or peddling on its
behalf and that each person is a law abiding person of good moral character
and has not been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within ten
years from the date of this application; and



         (k)    Six consecutive days the business entity would
like to solicit in the village:



            1.   1st choice;



            2.   2nd choice;



            3.   3rd choice;



            with no date less than seven days from the date the
completed application is submitted.



      (2)   Application for individual.



         (a)   The application for the person who will peddle,
solicit or canvass shall be completed and signed under oath by the applicant
and shall include:



            1.   The name, address, date of birth, social
security and driver’s license number of the applicant;



            2.   The name, address and telephone number of the
applicant’s employer and the name and address of applicant’s supervisor;



            3.   The kind of merchandise, or goods to be
peddled, or offered for sale, or order, or the purpose and nature of the
matters to be canvassed;



            4.   The number and description, including make,
model and license plate numbers of vehicles, if any, intended to be operated
in the village by the person in the course of soliciting, canvassing or
peddling;



            5.   The name of all cities, villages or towns
where applicant has engaged in peddling, soliciting or canvassing within the
state;



            6.   Whether the applicant, or his or her
employer, principal or the entity which is represented by the applicant, has
ever had a peddler’s, solicitor’s, or canvasser’s license revoked
and/or been convicted of violating any statute or ordinance relating to the
same;



            7.   Whether applicant has ever been convicted of
a felony or crime of moral turpitude, including fraud, forgery, theft or
deceptive practices, and if so, the case disposition, case number, offense
charges, offense convicted of and date and place of such conviction, and



            8.   An acknowledgment there shall be no
canvassing, peddling or soliciting at any business or residence which has
signs posted in the following or similar words: “No Solicitors,” or “No
Solicitors, Peddlers, or Canvassers.”



         (b)   The applicant, if not working in conjunction with
a business entity, shall state the exact specific consecutive dates the
applicant desires to peddle, solicit or canvass, not in excess of three
consecutive days, and the license, if issued, shall be limited to only those
dates specified.



(Ord. 1412, passed 4-19-93)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.05  TERM OF LICENSE.



   All licenses issued to business entities and persons hereunder shall be
a specified term of consecutive days, not to exceed six consecutive days.



(Ord. 1412, passed 4-19-93)



§ 115.06  LIMIT OF ONE LICENSE PER CALENDAR YEAR.



   Not more than one peddler’s, solicitor’s or canvasser’s license
shall be issued to any person, or business entity during any calendar year.
Any license issued under this subchapter shall be non transferable.



(Ord. 1412, passed 4-19-93)



§ 115.07  INVESTIGATION; DENIAL OF PERMIT.



   No license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a
felony or any offense which involved fraud, forgery, moral turpitude, theft
or deceit within the last ten years.



(Ord. 1412, passed 4-19-93)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.08  FRAUD.



   It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or canvasser to cheat,
deceive or fraudulently misrepresent, whether through himself or through an
employee or agent, while acting as a peddler, solicitor or canvasser in the
village, or to barter, sell or peddle any goods, merchandise or wares or to
solicit funds, take surveys or polls other than those specified in his
application for a license.



(Ord. 1412, passed 4-19-93)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.09  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   No soliciting, peddling or canvassing shall be permitted before the
hour of 10:00 a.m., or after the hour of 8:00 p.m. within the village.



(Ord. 1412, passed 4-19-93)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.10  NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING, PEDDLING AND CANVASSING.



   (A)   The occupant of any premises shall give notice to the licensee
of the determination not to allow any solicitors, peddlers or canvassers in
the following manner; a weatherproof notice, at least three inches by four
inches in size, shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the
residence indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the
following or similar words:



   “NO SOLICITORS, OR PEDDLERS OR CANVASSERS ALLOWED”



   (B)   The letters of this notice shall be at least 1/3 inch in
height. For the purpose of uniformity, the notices shall be provided by the
Village Clerk to persons so requesting, at the cost thereof. Such notices so
exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor, peddler, or
canvasser of the determination of the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.



   (C)   It shall be a violation of the subchapter for any business
entity or person, whether licensed or not, to engage in the activities of
peddling, soliciting or canvassing at any residence displaying the aforesaid
notice in conformity with the provisions herein.



(Ord. 1412, passed 4-19-93)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.11  SIGNS AT VILLAGE LIMITS.



   The Superintendent of Streets is directed to post and maintain
appropriate signs at the limits of the village with the following language:



   “SOLICITORS, PEDDLERS AND CANVASSERS AND CONTRACTORS MUST BE LICENSED
AND REGISTERED AT THE FRANKFORT MUNICIPAL BUILDING”



(Ord. 1412, passed 4-19-93)



§ 115.12  LICENSES AND IDENTIFICATION BADGES.



   A copy of the license issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be
carried with the licensee while he or she is engaged in peddling, soliciting
or canvassing within the village.



(Ord. 1412, passed 4-19-93)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.13  REVOCATION.



   Any such license or registration may be revoked by the Village
President because of any violation of this subchapter, or whenever the
licensee or registrant shall cease to possess the qualifications required in
this subchapter for the original license or registration. Upon receipt of
information that the licensee has violated this subchapter or no longer
possesses the requisite qualifications to be licensed hereunder, the Village
President shall immediately revoke the license and give the licensee written
notice by certified mail of such suspension. The notice shall contain a
statement of the facts upon which the Village President has acted in revoking
the permit. The licensee shall have the right to demand a hearing to be held
within five business days of the village’s receipt of the licensee’s
demand for hearing. Upon the filing of such a demand with the Village Clerk,
the Village President shall affix a time and place for hearing. At the
hearing the licensee, and any other interested person, shall have the right
to present evidence as to the facts upon which the Village President based
the suspension of the license, and any other facts which may aid the Village
President in determining whether this subchapter has been violated. If, after
such hearing, the Village President finds that the subchapter has been
violated, or the information set forth in the application has been
misrepresented, he shall within two days after the hearing file with the
Village Clerk for public inspection and serve upon the licensee, and all
interested persons participating in the hearing, a written statement of the
facts upon which he bases such finding and shall immediately revoke the
permit. If, after such hearing the Village President finds that the
subchapter has not been violated or the information has not been
misrepresented, he shall within two days after the hearing give to the
licensee a written statement canceling the suspension of the license.



(Ord. 1412, passed 4-19-93)



§ 115.14  NO SOLICITING ON A PUBLIC WAY.



   No person, including any solicitor, hawker, or peddler, shall sell,
barter, give away, offer for sale or gift any item of personal property, or
otherwise engage in any “soliciting” as defined in this chapter, on,
along, about, upon, or within any right-of-way of any street corner,
intersection, highway, roadway, street, alley, or any other public way,
unless approved as a charitable organization Tag Day as defined in this
chapter.



(Ord. 1816, passed 7-17-00)



CHARITABLE SOLICITATION; TAG DAYS



§ 115.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.   As that same term is defined in ILCS Ch.
225, Act 460, § 1, or a not-for-profit organization incorporated pursuant to
ILCS Ch. 805, Act 110 § 0.01 and ILCS Ch. 805, Act 110 § 35, or any other
organization that has been granted tax exempt status from the state or the
Internal Revenue Service.



   CHARITABLE PURPOSE.  As that same term is defined in 225 ILCS 460/1,
and as that term is construed by the state courts under such statute.  For
the purpose of this subchapter, solicitation for a charitable purpose shall
include solicitation for or on behalf of a charitable organization, as that
term is defined herein.



   PERSON.  Any individual, organization,, group, association,
partnership, corporation, trust or any combination of them.



   TAG DAY.  Those days on which it shall be lawful for charitable
organizations to solicit funds for charitable purposes upon the public ways
of the village by means of distributing emblems, selling flowers or tags to
people who have contributed to such funds.



(Ord. 1412, passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 2874, passed 10-21-13)



§ 115.26  TAG DAYS RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Village Board of Trustees shall formulate such reasonable
rules and regulations for Tag Days as it deems necessary for the purpose of
carrying out the provisions of this subchapter and controlling the conduct of
any such tag day.



   (B)   Tag days shall be limited to the following:



      (1)   There shall be only one charitable organization tag day
conducted on any given day.



      (2)   Tag days are governed by the Village Board.  There
shall be only 18 tag permits issued per calendar year.  Applications must be
submitted to the office of the Village President, or his or her designee.



(Ord. 1412, passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 1545, passed 12-4-95; Am. Ord. 2955,
passed 12-1-14)



§ 115.27  REQUIREMENTS FOR THE CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.



   No charitable organization shall conduct, participate, engage or share
in the proceeds of any tag day until it conforms to the following
requirements:



   (A)   The charitable organization fully complies with all rules and
regulations established in “An act to regulate solicitation and collection
of funds for charitable purposes, providing violation thereof, in making
appropriation therefore” as it now exists or may hereafter be amended (ILCS
Ch. 225, Act 460, §§ 1 et seq.) and that by making an application for tag
day such charitable organization specifically acknowledges and represents
that it has fully complied with the act.



   (B)   The charitable organization has actually engaged in a
charitable purpose for not less than one year prior to the filing of its
application. This division does not apply to religious corporations, trusts
or organizations established for religious purposes or to other religious
agencies or organizations which serve religion by the preservation or
religious rights or freedom from prosecution or prejudice by fostering
religion.



   (C)   The charitable organization shall be from the village or
affiliated with a local chapter or group.



   (D)   The charitable organization shall agree to cooperate and shall
cooperate with all of the charitable organizations in promoting efficiency of
amounts and charitable work with a view to prevent duplication of effort and
waste of funds collected.



   (E) If applicable, the charitable organization may be required to
submit to the Village Board of Trustees in connection with any application
for tag days a statement showing its receipts and disbursements for one year
immediately preceding its application and that any application shall be
verified by an officer of the charitable organization.



   (F)   It shall not employ paid solicitors in connection with the tag
day.  All solicitors shall be 18 years of age or more, unless accompanied by
an adult 21 years of age or greater; however, no solicitor on a roadway shall
be less than 16 years of age.



   (G)   In connection with its application for tag day, the charitable
organization shall submit a certificate of insurance in the amount of not
less than $1,000,000 per claim and $2,000,000 per occurrence, indemnifying,
and holding the village harmless for negligent acts of the organization’s
solicitors resulting in injuries to any person or property during the
solicitation which is causally related to an act of ordinary negligence of
the soliciting agent and naming the village as additionally insured.



   (H)   In the event that any charitable organization is unable to
obtain a permit to solicit in the village for the purpose of collecting tag
day revenues, the affected charitable organization may appeal the village’s
determination to request their tag day application.  Appeal must be made to
the Village President within five days of formal written rejection of any tag
day application.  The ruling of the Village President is final and no
further redress will be available.



(Ord. 1412, passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 1545, passed 12-4-95; Am. Ord. 2874,
passed 10-21-13; Am. Ord. 2955, passed 12-1-14)



§ 115.28  FILING OF APPLICATION.



   Applications shall include the name, address and local telephone number
of the applying organization and the name of the local contact person. 
Applications should be submitted to the Office of the Village at least 30
days prior to the day of the proposed tag day. No more than one tag day
permit shall be issued for any given day. If more than one application is
received for the same day, the Village President or designee shall give
preference to an organization based in or having more significant contacts
with the village.



(Ord. 1412, passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 1545, passed 12-4-95; Am. Ord. 2955,
passed 12-1-14)



§ 115.29  VERIFICATION OF STATEMENT CONCERNING RECEIPTS AND DISTRIBUTIONS
OF MONEY REQUIRED.



   Within 60 days after the date of any tag day such charitable
organization may be required to file a statement with the village of all
receipts and distributions of money derived from said tag day with such
statement to be verified by an officer of such charitable organization.



(Ord. 1412, passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 2955, passed 12-1-14)



§ 115.30  IDENTIFICATION; UNIFORM AND INSIGNIA; COIN CONTAINER.



   (A)   Every person who solicits funds on behalf of such charitable
organization on such tag day shall wear a uniform or article of clothing
which by its nature or design informs the general public of the identity of
the organization soliciting the funds or shall wear or carry such emblem,
button, insignia or sign that fully and completely informs the public
identity of such organization.  Each solicitor must wear brightly colored,
highly reflective outer clothing.  In addition, the name of the charitable
organization should be clearly marked on the container used to collect coins
or currency.



   (B)   All solicitors are encouraged to wear safety vests that are in
accordance with Illinois Department of Transportation standards.



   (C)   Solicitation organizations shall be responsible for cleaning
the area when finished.



(Ord. 1412, passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 1545, passed 12-4-95; Am. Ord. 2874,
passed 10-21-13; Am. Ord. 2955, passed 12-1-14)  Penalty § 115.99



§ 115.31  OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC WHILE SOLICITING FUNDS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person soliciting funds on behalf of any organization shall
willfully or unnecessarily hinder, obstruct or delay or willfully or
unnecessarily attempt to hinder, obstruct or delay any other person in the
lawful driving or traveling along or upon any street, throughway or any
pedestrian of any public way within the village.



   (B)   No solicitation shall occur on roadways or intersections with
posted speed limits of greater than 35 mph.



   (C)   Solicitation is allowed only at Village of Frankfort Police
Department approved locations. Solicitation at the approved location shall
occur only at intersections. All permitted intersections must have stop signs
for all directions. No solicitation will be permitted at signal-controlled
intersections. This list will be furnished to all applicants upon request of
application for permit.



   (D)   Permits shall only apply to village roadways. Permission is
not authorized, granted, nor implied for state or county roadways.



   (E)   The village encourages solicitation to be off the traveled
roadway.  If soliciting on the roadway, traffic shall already be stopped
before solicitation may initiate and shall immediately cease when traffic is
moving.  The use of attention getting devices, flagmen or traffic control
devices is prohibited.



   (F)   Organizations are encouraged to post temporary, breakaway
style signs 500 feet prior to solicitation area indicating “Charitable
Organization 500 Ft Ahead”; the board should indicate the name of the
organization.



   (G)   Solicitation shall be in accordance with the hours granted by
permit and will only be allowed during daylight hours.  State, county or
local law enforcement officers or representatives of the Department of
Transportation may suspend or revoke solicitation operations at any time if
any condition of the permit is violated or if, in the judgment of law
enforcement officers or at the village’s sole discretion, due to weather,
if traffic is being impeded or delayed or the public safety is at risk.



(Ord. 1412, passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 2874, passed 10-21-13; Am. Ord. 2955,
passed 12-1-14)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.32  TAG DAY PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall solicit funds or offer merchandise for sale in the
public way without a tag day permit.



(Ord. 1412, passed 4-19-93)  Penalty, see § 115.99



CHARITABLE GAME EVENTS



§ 115.40  REGISTRATION AND APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   At least 35 days prior to the scheduled date of the event, any
not-for-profit charitable organization proposing to conduct an event under
the Charitable Games Act, ILCS Ch. 230, Act 30, §§ 1 et seq., shall file
with the Village of Frankfort Police Department a fully completed copy of its
State of Illinois Department of Revenue Application to conduct charitable
games file-stamped by the State of Illinois and as necessary supplemented to
include the following information and submittals:



      (1)   The name, address, phone number, email address of the
charitable organization conducting the charitable game event;



      (2)   The name, address, home, business and cell phone numbers
and email address of the contact person for the charitable organization who
is principally responsible for the event;



      (3)   A copy of the application filed by the charitable
organization with the State of Illinois under  ILCA Ch. 230, Act 30, §§ 1
et seq.;



      (4)   A copy of the license issued by the State of Illinois
authorizing a charitable games event for the planned date of the event;



      (5)   The date of the event;



      (6)   The name, address and phone number of the venue where
the event will be held, the time the event will commence and conclude;



      (7)   Information concerning event security;



      (8)   Information concerning traffic control and vehicular
parking; and



      (9)   Acknowledgment that the charitable organization will
fully comply with all applicable requirements under ILCS Ch. 230, Act 30,
§§ 1 et seq., the Village of Frankfort liquor control ordinances and all
other applicable laws and ordinances.



   (B)   These submittals will constitute the charitable organization's
Village of Frankfort event registration and license application.



(Ord. 2696, passed 2-22-11)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.41  LICENSE PROCESS.



   (A)   Within ten business days from submittal, the village shall
review and determine if the application is compete and that security, traffic
control and vehicular parking is adequate for the event. Upon such
determination the village shall:



      (1)   Issue the license; or



      (2)   If the application is incomplete or inadequate and after
consultation with the applicant and an opportunity to correct the
deficiencies, deny the license and specify the reason(s) for denial.



   (B)   If a license is denied, the applicant has the right, within
five business days of written notice of the declination, to file a written
appeal of the denial to the Village Board, who will make a formal
determination after the applicant has been afforded the opportunity for a
hearing before the Village Administrator  and received a summary of the
hearing.



(Ord. 2696, passed 2-22-11)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.42  EVENT LICENSE.



   In addition to complying with all other requirements imposed by law, no
not-for-profit charitable organization shall conduct a charitable games event
subject to the requirements of  ILCS Ch. 230, Act 30, §§ 1 et seq. without
a license issued by the Village of Frankfort.



(Ord. 2696, passed 2-22-11)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, business entity, firm or corporation violating the
provisions of §§ 115.02 through 115.13 shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $750 for each violation, and each day such violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense.



(Ord. 1412, passed 4-19-93; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02)



   (B)   Any business or person found to have violated any provision of
§§ 115.40 through 115.42 shall be fined not less than $250 for the first
offense and not less than $500 for each subsequent offense. (Ord. 2696,
passed 2-22-11)



CHAPTER 116:  SEXUAL CONDUCT IN BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



   116.01   Definitions



   116.02   Underwear modeling



   116.03   Prohibited contact



   116.04   Revocation or suspension hearing



 



   116.99   Penalty



§ 116.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   NUDITY.  Exposure of any of the following parts of the human body to
any person: male or female genital, pubic hair, buttocks, anus or anal
cleavage, female breasts below the top of the areola or the employment of any
device or covering which is intended to give the impression of or stimulate
such parts of the male or female anatomy.



   SEXUAL CONDUCT.  Any conduct by a person intended to induce any other
person or engage in any act of sexual contact, including sexual intercourse,
oral or anal intercourse or masturbation.



   SEXUAL CONTACT.  The touching of the female breasts, male or female
genitals, anus or anal cleavage, by any person whether male or female.



   UNDERWEAR.  Any article or item of clothing designed to be worn by a
male or female as an undergarment, including, but not limited to, lingerie,
underpants, teddies, g-strings, panties, brassieres, bustiers, bikinis and
swim wear.



(Ord. 1485, passed 12-5-94)



§ 116.02  UNDERWEAR MODELING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, including a corporation, joint
venture or partnership, to model underwear in any business establishment or
to own or operate a business establishment where underwear is modeled or worn
without any covering by exterior clothing. This prohibition shall not apply
to clothing stores, boutiques, department stores and such other
establishments whose primary business purpose is the wholesale or retail sale
of clothing apparel.



(Ord. 1485, passed 12-5-94)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.03  PROHIBITED CONTACT.



   No employee, agent, independent contractor or patron shall appear nude
in any business establishment. No employee, agent, independent contractor or
patron shall participate in any sexual contact in any business establishment.
No employee, agent, independent contractor or patron shall engage in any
sexual conduct within any business establishment. It shall be unlawful for
any manager of any business establishment to allow any nudity, sexual conduct
or sexual contact to occur within any business establishment.



(Ord. 1485, passed 12-5-94)  Penalty, see § 116.99



§ 116.04  REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION HEARING.



   (A)   When the Village President becomes aware of any violation of
this chapter, he or she may call a hearing to determine whether the license
issued to a particular establishment should be revoked or suspended. If a
hearing is called the Village President will act as a hearing officer and the
person named as the owner or manager of the establishment on the license
application form shall be notified by certified mail of the date of the
hearing and the nature of the charges lodged against the establishment, its
agents or employees, which constitute the violations of this chapter. The
hearing shall not occur less than seven days nor more than 21 days after
service of the notice upon the owner or the manager of the establishment. At
that hearing the village, through its Village Attorney or Village Prosecutor,
and the owner or the manager of the establishment may present evidence
relevant to the question as to whether a violation did occur. Evidence shall
be presented as provided by law. If the village proves by a preponderance of
the evidence that the violation took place as charged, the Village President
shall determine whether the license should be suspended or revoked. If
suspension or revocation is ordered, it shall begin immediately upon
notification to the owner or manager of the establishment. Such notice shall
be given within seven days after a hearing has been completed.



   (B)   If the Village President suspends or revokes the license, the
licensee may file in the Circuit Court of Will County for an administrative
review of that decision as provided for in the Illinois Administrative Review
Act.



   (C)   If the license is revoked, the licensee shall not be eligible
to apply for a license to perform the same business activity at the
establishment until the next license year.



(Ord. 1485, passed 12-5-94)



§ 116.99  PENALTY.



   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense and
shall be subject to revocation or suspension of the business license for that
establishment as provided for in § 116.04. Each separate act which can
constitute a violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be a separate act
for the purpose of imposing a fine or penalty under this provision.



(Ord. 1485, passed 12-5-94; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02)



CHAPTER 117: LONG-TERM CARE FACILITIES



Section



   117.01   Definitions



   117.02   License required



   117.03   License application and procedures



   117.04   Inspections



   117.05   Notice to the state



   117.06   Security requirements



   117.07   Persons prohibited from residing or working in facilities



   117.08   State law



   117.09   Suspension and revocation



 



   117.99   Penalty



§ 117.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the definitions contained in the
Nursing Home Care Act (ILCS Ch. 210, Act 45 §§ 1-101 et seq.) shall apply
unless the context otherwise requires.



(Ord. 2246, passed 12-5-05)



§ 117.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No facility shall operate without a State of Illinois license.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to establish, operate or maintain a
long-term care facility without a valid long-term care facility license from
the Village. The village shall use the same licensing classifications as the
State, and a facility may not be licensed for a different classification by
the village than by the State.



   (C)   Village licenses shall be renewed annually and shall be valid
for a period of 12 months from the date of issuance. Applications for renewal
must be submitted at least 90 days prior to the expiration date of the
existing license.



(Ord. 2246, passed 12-5-05)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.03  LICENSE APPLICATION AND PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Each long term care facility applicant shall submit a
completed application form and such information as required by the Village
Clerk. (See Appendix A.) The application shall contain the following
information:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant.



      (2)   The name and address of the facility for which a license
is sought.



      (3)   A full and complete copy of the application for
licensure filed with the Illinois Department of Public Health, including all
attachments and required submittals.



      (4)   A copy of the license issued for the facility by the
Illinois Department of Public Health.



      (5)   A census of current facility employees by number,
experience and training.



      (6)   A census of current residents by age, diagnoses and
treatment with psychoactive medications.



      (7)   Such other information as the village may deem necessary
or prudent.



   (B)   All applications shall be accompanied by a current valid
license issued by the Illinois Department of Public Health, any management
agreements for the operation of the facility and copies of any
Medicare/Medicaid certifications. A license fee shall be submitted in the
amount of $500. To assure its application is continuously updated, current
and correct, the applicant shall file a written supplement to its application
within seven days of any of the following events:



      (1)   Any change in ownership, management or administrator.



      (2)   Any action by the State of Illinois which could result
in the limitation, suspension, or revocation of its licensing.



      (3)   Any reduction by more than 5% in any portion of the
applicant's employee census.



      (4)   Any change by more than 5% in any portion of the
applicant's resident census.



(Ord. 2246, passed 12-5-05)



§ 117.04  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Before a license is issued or renewed by the village, and
without prior notice, the facility shall be inspected by authorized village
personnel to determine that it is in compliance with the ordinances of the
village, the provisions of the Nursing Home Care Act and any rules or
regulations promulgated thereunder.



   (B)   Authorized village personnel shall have the right at any time,
without prior notice, to visit and inspect the premises and personnel of any
facility for the purpose of determining whether the facility is in compliance
with the ordinances of the village, the provisions of the Nursing Home Care
Act and any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder. In determining
whether to make such an inspection, the Village shall consider one or more of
the following:



      (1)   Previous inspection reports;



      (2)   The facility's history of compliance with standards,
rules and regulations promulgated under the Nursing Home Care Act and
correction of violations, penalties or other enforcement actions;



      (3)   The number and severity of complaints received about the
facility;



      (4)   Any allegations of resident abuse or neglect;



      (5)   Weather conditions;



      (6)   Health emergencies;



      (7)   Other reasonable belief that deficiencies exist.



   (C)   A copy of each inspection report shall be sent to the facility
and the Illinois Department of Public Health.



(Ord. 2246, passed 12-5-05)



§ 117.05  NOTICE TO THE STATE.



   Within ten days of the issuance, denial, suspension or revocation of a
license, the village shall notify the Illinois Department of Public Health of
the issuance or denial. If a license is issued, the notice shall include the
facility name, address, the date of issuance and the number of beds by level
of care. If a license is denied, suspended or revoked, the notice shall
indicate the reason therefor and the current status of the license
application.



(Ord. 2246, passed 12-5-05)



§ 117.06  SECURITY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The facility and its administrator shall maintain a log book
which shall be used for all residents leaving the facility. Before a resident
leaves the facility, a staff member shall legibly enter the date, the name of
the resident, the time of leaving and, if provided by the resident, the
destination and the anticipated time of return. Upon the resident's return to
the facility, a staff member shall enter the time of return in the log book.
All log books shall be kept, maintained and made available for inspection for
at least one year from the date of the final entry.



   (B)   The registration desk and each exterior door of any long term
care facility shall be equipped with an independent, continuously recording
video camera which shall be monitored by the staff for resident safety and
facility security and so that a resident shall not leave the facility as
provided in this chapter. All video recordings shall be kept, maintained and
made available for inspection for at least 30 days from the date of recording.



   (C)   All exterior doors shall be equipped with a signal that will
alert the facility staff if a resident leaves the building. Any exterior door
that is supervised by a staff member may have a disconnect device for the
signal during such time as the door is actually supervised. If an exterior
door is supervised by a staff member 24 hours a day, no signal is required.



   (D)   Prior to issuance or renewal of a license, each applicant must
submit an emergency life safety plan to the Village of Frankfort Police
Department and the Frankfort Fire Protection District.



(Ord. 2246, passed 12-5-05)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.07  PERSONS PROHIBITED FROM RESIDING OR WORKING IN FACILITIES.



   (A)   Any person required to register as a sex offender or sexual
predator under the provisions of the Sex Offender Registration Act (ILCS Ch.
730, Act 150 §§ 1 et seq.) is prohibited from residing in or being employed
by a facility within the village. The facility and its administrator may not
admit or allow any person who is or is required to be registered as a sex
offender or sexual predator (regardless of the address where registered) on
the Sex Offender Registry maintained by the Illinois State Police to reside
or remain overnight in the facility or to be employed by the facility. Each
facility must conduct a search of the Sex Offender Registry for each person
seeking admission to or employment with the facility, before the person is
admitted or hired, in order to determine whether the person is a registered
sex offender or sexual predator. Each facility must have in its possession
evidence demonstrating that such a search has been made before allowing a
person to be admitted as a resident or hired as an employee. The facility
must notify the village within 48 hours of identifying a prospective resident
or employee as a sex offender or sexual predator on the Sex Offender
Registry. When the facility determines upon information or belief that a
person residing or employed therein is a sex offender or sexual predator who
is required to be registered but has failed to do so, the facility shall
immediately notify the Frankfort Police Department of its suspicion.



   (B)   No person may reside in or be employed by a facility within
the village if less than ten years have passed since he or she was convicted
of or released from confinement for (i) a significant crime against a person
or persons, including but not limited to assault or aggravated assault,
battery or aggravated battery, deviate sexual assault, incest or aggravated
incest, indecent liberties with a child, kidnapping or aggravated kidnapping,
murder, rape or sale of narcotic drugs, (ii) a significant crime against
property, including but not limited to arson, burglary, robbery or, if a
penitentiary sentence could have been imposed, theft or (iii) a crime
involving dishonesty or false statement. The facility and its administrator
may not admit or allow any person who has been convicted of or released from
confinement for such crimes to reside or remain overnight in the facility or
to be employed by the facility if less than ten years have passed since the
date of conviction or release. Each facility must conduct a criminal
background check for each person seeking admission to or employment with the
facility, before the person is admitted or hired, in order to determine
whether the person has been convicted of or released from confinement for
such a crime or crimes.



   (C)   To ensure that facilities are conducting Sex Offender Registry
searches and criminal background checks, the village shall, upon 72 hours'
advance notice, visit each facility semi-annually for the purpose of auditing
such reports.



(Ord. 2246, passed 12-5-05) Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.08  STATE LAW.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a facility in
violation of any provision of the Nursing Home Care Act.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a facility in
violation of any provision of any rule or regulation promulgated by the
Illinois Department of Public Health pursuant to the Nursing Home Care Act.



   (C)   In the event that a license issued by the State of Illinois
for a facility is revoked, suspended or not in effect, such fact shall be
grounds for the Village President to take similar action with respect to any
village license.



(Ord. 2245, passed 12-5-05)  Penalty, see § 117.99



§ 117.09  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   In addition to and not in lieu of any penalty or relief
available at equity, any facility that violates any federal, state or local
law, rule or regulation shall be subject to the suspension or revocation of
its village license. The Village Administrator or his or her designee may
seek the suspension or revocation of the license by filing charges with the
Village President alleging a violation of the aforementioned provisions.



   (B)   Before any suspension or revocation order shall be issued, the
village shall notify the facility of the specific charges against it and of
its right to a hearing before a hearing officer appointed by the Village
President. Notice shall be served upon the facility and its administrator at
least seven days prior to the hearing date by first class or express mail,
overnight carrier or personal service at the address contained in the
facility application. At the hearing, the facility may be represented by
counsel, cross- examine witnesses called by the charging party and present
documentary evidence and witnesses. The charging party shall present
sufficient evidence to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that a
violation of the aforementioned provisions occurred. The strict rules of
evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply to hearings under
this section. The record of each hearing shall include (i) a record of the
testimony presented at the hearing, which may be by tape recording or other
appropriate means; (ii) any document presented at the hearing; and (iii) a
copy of the written notice of hearing that was served.



   (C)   Following review and consideration of the record, the
corporate authorities shall issue in writing a determination as to whether a
violation occurred. If a violation is found, the corporate authorities may
suspend the license for a period not to exceed 30 days or revoke the license.



(Ord. 2246, passed 12-5-05)



§ 117.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to violate any provision of this chapter,
any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, any provision of the Nursing
Home Care Act or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder. Notice and
correction of violations shall be consistent with the provisions of the
Nursing Home Care Act.



   (B)   Any person or facility that violates any provision of this
Chapter, any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, the Nursing Home Care
Act or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a
lawsuit seeking an injunction and/or a fine of not less than $250 nor more
than $750 per violation. Each day that such violation exists shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense. The facility and its administrator shall be
jointly and severally liable for any and all violations.



(Ord. 2246, passed 12-5-05)



Appendix A



   APPLICATION FOR A LONG-TERM CARE FACILITY LICENSE IN THE VILLAGE OF
FRANKFORT



Click for a printer-friendly PDF version of Appendix A



SECTION A - GENERAL FACILITY INFORMATION



                                                   
                                                   
                         



Complete Name of Facility:                                
                               



Prior Name(s):                                        
                       



Street Address:                                        
                       



City, State, ZIP:                                      
                         



Telephone:                                          
                     



Fax:                                              
                 



Email:                                              
                 



Has the ownership of this facility changed within the past year?



[Circle one]     YES         NO



Contact Person for this Application:                          
                                     



Assumed Name(s):                                      
                         



Street Address:                                        
                       



City, State, ZIP:                                      
                         



Telephone:                                          
                     



Fax:                                              
                 



Email:                                              
                 



Capacity and Level of Care:



Skilled Nursing   Capacity                              
                   



Persons Under 22 Years of Age   Capacity                    
                             



Intermediate Care   Capacity                            
                     



Intermediate Care for the



    Developmentally Disabled   Capacity                    
                             



Sheltered Care   Capacity                              
                   



Community Living   Capacity                              
                   



SECTION B - INFORMATION REGARDING CAPACITY AND LEVEL OF CARE



                                                   
                                                   
                         



   Part 1 - Employee Census



Indicate the number of employees falling under the following categories:



 




Employee Classification

 

40 or more hrs./wk.

 

30 - 39 hrs./wk.

 

20 -29 hrs./wk.

 

10 - 19 hrs./wk.

 

Less than 10 hrs./wk.



Physicians
 
 
 
 
 


LPNs
 
 
 
 
 


RNs
 
 
 
 
 


CNAs
 
 
 
 
 


Physical or occupational therapists
 
 
 
 
 


Other licensed health or medical personnel (list on lines below)
 
 
 
 
 


All employees
 
 
 
 
 




 



_______________________________________________________________________________
_



_______________________________________________________________________________
_



_______________________________________________________________________________
_



   Part 2 - Resident Census



Indicate the number of employees falling under the following categories:



      Total Number of Residents:            _____



      Age:



         21 or younger:               _____



         22 - 30:                  _____



         31 - 40:                  _____



         41 - 50:                  _____



         51 - 60:                  _____



         61 - 70:                  _____



         71 - 80:                   _____



         81 - 90:                   _____



         91 - 100:                  _____



         101 or older:               _____



      Diagnoses:



      a.   Mental disability or illness:         



            Mental retardation:            _____



            Documented signs and



              symptoms of depression:      _____



            Dementia:               _____



            Documented psychiatric diagnosis



              other than depression or



              dementia:               _____



            Behavioral symptoms:         _____



            Of those with behavioral symptoms,



              the total number receiving a



              behavioral management program:   _____



            Receiving health rehabilitative



              services for MI/MR         _____



      b.   Physical disability or illness



           other than advanced age:         _____



      c.   Substance abuse:               _____



            Alcohol:               _____



            Illegal drugs:               _____



              Depressants:            _____



              Hallucinogens:            _____



              Narcotics:               _____



              Stimulants:               _____



            Prescription drugs:            _____



            Other:                  _____



   Receiving Psychoactive Medication:



      Any variety:                  _____



      Antipsychotic:               _____



      Antianxiety:                  _____



      Antidepressant:               _____



      Hypnotic:                  _____



SECTION C - ACKNOWLEDGMENTS, SUBMISSIONS AND DECLARATIONS



                                                   
                                                   
                         



   Part 1 - Acknowledgments



Authorized village personnel must conduct an unannounced inspection of the
facility prior to issuance or renewal of a license for the purpose of
determining whether the facility is in compliance with the ordinances of the
village, the provisions of the Nursing Home Care Act and any other rules or
regulations promulgated thereunder. After a license has been issued,
authorized village personnel may, without prior notice, visit and inspect the
premises and personnel of any facility for the purpose of assessing said
compliance. Authorized village personnel shall also, with at least 72
hours’ advance notice, conduct semi-annual audits of Sex Offender Registry
searches and criminal background checks. Refusal to permit an inspection or
audit shall be grounds for denial of a license application or revocation of
an existing license.



   Part 2 - Submissions



Each applicant must submit the following prior to issuance or renewal of a
license:



   1.   A full and complete copy of the most recent application for
licensure filed with the Illinois Department of Public Health (IDPH),
including all attachments and required submittals. If any information
requested in the IDPH application has changed since the time of filing, the
applicant must also submit a written supplement to the village.



   2.   A copy of the most recent license granted for the facility by
the IDPH. If an  applicant has not yet received a license from the IDPH, its
application will be deemed incomplete until such license is granted.



   3.   A license fee in the amount of $500.00.



Each applicant must also have submitted a copy of its most recent emergency
life safety plan to the Village of Frankfort Police Department and the
Frankfort Fire Protection District.



   Date(s) of submission:   _______________________



   Last revised:      _______________________



Each applicant must provide the village with a written supplement to this
application and/or the IDPH application within 7 days of any of the following
events:



   1.   Any change in ownership, management or administrator.



   2.   Any action by the State of Illinois which could result in the
limitation, suspension or revocation of its licensing.



   3.   Any reduction by more than 5% in the employee census.



   4.   Any change by more than 5% in the resident census.



   Part 3 - Declarations



I certify, under penalty of perjury, that I am authorized to sign this
application on behalf of the operator/licensee, that I have fully reviewed
this entire application (including attachments, accompanying documents and
acknowledgments) and that the information is true, correct and complete. If
any information in this application is untrue, incorrect or incomplete, I
understand that, in addition to pursuing any penalties provided by law, the
village may reject this application or, if a license has already been
granted, suspend or revoke said license.



Name of Operator/Licensee:      _______________________________________



Signature of Authorized Agent:   _______________________________________



   Printed Name:         _______________________________________



   Title:               _____________________________________
__



Date:               _______________________________________



Subscribed and sworn to before me



this _____  day of ___________________________, 20____.



_____________________________



Notary Public



Notary Seal:



CHAPTER 118:  CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS



Section



Cable and Video Service Provider Fee and PEG Access Support Fee



   118.01   Definitions



   118.02   Cable/video service provider fee imposed



   118.03   PEG access support fee imposed



   118.04   Applicable principles



   118.05   No impact on other taxes due from holder



   118.06   Audits of cable/video service provider



   118.07   Late fees/payments



Cable and Video Customer Protection Law



   118.20   Customer Service and Privacy Protection Law



   118.21   Enforcement



   118.22   Customer credits



 



   118.99   Penalty



CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE



§ 118.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CABLE SERVICE. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).



   COMMISSION. The Illinois Commerce Commission.



   GROSS REVENUES. All consideration of any kind or nature, including
without limitation cash, credits, property and all in-kind contributions
received by the holder for the operation of a cable or video system to
provide cable service or video service within the holder’s cable service or
video service area within the village.



      (1)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:



         (a)   Recurring charges for cable or video service.



         (b)   Event-based charges for cable service or video
service, including without limitation pay-per-view and video-on-demand
charges.



         (c)   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or
video service equipment.



         (d)   Service charges related to the provision of cable
service or video service, including without limitation, activation,
installation and repair charges.



         (e)   Administrative charges related to the provision of
cable service or video service, including without limitation service order
and service termination charges.



         (f)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds
check charges and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting
delinquent payments.



         (g)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the
holder or its affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for
advertising or for promotion or exhibition of any products or services
derived from the operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service
or video service within the village. The allocation shall be based on the
number of subscribers in the village divided by the total number of
subscribers in relation to the relevant regional or national compensation
arrangement.



         (h)   Compensation received by the holder that is
derived from the operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service
or video service with respect to commissions that are received by the holder
as compensation for promotion or exhibition of any products or services on
the holder’s network, such as a “home shopping” or similar channel,
subject to division (1)(i) of this definition.



         (i)   In the case of a cable service or video service
that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities
or applications, the portion of the holder’s revenue attributable to the
other services, capabilities or applications shall be included in the gross
revenue unless the holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion
of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course
of business.



         (j)   The service provider fee permitted by ILCS Ch.
220, Act 5, § 21-801(b).



      (2)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:



         (a)   Revenues not actually received, even if billed,
such as bad debt, subject to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(c)(l)(vi).



         (b)   Refunds, discounts or other price adjustments that
reduce the amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the
state-issued authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit or
discount is attributable to cable service or video service.



         (c)   Regardless of whether the services are bundled,
packaged or functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any
revenues received from services not classified as cable service or video
service, including without limitation revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
non-cable service or non-video service in accordance with the holder’s
books and records and records kept in the regular course of business and any
applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards or orders.



         (d)   The sale of cable services or video services for
resale in which the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee
from the purchaser’s subscribers, to the extent the purchaser certifies in
writing that it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee
permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b) with respect to the service.



         (e)   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed
upon the subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal or any
other governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including
sales and use taxes.



         (f)   Security deposits collected from subscribers.



         (g)   Amounts paid by subscribers to “home shopping”
or similar vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel
offered as part of the cable service or video service.



      (3)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in
the calculation of GROSS REVENUES to the extent the treatment of the revenue
as revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading
the payment of the fee permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b) which
would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.



   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220,
Act 5, § 21-401.



   PEG. Public, educational and governmental.



   PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE. The amount paid under this subchapter and ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(d) by the holder to the village for the service
areas within its territorial jurisdiction.



   SERVICE. The provision of “cable service” or “video service” to
subscribers and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that
has received authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from
the Commission pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401.



   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE. The amount paid under this subchapter and ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801 by the holder to a village for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.



   VIDEO SERVICE. Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any,
that is required for the selection or use of such video programming services,
and which is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in
the public right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including
internet protocol technology. This definition does not include any video
programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider, as defined in
47 U.S.C. § 332(d), or any video programming provided solely as part of, and
via, service that enables users to access content, information, electronic
mail or other services offered over the public internet.



(Ord. 2478, passed 6-16-08)



§ 118.02  CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED.



   (A)   Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing
cable service or video service in the village.



   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be
5% of the holder’s gross revenues, or the same fee paid to the village by
an incumbent cable operator providing cable service.



   (C)   Notice to the village. The holder shall notify the village at
least ten days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable
service or video service in the village.



   (D)   Holder’s liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay
the service provider fee to the village. The holder’s liability for the fee
shall commence on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after
receipt a copy of Ordinance No. 2478 by the holder. A copy of Ordinance No.
2478 shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the
holder’s application notice sent pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
21-401(b)(6) to the village.



   (E)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be
due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If
mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment
shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.



   (F)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing
cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise
agreement with the village in which a fee is paid.



   (G)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that
elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, §
21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
division (B) above.



(Ord. 2478, passed 6-16-08)



§ 118.03  PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED.



   (A)   PEG fee imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on
any holder providing cable service or video service in the village in
addition to the fee imposed pursuant to § 118.02.



   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee
imposed hereby shall be 1% of the holder’s gross revenues or, if greater,
the percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the
village or its designee for PEG access support in the village.



   (C)   Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to
the village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access.
The holder’s liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the
date set forth in § 118.02(D).



   (D)   Payment due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall
be due on a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter.
If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each
payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of
the fee.



   (E)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that
elects to terminate an existing agreement pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5,
§21 -301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary
payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of
the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All
payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous
sentence may be credited against the fees that that operator owes under
division (B) above.



(Ord. 2478, passed 6-16-08)



§ 118.04  APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES.



   All determinations and calculations under this subchapter shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.



(Ord. 2478, passed 6-16-08)



§ 118.05  NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER.



   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to exempt a
holder from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including
without limitation any tax that is or may later be required to be paid by or
through the holder with respect to cable service or video service. A
state-issued authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder
with respect to payment of the village’s simplified municipal
telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any telephone
service provided by the holder. A state-issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local unit of
government’s 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.



(Ord. 2478, passed 6-16-08)



§ 118.06  AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER.



   (A)   Audit requirement. The village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder’s books and records and
to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of
the village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, ILCS Ch.
50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be
construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.



   (B)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit
shall be paid within 30 days after the municipality’s submission of an
invoice for the sum.



(Ord. 2478, passed 6-16-08)



§ 118.07  LATE FEES/PAYMENTS.



   All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by
ordinances adopted by the village pursuant to the Local Government
Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, ILCS Ch. 50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq.



(Ord. 2478, passed 6-16-08)



CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW



§ 118.20  CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW.



   (A)   Adoption. The regulations of ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 22-501
are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video
providers offering services within the village’s boundaries.



   (B)   Amendments. Any amendment to the Cable and Video Customer
Protection Law that becomes effective after the effective date of this
subchapter shall be incorporated into this subchapter by reference and shall
be applicable to cable or video providers offering services within the
municipality’s boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions
optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this
subchapter by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of
the village.



(Ord. 2478, passed 6-16-08)



§ 118.21  ENFORCEMENT.



   The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce
all of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and
Video Protection Law with respect to complaints received from residents
within the village.



(Ord. 2478, passed 6-16-08)



§ 118.22  CUSTOMER CREDITS.



   The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for
violations. Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 22-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the
customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or following the
discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for
providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the
credit.



(Ord. 2478, passed 6-16-08)



§ 118.99  PENALTY.



   The village, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 22-501(r)(l), does
hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the
Cable and Video Protection Law by cable or video providers in addition to the
penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a
competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed $750 for each day of the
material breach, and shall not exceed $25,000 for each occurrence of a
material breach per customer.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, MATERIAL BREACH means any
substantial failure of a cable or video provider to comply with service
quality and other standards specified in any provision of the law.



   (B)   The village shall give the cable or video provider written
notice of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at
least 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material
breach.



   (C)   A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties,
shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been
remedied by the cable or video service provider after the notice in division
(B).



(Ord. 2478, passed 6-16-08)



CHAPTER 119:  TOBACCO



Section



   119.01   Scope



   119.02   Definitions



   119.03   License required



   119.03.1   License notification requirements



   119.04   Term of license; proration of fee



   119.05   Application



   119.06   Restrictions on issuance of license



   119.06.1   Classification of licenses; fees



   119.06.2   Limitation on number of licenses



   119.07   Enforcement



   119.08   Sales to or by minors prohibited



   119.09   Age verification training required



   119.10   Purchase or possession by minors prohibited



   119.11   Tobacco samples



   119.12   Sales of tobacco removed from manufacturer's packaging
prohibited



   119.13   Vending machines



   119.14   Signs



   119.15   Responsibility of licensees



   119.16   Suspension or revocation of license



 



   119.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Smoking in public places, see Ch. 138



   Smoking on public conveyances, see § 132.03



§ 119.01  SCOPE.



   This chapter shall be liberally construed to the end that the health,
safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the village shall be protected by
regulation of the sale of tobacco products.



(Ord. 2598, passed 7-20-09; Am. Ord. 2779, passed 6-4-12)



§ 119.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY TOBACCO SALES.  A retail establishment that derives less
than 30% of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants or
herbs, and cigars, cigarettes, pipes and other smoking devices for burning
tobacco and related smoking accessories, including electronic cigarettes,
personal vaporizers, and electronic nicotine delivery systems, and in which
the sale of other non-tobacco-related products is the primary function.



   ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS.  A product or device not consisting of
or containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of
nicotine, whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling,
snorting, sniffing, or by any other means. Examples include but are not
limited to: electronic cigarettes, personal vaporizers, electronic nicotine
delivery systems, liquid nicotine and all other vapor products. ALTERNATIVE
NICOTINE PRODUCTS excludes cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, or other tobacco
products.



   BUSINESS.  Any individual or person, as defined herein, owning or
operating an enterprise that offers to sell, displays, sells, or gives any
tobacco products to any person.



   PERSON.  An individual, and for the purposes of this chapter, the term
PERSON also includes any and all proprietorships, partnerships, corporations,
associations, or other legal entity.



   TOBACCO PRODUCTS.  Tobacco in all its forms, including but not limited
to:  cigarettes, cigars, cheroots, stogies, periques, granulated, plug cut,
crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco, snuff or snuff flour,
cavendish, plug and twist tobacco, fine-cut and other chewing tobaccos,
shorts, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings, and sweeping of tobacco, and all
other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such manner so as to be suitable
for snuff, chewing, smoking, and/or otherwise ingested to any degree by any
means, and tobacco purchased or offered for sale for the manufacture of
cigarettes, and any paraphernalia designated, designed for, or that could be
used, or is intended to be used, for the ingestion of tobacco to any degree,
whether by inhalation or other means.



   TOBACCO STORE.  A retail establishment that derives more than 30% of
its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants or herbs, and
cigars, cigarettes, pipes and other smoking devices for burning tobacco,
alternative nicotine products, and related smoking accessories, including
electronic cigarettes, personal vaporizers, and electronic nicotine delivery
systems, and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental.



(Ord. 2598, passed 7-20-09; Am. Ord. 2779, passed 6-4-12; Am. Ord. 2956,
passed 12-1-14; Am. Ord. 3006, passed 12-21-15)



§ 119.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any business selling, offering for sale, or otherwise
providing or giving away tobacco and/or alternative nicotine products in the
village will be required to hold and maintain a valid Village of Frankfort
Tobacco License, in addition to any other license(s) that may also be
required.



   (B)   A separate license shall be required for each point of sale.



(Ord. 2598, passed 7-20-09; Am. Ord. 2779, passed 6-4-12; Am. Ord. 3006,
passed 12-21-15)  Penalty, see § 119.99



§ 119.03.1  LICENSE NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   The tobacco licensee shall immediately notify the Village Clerk and the
Village Administrator in writing, by either personal service or by certified
U.S. Mail (return receipt requested), separately addressed to each at the
Village of Frankfort Administrative Center, in the event of any of the
following:



   (A)   The cessation of a business licensed under this chapter; or



   (B)   The cessation of the sale of tobacco and tobacco-related
products by a business licensed under this chapter: or



   (C)   The sale, transfer, assignment or alienation of any interest
in a business licensed under this chapter.



(Ord. 2779, passed 6-4-12)  Penalty, see § 119.99



§ 119.04  TERM OF LICENSE; PRORATION OF FEE.



   (A)   No license shall be issued under this chapter for a period of
less than one calendar year, unless the application is made subsequent to the
first day of any calendar year, in which case the license shall be issued for
the remaining period of the year. No license shall be issued for a period of
more than one year. Unless otherwise provided by law, all licenses issued
hereunder shall be valid from January 1 or the date of issuance, whichever
comes later, to December 31 of each year.



   (B)   For all licenses issued and in effect on or before June 30 of
each year, the full fee shall be paid. For all licenses issued on or after
July 1 of each year, the fee shall be 50% of the annual fee as hereinbefore
established. All license fees shall be paid at the time the application.



   (C)   A tobacco license issued to its licensee shall automatically
terminate and become null and void, and the number of available tobacco
licenses authorized in the classification (class) of the terminated license
shall automatically be reduced by one, upon any of the following:



      (1)   Closing or otherwise ceasing to do business; or



      (2)   Discontinuing or ceasing the sale of tobacco products: or



      (3)   Upon the sale, transfer or any other alienation of any
interest of any business licensed under this chapter.



(Ord. 2598, passed 7-20-09; Am. Ord. 2779, passed 6-4-12; Am. Ord. 3184,
passed 12-17-18)



§ 119.05  APPLICATION.



   (A)   All applications for a license under this chapter shall be
made in writing to the Village Clerk on a form provided for that purpose,
accompanied by the applicable license fee.



   (B)   Each application shall be made at least 30 days before it is
requested to be issued, in order to allow a period for a proper examination
and investigation into whether the license should not be granted pursuant to
the terms of this chapter.



   (C)   The application fee for a Tobacco License shall be $100.



   (D)   Each application shall be accompanied by proof of completion
by the applicant, as well as anyone whom applicant believes is or will be
selling, offering for sale, or otherwise providing or giving away tobacco
products in connection with the license, of a state-certified training
program such as T.I.P.S. or BASSETT, or a similar village pre-approved
training program relating to the laws requiring verification of a consumer's
age and detection of false identifications.



(Ord. 2598, passed 7-20-09; Am. Ord. 2779, passed 6-4-12)  Penalty, see §
119.99



§ 119.06  RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   No Tobacco License shall be issued to:



   (A)   A person who is not a resident of the village, unless such
person shall appoint a registered agent in the county where the business is
located for the purpose of receiving a summons, mail and notices; provided
that such registered agent shall be a person who would be eligible to receive
a license hereunder.



   (B)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.



   (C)   An applicant who has previously had a tobacco, liquor, or
other type of business license revoked for cause, or a partnership in which a
partner has previously had a tobacco, liquor, or other type of business
license revoked for cause, or any other type of business entity in which an
officer, director, manager or managing member has previously had a tobacco,
liquor, or other type of business license revoked for cause.



   (D)   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any
license issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.



   (E)   A partnership or limited liability company, unless all of the
members of such partnership or limited liability company are qualified to
obtain a license.



   (F)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or
any stockholder or stockholders owning the aggregate more than 5% of the
stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship or residency within the
village.



   (G)   A corporation, unless it is incorporated in the State of
Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation qualified under the Illinois
Business Corporation Act to transact business in Illinois.



   (H)   An applicant whose business on the licensed premises will be
conducted by a manger or agent, unless the manager or agent would be
qualified to obtain a license.



   (I)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal
or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of tobacco, or
has forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges for any
such violations, or a partnership in which a partner has previously has been
convicted of such a violation or failed to appear in court to answer to such
charges, or any other type of business entity in which an officer, director,
manager or managing member has previously been convicted of such a crime or
failed to appear in court to answer to such charges.



   (J)   An applicant who does not beneficially own the premises for
which a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full
period for which the license is to be issued.



(Ord. 2598, passed 7-20-09; Am. Ord. 2779, passed 6-4-12)



§ 119.06.1  CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES; FEES.



   Every person, partnership, firm or corporation engaged in the retail
sale of tobacco and tobacco-related products, as defined herein, shall be
required to obtain a Tobacco License. Such licenses shall be divided into the
following classes:



   (A)   Class A - Accessory tobacco sales. Class A licenses shall
authorize the limited retail sales of tobacco and/or alternative nicotine
products and tobacco-related products in accordance with the definition of
accessory tobacco sales contained herein.



   (B)   Class B - Tobacco store. Class B licenses shall authorize the
operation of a retail tobacco and/or alternative nicotine products store in
accordance with the definition of a tobacco store contained herein.



   (C)   License fee. License fees for all classes are set forth below
and as subsequently amended from time to time by the President and Board of
Trustees.



 


CLASS

 

FEE




A

 

$200




B

 

$500









(Ord. 2779, passed 6-4-12; Am. Ord. 2875, passed 10-21-13; Am. Ord. 3006,
passed 12-21-15)



§ 119.06.2  LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF LICENSES.



   There shall be available for issuance the following number of licenses
for each of the classifications:



   (A)   There shall be issued in the village no more than nine Class A
licenses.



   (B)   There shall be issued in the village no more than one Class B
license.



(Ord. 2779, passed 6-4-12; Am. Ord. 2888, passed 1-6-14; Am. Ord. 2889,
passed 1-6-14; Am. Ord. 2962, passed 1-20-15; Am. Ord. 3023, passed 4-4-16;
Am. Ord. 3184, passed 12-17-18)



§ 119.07  ENFORCEMENT.



   The village shall inspect each licensee for compliance.



(Ord. 2598, passed 7-20-09; Am. Ord. 2779, passed 6-4-12)



§ 119.08  SALES BY OR TO MINORS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 16 to
sell tobacco products and/or alternative nicotine products, or for any
licensee, or its agent, director, manager, employee, officer or
representative, to permit any person under 16 years of age to sell tobacco
products and/or alternative nicotine products in any licensed premises. All
persons selling tobacco must successfully complete a certified training
course in age verification.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale,
give, or deliver tobacco products and/or alternative nicotine products to any
person under 18 years of age.



(Ord. 2598, passed 7-20-09; Am. Ord. 2779, passed 6-4-12; Am. Ord. 2936,
passed 9-2-14; Am. Ord. 3006, passed 12-21-15)  Penalty, see § 119.99



§ 119.09  AGE VERIFICATION TRAINING REQUIRED.



   Each person who will be, or is selling, offering for sale, or otherwise
providing or giving away tobacco products in connection with the license must
have a certificate of completion, or other proof of completion, of a
state-certified training program such as T.I.P.S. or BASSETT, or a similar
village pre-approved training program relating to the law requiring
verification of a customer's age and detection of false identifications.



(Ord. 2598, passed 7-20-09; Am. Ord. 2779, passed 6-4-12)  Penalty, see §
119.99



§ 119.10  PURCHASE OR POSSESSION BY MINORS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to
purchase any tobacco product and/or alternative nicotine product, or to
misrepresent his or her age or identity for the purpose of purchasing any
tobacco product.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to
possess or use any tobacco and/or alternative nicotine product.



(Ord. 2598, passed 7-20-09; Am. Ord. 2779, passed 6-4-12; Am. Ord. 3006,
passed 12-21-15)  Penalty, see § 119.99



§ 119.11  TOBACCO SAMPLES.



   It shall be unlawful to distribute free tobacco and/or alternative
nicotine products or coupons for such products in or at any event or place
open to the public, except upon premises that hold a current and valid
tobacco license.



(Ord. 2598, passed 7-20-09; Am. Ord. 2779, passed 6-4-12; Am. Ord. 3006,
passed 12-21-15)  Penalty, see § 119.99



§ 119.12  SALES OF TOBACCO REMOVED FROM MANUFACTURER'S PACKAGING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale
cigarettes or other forms of tobacco and/or alternative nicotine products
that are not sealed and contained in the manufacturer’s packaging.  Such
packaging must include all required health warnings and a tax stamp verifying
that the cigarettes have been legally taxed.



(Ord. 2598, passed 7-20-09; Am. Ord. 2779, passed 6-4-12; Am. Ord. 3006,
passed 12-21-15)  Penalty, see § 119.99



§ 119.13  VENDING MACHINES.



   (A)   Vending machines and other devices for the sale or
distribution of tobacco products are prohibited, unless the machine or device
was in place prior to the date of the passage of Ordinance  No. 2598, July
20, 2009.



   (B)   Vending machines or other such devices that were in place
prior to the date of the passage of Ordinance No. 2598, July 20, 2009, must
be in view of a licensee or its agent, director, manager, employee, officer
or representative, and must require an action by the licensee or its agent,
director, manager, employee, officer or representative to activate it for
each sale if minors are permitted in the premises.



(Ord. 2598, passed 7-20-09; Am. Ord. 2779, passed 6-4-12)  Penalty, see §
119.99



§ 119.14  SIGNS.



   (A)   Each licensee shall obtain from the village, a sign informing
the public of the age restrictions upon the sale, purchase and possession of
tobacco and/or alternative nicotine products.



   (B)   The licensee shall prominently post such a sign in a location
visible from each cash register where tobacco products can be paid for,
and/or at each location within the premises where tobacco products may be
otherwise provided or given away.



   (C)   The licensee shall post such a sign on or as near as possible
to every display, machine or device offering tobacco products for sale.



(Ord. 2598, passed 7-20-09; Am. Ord. 2779, passed 6-4-12; Am. Ord. 3006,
passed 12-21-15)  Penalty, see § 119.99



§ 119.15  RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEES.



   (A)   Every act or omission constituting a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter by an agent, director, manager, employee, officer
or representative of a licensee shall also be deemed and held to be the act
or omission of such licensee, and the licensee shall be punishable in the
same manner as if it were directly responsible for the act or omission.



   (B)   The business shall keep, maintain, and have readily available
for inspection by the village, original certificates of completion of the
training program required under this chapter for each person who is or will
be selling, offering for sale, or otherwise providing or giving away tobacco
products in connection with the license.



(Ord. 2598, passed 7-20-09; Am. Ord. 2779, passed 6-4-12)  Penalty, see §
119.99



§ 119.16  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   In addition to all other applicable fines and penalties, any
licensee who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
suspension or revocation of his or her tobacco license.



      (1)   The Village Administrator, or his or her designee,  may
seek the suspension or revocation of the license by filing charges with the
Village President alleging a violation of this chapter.



      (2)   Before any suspension or revocation order shall be
issued, the village shall notify the licensee of the specific charges against
it and of its right to a hearing before the Village President.  Notice shall
be served upon the licensee, at the address stated in the Tobacco License
application, at least seven days prior to the hearing date, by first class or
express mail, overnight carrier or personal service.  At the hearing, the
licensee may be represented by counsel, cross-examine witnesses, and present
documentary evidence and witnesses.  The Village Attorney, or his or her
designee, shall present sufficient evidence from witnesses having personal
knowledge of the offense to prove, by a preponderance of the evidence, that a
violation of the aforementioned provisions occurred.  The strict rules of
evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply to hearings under
this section.  The record of each hearing shall include (a) a record of the
testimony presented at the hearing by a certified court reporter or recorded
by other appropriate means; (b) any document presented at the hearing; and
(c) a copy of the written notice of hearing that was served.



      (3)   Following review and consideration of the record, the
Village President shall issue, in writing, a determination as to whether a
violation occurred.  If a violation is found, the Village President may
suspend the license for a period not to exceed 30 days, or may revoke the
license.  The licensee may seek administrative review of a suspension or
revocation order in a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (B)   A violation of this chapter shall also constitute grounds for
suspension and/or revocation of any and all village licenses issued to the
business, person(s) or premises where such violations occur.  Such
revocation or suspension shall be as provided for in the ordinance granting
such license.



(Ord. 2598, passed 7-20-09; Am. Ord. 2779, passed 6-4-12)



§ 119.99  PENALTY.



   In addition to the suspension or revocation provided for herein, any
business or person found to have violated any provision of this chapter shall
be fined not less than $250 for the first offense, and not less than $500 for
each subsequent offense.



(Ord. 2598, passed 7-20-09; Am. Ord. 2779, passed 6-4-12)



CHAPTER 120:  PRE-OWNED MERCHANDISE



Section



   120.01   Definitions



   120.02   Recordation of transaction



   120.03   Limitations on purchases



   120.04   Daily reports



   120.05   Resale of pre-owned merchandise



 



   120.99   Penalty



§ 120.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ELECTRONICS. Includes but it not limited to the following general
categories or type of devices, systems or components: computer including note
pad, video, audio and video games.



   JEWELRY.  Includes but it not limited to watches, rings, bracelets,
necklaces and any other article containing any precious or semi-precious
stones or metal.



   MERCHANT.  Any individual, partnership, corporation or entity
operating a retail business which purchases pre-owned merchandise at the
retail business locations and pawn brokers regulated under the Pawn Broker
Regulation Act, ILCS Ch. 205, Act 510, §§ 0.01 et seq.



   PRE-OWNED MERCHANDISE.  New or used jewelry, electronics, sporting
goods and equipment including golf clubs, and power and hand tools. It does
not include any merchandise taken or held for consignment sale or received in
trade or in exchange for the merchant's other pre-owned merchandise.



   SPORTING GOODS.  Includes any equipment used by a participant in
sporting or recreational events or activities but specifically excludes
personal fitness equipment.



(Ord. 2709, passed 4-18-11)



§ 120.02  RECORDATION OF TRANSACTION.



   Any merchant who purchases pre-owned merchandise shall, for every
transaction, secure and maintain for at least two years from the date of the
transaction not less than the following information:



   (A)   The name, address, email address, telephone number, mobile
number of the seller;



   (B)   The following information shall be recorded from a legible
copy of a current United States federal or state issued photographic
identification or driver's license showing a clear photograph of the seller:



      (1)   Seller's name;



      (2)   Seller's address;



      (3)   Seller's date of birth;



      (4)   Seller's drivers license/identification number;



   (C)   A complete, accurate and full description of each item in
excess of $10, which, if located on the item shall include the serial number,
model number, identification number, or distinguishing marks, with photograph
and amount paid to the seller;



   (D)   Abbreviations shall not be used. Each item shall be listed
separately and terms such as "scrap," "bulk," etc, cannot be used in item
descriptions; and



   (E)   The exact time the pre-owned article was purchased.



(Ord. 2709, passed 4-18-11)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.03  LIMITATIONS ON PURCHASES.



   No merchant shall purchase any pre-owned merchandise:



   (A)   From any person who is under 18 years of age;



   (B)   Where someone other than the seller claims any interest in the
pre-owned merchandise;



   (C)   From any person appearing to be intoxicated, incapacitated, or
under the influence of alcohol or drugs; or



   (D)   From any person who is known to have been convicted of theft,
burglary, robbery or armed robbery.



(Ord. 2709, passed 4-18-11)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.04  DAILY REPORTS.



   A merchant shall fully comply with ILCS Ch. 205, Act 510, § 7(A)) and
shall also send a daily report made by computer printout before the hour of
12:00 noon for any pre-owned merchandise purchased during the preceding day
except that sporting goods shall be reported only if it is purchased for $30
or more. Handwritten reports will not be accepted. The format of the report
shall be approved by the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee. The daily
reports shall be sent to the Frankfort Police Department either by facsimile
or electronically to Resale@Frankfortpolice.net.



(Ord. 2709, passed 4-18-11)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.05  RESALE OF PRE-OWNED MERCHANDISE.



   No merchant shall sell, transfer or dispose of any pre-owned
merchandise purchased for $30 or more within five business days after it
filed the daily report of receipt of the merchandise as required under §
120.04. Items purchased for less than $30 have no waiting period.



(Ord. 2709, passed 4-18-11)  Penalty, see § 120.99



§ 120.99  PENALTY.



   Any person or business found to have violated any provision of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $250 for the first offense and not less
than $500 for each subsequent offense.



(Ord. 2709, passed 4-18-11)



CHAPTER 121:  SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES



Section



   121.01   Purpose; scope



   121.02   Definitions



   121.03   Regulation of small wireless facilities



   121.04   Dispute resolution



   121.05   Indemnification



   121.06   Insurance



§ 121.01  PURPOSE; SCOPE.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish
regulations, standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small
wireless facilities on rights-of-way within the village’s jurisdiction, or
outside the rights-of-way on property zoned by the village exclusively for
commercial or industrial use, in a manner consistent with the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act (“the Act”), Public Act 100-0585.



   (B)   Conflicts with other ordinances. This chapter supersedes all
ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.



   (C)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that
applicable federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the
requirements of this chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating
federal or state laws or regulations.



(Ord. 3174, passed 9-17-18)



§ 121.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless
services.



   APPLICABLE CODES. Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing,
mechanical, or fuel gas codes adopted by the village and all local amendments
thereto, as amended from time to time.



   APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application and is a wireless
provider.



   APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant to the village for a
permit to collocate small wireless facilities, which may include the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, and the applicable
review fee.



   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION.  To install, mount, maintain, modify,
operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support
structure or utility pole.



   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6),
as amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended;
mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; or wireless
service other than mobile service.



   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. A cable operator, as defined in 47
U.S.C. 522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in
47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47
U.S.C. 153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.



   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.



   FEE. A one-time charge.



   HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC LANDMARK. A building, property, or site,
or group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either (i) listed in the
National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for
listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and
determine their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with
Section VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic
Agreement codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a
locally landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an
ordinance adopted by the village pursuant to a preservation program that
meets the requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the
Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of
the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office
is pending.



   LAW. A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation,
order, or local ordinance or resolution.



   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is not larger
in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in
height and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.



   MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE. A utility pole owned or operated by the village
in public rights-of-way.



   PERMIT. A written authorization required by the village to perform an
action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.



   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization.



   PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY. The functional division of the federal
government, the state, a unit of local government, or a special purpose
district located in whole or in part within this state, that provides or has
authority to provide firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other
emergency services to respond to and manage emergency incidents.



   RATE. A recurring charge.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use. RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include village-owned aerial lines.



   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications:  (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure
of no more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that
has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit
within an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and (ii) all
other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with
the facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The
following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.



   UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in
part by a communications service provider or for electric distribution,
lighting, traffic control, or a similar function.



   UTILITY POLE CATEGORY. A description of the principal use of a utility
pole, such as electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, or a similar
function.



   WIRELESS FACILITY.



      (1)   Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network,
including: (i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii)
radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and
backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological
configuration.



      (2)   WIRELESS FACILITY includes small wireless facilities.



      (3)   WIRELESS FACILITY does not include:



         (a)   The structure or improvements on, under, or within
which the equipment is collocated; or



         (b)   Wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or
coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to
or directly associated with an antenna.



   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for
the application submitted to the city.



   WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless
services provider.



   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided to the general public,
including a particular class of customers, and made available on a
nondiscriminatory basis using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a
fixed location or mobile, provided using wireless facilities.



   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.



   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a
monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other
existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting
wireless facilities. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a utility
pole.



(Ord. 3174, passed 9-17-18)



§ 121.03  REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.



   (A)   Permitted use. Small wireless facilities shall be classified
as permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in
divisions (C)(16), (C)(18) and (H) below regarding height exceptions or
variances, but not subject to zoning review or approval if they are
collocated (i) in rights-of-way in any zoning district, or (ii) outside
rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial or industrial use.



   (B)   Permit required. An applicant shall obtain one or more permits
from the village to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall
be received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the
following conditions and requirements:



      (1)   Application requirements. Prior to a wireless providers
submitting a small cell facilities permit application, the wireless provider
shall be responsible for coordinating and meeting with village staff for a
pre-application meeting. The purpose of the pre-application meeting is to
streamline the application and collocation process, to promote the visual
character and aesthetic of the village, and to accommodate the needs of
wireless providers. After a pre-application meeting, wireless providers shall
submit the following information to the village, together with the
village’s small cell facilities permit application, as a condition of any
permit application to collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole
or wireless support structure:



         (a)   Site specific structural integrity and, for a
municipal utility pole, makeready analysis prepared and certified by an
Illinois licensed structural engineer, as that term is defined in Section 4
of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;



         (b)   The location where each proposed small wireless
facility or utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location
and its immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on
which each proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location
where utility poles or structures would be installed. This shall include a
depiction of the completed facility. Photographs shall include sufficient
perspective and detail to document the existing conditions to which the work
area will be restored;



         (c)   Photographs of each existing public or private
pole located within a 400-foot radius of the proposed small wireless
facility. Where multiple poles of the same type, material, size and color
exist within the radius, the applicant may substitute one photograph of each
pole type together with a map depicting the multiple locations;



         (d)   Written statement determining if the proposed
location is on a historic landmark or within a historic district;



         (e)   Specifications and drawings prepared and certified
by an Illinois licensed structural engineer, as that term is defined in
Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989, for each
proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as it is proposed
to be installed;



         (f)   The equipment type and model numbers for the
antennas and all other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless
facility;



         (g)   A proposed schedule for the installation and
completion of each small wireless facility covered by the application, if
approved;



         (h)   Certification that the collocation complies with
the collocation requirements and conditions contained herein in division (C)
below, to the best of the applicant’s knowledge; and



         (i)   In the event that the proposed small wireless
facility is to be attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than
the village, the wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence
of the consent of the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.



      (2)   Application process. The village shall process
applications as follows:



         (a)   The first completed application shall have
priority over applications received by different applicants for collocation
on the same utility pole or wireless support structure.



         (b)   1.   An application to collocate a small
wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure,
or replacement of an existing utility pole or wireless support structure
shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved
if the village fails to approve or deny the application within 90 days after
the submission of a completed application.



            2.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed
with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall
notify the village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved
remedy no sooner than 75 days after the submission of a completed application.



            3.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the
latter of the ninetieth day after submission of the complete application or
the tenth day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village.
The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the village’s
denial of the permit request within the time limits as provided under this
chapter.



         (c)   1.   An application to collocate a small
wireless facility that includes the installation of a new utility pole shall
be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the village
fails to approve or deny the application within 120 days after the submission
of a completed application.



            2.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed
with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall
notify the village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved
remedy no sooner than 105 days after the submission of a completed
application.



            3.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the
latter of the one hundred twentieth day after submission of the complete
application or the tenth day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice
by the village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude
the village’s denial of the permit request within the time limits as
provided under this chapter.



         (d)   1.   The village shall deny an application
which does not meet the requirements of this chapter.



            2.   If the village determines that applicable
codes, ordinances or regulations that concern public safety, or the
collocation requirements and conditions contained herein in division (C)
require that the utility pole or wireless support structure be replaced
before the requested collocation, approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of the utility pole or wireless support structure at the cost of
the provider.



            3.   The village shall document the basis for a
denial, including the specific code provisions or application conditions on
which the denial is based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or
before the day the village denies an application.



            4.   The applicant may cure the deficiencies
identified by the village and resubmit the revised application once within 30
days after notice of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an
additional application fee. The village shall approve or deny the revised
application within 30 days after the applicant resubmits the application or
it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the revised application within 30
days of denial shall require the application to submit a new application with
applicable fees, and recommencement of the village’s review period.



            5.   The applicant must notify the village in
writing of its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed
approved basis, which may be submitted with the revised application.



            6.   Any review of a revised application shall be
limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised
application does not apply if the cure requires the review of a new location,
new or different structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other
wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility.



         (e)   Pole attachment agreement.



            1.   Within 30 days after an approved permit to
collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the village
and the applicant shall enter into a Master Pole Attachment Agreement,
provided by the village for the initial collocation on a municipal utility
pole by the applicant. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a
small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the village and the
applicant shall enter into a License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment
Agreement.



            2.   The Village Board adopts a standard form
license agreement, titled Master Pole Attachment Agreement and attached to
Ord. 3174 as Exhibit A, and delegates its authority to amend and administer
the Agreement to the Village Administrator or his or her designee. The Master
Pole Attachment Agreement is approved by the village subject to periodic
amendments by the village staff, as deemed in the best interests of the
village and consistent with the Act.



      (3)   Completeness of application.



         (a)   Within 30 days after receiving an application, the
village shall determine whether the application is complete and notify the
applicant. If an application is incomplete, the village must specifically
identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed complete if
the village fails to provide notification to the applicant within 30 days
after all documents, information and fees specifically enumerated in the
village’s permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the
village.



         (b)   Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the
village sends the notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides
the missing information.



      (4)   Tolling. The time period for applications may be further
tolled by:



         (a)   An express written agreement by both the applicant
and the village; or



         (b)   A local, state or federal disaster declaration or
similar emergency that causes the delay.



      (5)   Consolidated applications.



         (a)   An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless
facilities within the jurisdiction of the village shall be allowed, at the
applicant’s discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a
single permit for the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities if
the collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless
facility and substantially the same type of structure.



         (b)   If an application includes multiple small wireless
facilities, the village may remove small wireless facility collocations from
the application and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for
which incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for
consolidated treatment or that are denied. The village may issue separate
permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.



      (6)   Duration of permits.



         (a)   The duration of a permit shall be for a period of
five years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless
the village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or
modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable village codes or any
provision, condition or requirement contained in this chapter.



         (b)   If the Act is repealed as provided in Section 90
therein, renewals of permits shall occur on the next anniversary date of the
Master Pole Attachment Agreement or permit issuance date, as the case may be,
and be subject to all other applicable village code provisions or regulations
in effect at the time of



renewal.



      (7)   Means of submitting applications. Applicants shall
submit applications, supporting information and notices to the village by
personal delivery at the village’s designated place of business, by regular
mail postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means,
including electronic mail.



   (C)   Collocation requirements, written design standards, and
conditions.



      (1)   Public safety space reservation. The village may reserve
space on municipal utility poles for existing or future public safety uses,
for the village’s electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of
space may not preclude the collocation of a small wireless facility unless
the village reasonably determines that the municipal utility pole cannot
accommodate both uses. The village hereby reserves, as a matter of policy,
adequate space on each municipal utility pole for public safety uses and/or
the village’s electric utility uses, whether desired for use now or in the
future, and sufficient sections of the pole’s interior to provide power,
wiring, and in some cases, the mounting of public safety apparatus, as the
case may be. The reservation of adequate space for public safety uses is a
condition precedent to the location of small wireless facilities and the
village may, from time to time, require the relocation of small wireless
facilities to another location or pole to provide public safety or electric
utility uses as it deems necessary or desirable, provided however relocation
shall not be required if both the public safety and/or electric utility use
and the small wireless facility may physically and technically operate on or
about the same pole. In the event the village decides it necessary or
desirable to remove, relocate or change any or all of its municipal utility
poles, the wireless provider shall relocate their equipment and service(s) at
their sole cost and expense to a new appropriate location approved by the
village, which shall be installed following the then current requirements. In
the event the existing small wireless facility can physically and technically
operate on or about the same pole as an existing or proposed public safety
and/or electric utility use, but doing so requires upgrades to the pole,
changes to the structural capacity, or other improvements, the small wireless
provider shall have the right to relocate their small wireless facility,
complete the required design and improvements to the existing location at
their sole cost and expense. Under no circumstance shall the presence of a
small wireless facility cause the village any expense greater than what it
would otherwise incur to locate the public safety and/or electric utility use
on a similarly situated pole not already occupied by a small wireless
facility.



      (2)   Installation and maintenance. The wireless provider
shall install, maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities at
their sole cost and expense, in safe condition and good repair and in
compliance with the requirements and conditions of this chapter, the Master
Pole Attachment Agreement and other state, federal and local laws and
requirements, as amended from time to time. All proposed installations shall
be fabricated from material similar to and in a decorative design the village
determines to be in compliance with the existing support pole, and shall have
a degree of strength capable of supporting all existing uses along with the
proposed antenna and any related appurtenances and cabling, which shall be
cumulatively capable of withstanding wind forces and ice loads in accordance
with the structural integrity standards set forth herein below. No extension
or installation fabricated from wood shall be permitted. The wireless
provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or contracts that perform
work in connection with its small wireless facilities are adequately trained
and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry and governmental
standards and regulations.



      (3)   Structural integrity. The wireless provider shall
design, install and maintain small wireless facilities to withstand a wind
force of at least 90 miles per hour, as well as be designed to withstand a
wind force of at least 40 miles per hour on a freestanding pole that is
covered with at least three quarters of an inch of ice all without the use of
guy wires. The wireless provider shall provide the village with a structural
evaluation of each specific location containing a recommendation that the
proposed installation passes the standards described herein. The evaluation
shall be prepared, certified and signed by a professional structural engineer
licensed in the State of Illinois.



      (4)   No interference with public safety communication
frequencies.



         (a)   The wireless provider’s operation of the small
wireless facilities shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public
safety agency for public safety communications. A wireless provider shall
install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not
cause unacceptable interference with a public safety agency’s
communications equipment.



         (b)   Unacceptable interference will be determined by
and measured in accordance with industry standards and the FCC’s
regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or
any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency.



         (c)   If a small wireless facility causes such
interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the
interference by the public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own
expense, shall remedy the interference in a manner consistent with the
abatement and resolution procedures for interference with public safety
spectrum established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973
and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675.



         (d)   The village may terminate a permit for a small
wireless facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not
in compliance with the Code of Federal Regulations cited in division
(C)(4)(c) above. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall
constitute a public nuisance.



      (5)   Electric distribution/transmission utility pole design
standards.



         (a)   The wireless provider shall not collocate small
wireless facilities on utility poles that are part of an electric
distribution or transmission system within the communication worker safety
zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole.



         (b)   However, the antenna and support equipment of the
small wireless facility may be located in the communications space on the
utility pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the
wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top
of the pole.



         (c)   For purposes of this division (C)(5), the terms
COMMUNICATIONS SPACE, COMMUNICATION WORKER SAFETY ZONE, and ELECTRIC SUPPLY
ZONE have the meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety
Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.



      (6)   Compliance with applicable codes. The wireless provider
shall comply with all applicable codes and local code provisions or
regulations, unless inconsistent with the Act, including those concerning
public safety.



      (7)   Site selection design standards for new small wireless
facilities. The village standardizes the appearance of its utility poles as
appropriate for each area of the village and category of utility pole. To
maintain consistency of appearances and design of small wireless facilities
throughout the village, wireless providers shall use best efforts to mount
equipment to village-owned utility poles, including all categories of
village-owned utility poles such as streetlights, traffic signals, and
towers. In the event village-owned infrastructure is not available or is
clearly demonstrated to lack the structural or technical capacity to meet the
wireless provider’s needs, wireless providers shall use best efforts to
install and collocate on a utility pole or alternative support structure
preapproved by the village, provided the wireless provider submits to the
village copies of the written approval from the owner of the specific pole or
support structure. Owner’s approval shall indicate occupation of the pole
by the wireless provider is subordinate to the use and/or expanded use by
existing public utilities existing prior to installation of the wireless
provider’s equipment and shall further include a statement indicated the
owner has reviewed and approved of the construction plans submitted as part
of the application, including all technical specifications. Owner’s
approval shall also include a guarantee by the owner that the owner will
either cause the removal of abandoned equipment in accordance with
requirement herein or remove the equipment themselves.



      (8)   Independent electric service. The wireless provider
shall provide for their own use an independently metered electric service.
Where temporary and/or backup power sources are installed or used within 200
feet of a residential property or structure intended for residential use, the
wireless provider shall utilize silent standby power supplies only.



      (9)   Quantity limitations. There shall be no more than one
small wireless facility mounted per pole.



      (10)   Non-proliferation. Wireless providers shall use best
efforts to not collocate a small wireless facility within 500 feet of another
small wireless facility.



      (11)   New poles. Wireless providers shall use best efforts to
collocate on existing utility poles or other support structures. New utility
poles, monopoles or other support towers of any type will be permitted when
approved by the village, subject to the provisions regarding alternative
placements in  division (C)(16) below.



      (12)   Guy wires. No guy wires or other support wires shall be
used in connection with small wireless facilities unless the facility is
attached to an existing pole or support structure that used guy wires prior
to its use for a small wireless facility, provided in no case shall the use
of guy wires be expanded beyond the existing condition.



      (13)   Compliance with design standards. The wireless provider
shall comply with written design standards that are generally applicable for
decorative utility poles, cabinets, enclosures and other appurtenances,
and/or reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements set forth
herein, by other village ordinances, written policy adopted by the village, a
comprehensive plan or other written design plan that applies to other
occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a
historic district. Unless the village has adopted specific standards for
installing new utility poles, whenever an application to collocate a small
wireless facility includes the installation of a new utility pole, the plans
shall specify the new utility pole to be installed meet or exceed the best
quality and aesthetic attributes, as determined by the village only, of the
existing public or private poles installed within a 400-foot radius of the
proposed location.



      (14)   Concealment of wiring and cabling. To promote the
visual character and aesthetic of the village, wireless providers shall use
best efforts to collocate small wireless facilities on hollow poles unless no
viable hollow pole exists within a 500-foot radius of the desired location.
Wires and cables used to connect or service each small wireless facility
shall be located within the interior of hollow poles only. In the event there
is insufficient space within a hollow pole, the applicant shall assess the
viability of locating the small wireless facility on another nearby hollow
pole, and if there are none, the possible erection of a new pole capable of
concealing all wiring within the pole. In the event no other desirable
locations of hollow poles exist and the village authorizes a small wireless
facility to be mounted to a solid pole, all wiring and/or cables must be
concealed within a cable shield, located and designed pursuant applicable
village ordinances, policies, planning documents and/or design guidelines
existing at the time. Approval to mount one small wireless facility to a
solid pole, which shall only occur under the most unique and unusual
circumstances, shall not constitute waiver from the requirements herein for
all other small wireless facilities.



      (15)   Finished appearance. No equipment, cabling,
concealment, steal thing, apparatus or other components of the small wireless
facility visible from the right-of-way or nearby public or private property
shall be painted or finished in a way that does not match or complement the
material and color of the pole to which it is attached.



      (16)   Alternate placements.



         (a)   Except as provided in this division (C), a
wireless provider shall not be required to collocate small wireless
facilities on any specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be
required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole.
However, with respect to an application for the collocation of a small
wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the village may propose
that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or
existing wireless support structure within 100 feet of the proposed
collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the
alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate
location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional
material costs as determined by the applicant.



         (b)   If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by
the village, the applicant shall provide written certification describing the
property rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate
location does not satisfy the criteria in this division (C)(16).



      (17)   Height limitations.



         (a)   The maximum height of a small wireless facility
shall be no more than ten feet above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated. Any pole
extension shall be of the same material, color and design as the existing
pole being extended, except however, wooden pole extensions are strictly
prohibited.



         (b)   New or replacement utility poles or wireless
support structures on which small wireless facilities are collocated may not
exceed the higher of:



            1.   Ten feet in height above the tallest existing
utility pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities,
that is in place on the date the application is submitted to the village,
that is located within 300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or
wireless support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the village, provided the village may designate
which intersecting right-of-way within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole
or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such
facility; or



            2.   Forty-five feet above ground level.



      (18)   Height exceptions or variances. If an applicant
proposes a height for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height
limitations on which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation,
the applicant shall apply for a variance in conformance with procedures,
terms and conditions set forth in Article 3: Section B of the Village of
Frankfort Zoning Ordinance, as amended from time to time.



      (19)   Contractual design requirements. The wireless provider
shall comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the
village and a private property owner that concern design or construction
standards applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in
the right-of-way.



      (20)   Ground-mounted equipment spacing. The wireless provider
shall comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and
ordinances concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the
right-of-way if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process
that addresses wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do
not prohibit granting of such exceptions or variances.



      (21)   Undergrounding regulations. The wireless provider shall
comply with local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding
requirements that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of
existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the
requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
requests to install such new utility poles or modify such existing utility
poles and do not prohibit the replacement of utility poles.



      (22)   Collocation completion deadline. Collocation for which
a permit is granted shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the
permit, unless the village and the wireless provider agree to extend this
period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole
or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site,
provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within 60 days after
the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the
additional time to complete installation does not exceed 360 days after
issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the
village grants an extension in writing to the applicant.



   (D)   Application fees. Application fees are imposed as follows:



      (1)   Applicant shall pay an application fee of $650 for an
application to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure, and $350 for each small wireless
facility addressed in a consolidated application to collocate more than one
small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support
structures.



      (2)   Applicant shall pay an application fee of $1,000 for
each small wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.



      (3)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of state law or
local ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied
by the required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.



      (4)   The village shall not require an application, approval
or permit, or require any fees or other charges, from a communications
service provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:



         (a)   Routine maintenance; or



         (b)   The replacement of wireless facilities with
wireless facilities that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller
and compliant with all then current design standards of the village if the
wireless provider notifies the village at least ten days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of
equipment consistent with division (B)(1) above; or



         (c)   The installation, placement, maintenance,
operation or replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables
that are strung between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable
safety codes.



      (5)   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the
village to work within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic
patterns or require lane closures.



   (E)   Exceptions to applicability.



      (1)   Nothing in this chapter authorizes a person to collocate
small wireless facilities on:



         (a)   Property owned by a private party or property
owned or controlled by the village or another unit of local government that
is not located within rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or
wireless support structure without the consent of the property owner;



         (b)   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park
district, forest preserve district, or conservation district for public park,
recreation or conservation purposes without the consent of the affected
district, excluding the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in
an affected district that are under the jurisdiction and control of a
different unit of local government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code;
or



         (c)   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under
Section 18c-7201 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
18c-7201), Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter rail service, or
an electric utility as defined in Section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act
(ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-102), without the consent of the rail carrier,
public commuter rail service, or electric utility. The provisions of this
chapter do not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such utility’s
wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and
maintained consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of Section
16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act (ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 16-108.5(i)).



      (2)   For the purposes of this division (E), PUBLIC UTILITY
has the meaning given to that term in Section 3-105 of the Public Utilities
Act (ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 3-105). Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to relieve any person from any requirement (a) to obtain a
franchise or a state-issued authorization to offer cable service or video
service or (b) to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain,
or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless facilities
subject to this chapter.



   (F)   Pre-existing agreements.



      (1)   Existing agreements between the village and wireless
providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the
right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on
village utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect
for all small wireless facilities collocated on the village’s utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted to the village before June 1, 2018,
subject to applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements
entered into after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this chapter.



      (2)   A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with
the village on the effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and
terms that the village makes available under this chapter for the collocation
of small wireless facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the
collocation of small wireless facilities that are the subject of an
application submitted two or more years after the effective date of the Act
by notifying the village that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms.
The existing agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable termination
provisions, for the small wireless facilities the wireless provider has
collocated on the village’s utility poles pursuant to applications
submitted to the village before the wireless provider provides such notice
and exercises its option under this division (F)(2).



   (G)   Annual recurring rate.



      (1)   A wireless provider shall pay to the village an annual
recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a village utility
pole located in a right-of-way that equals (i) $200 per pole per year or (ii)
the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider’s
use of space on the village utility pole. If P.A. 100-0585 is repealed as
provided in Section 90 of the Act, the annual recurring rate shall
immediately increase to the then current schedule of rents and annual
adjustments as determined by the village, unless otherwise restricted by law,
in which case the maximum permissible rate shall be charged and the rate
shall be increased by the maximum permissible amount or percentage at the
most frequent permissible frequency, but not less than one year.



      (2)   If the village has not billed the wireless provider
actual and direct costs, the fee shall be $200 per pole, payable on the first
day after the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or
notice of intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.



      (3)   Any small wireless facility located on a village utility
pole outside the right-of-way shall pay to the village an annual recurring
rate of $3,600 per pole per year.



   (H)   Variations. Each location of a small wireless facility shall
meet the requirements of this chapter. There is no right to any variance
hereunder.



      (1)   Request for variance. A wireless provider may request
variance from one or more of the provisions of this chapter if submitted in
writing as part of the permit application. The request shall identify each
provision from which a variance is requested and the reasons why the variance
should be granted.



      (2)   Authority to grant variances. The Village Administrator,
or his or her designee, shall have the authority to grant a variance of the
provisions of this chapter on a case-by-case basis.



      (3)   Conditions for granting variance. The Village
Administrator, or his or her designee, may authorize a variance only if the
wireless provider requesting the variance has demonstrated:



         (a)   One or more conditions not under the control of
the wireless provider (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way
line) create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision
unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and



         (b)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations
or facilities that would conform with the provision from which a variance is
requested are impracticable in relation to the requested approach.



   (I)   Site restoration. A wireless provider shall be responsible to
restore any disturbed land, landscaping, paving, or other improvements, above
or below ground, to the condition existing prior to the installation of a
small wireless facility. In the event the photographs submitted pursuant §
121.03(B)(1)(b) are insufficient to determine the conditions present prior to
the installation, the village shall have the sole authority to specify
reasonable conditions for the restoration required.



   (J)   Signage. No signage may be displayed on the equipment
associated with the small wireless facility, unless required by law.



   (K)   Surety. Prior to installing a small wireless facility, a
wireless provider shall provide the village a surety to remove and restore
the facility in the event of abandonment. A wireless provider shall maintain
the surety in continuous effect after the installation and shall provide the
village 120 days’ notice if cancelled, transferred, terminated, or
otherwise not renewed.



   (L)   Notice of discontinued use and abandonment.



      (1)   The owner of each small wireless facility shall notify
the village in writing whenever it intends to discontinue the continuous use
of a small wireless facility. Such notice shall identify the specific
location(s) to be discontinued and a schedule for removal of the small
wireless facility. Removal shall occur within 90 days of the date of
discontinued use or the site is deemed abandoned.



      (2)   A small wireless facility that is not removed within 90
days of the date of discontinued use or operated for a continuous period of
12 months shall be considered abandoned.



      (3)   The owner of the abandoned facility shall remove the
small wireless facility, at their sole cost and expense, within 90 days of
the date of abandonment or after receipt of written notice from the village
notifying the wireless provider of the abandonment.



      (4)   The notice shall be sent by certified or registered
mail, return receipt requested, by the village to the owner at the last known
address of the wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not
removed within 90 days of such notice, the village may call upon the surety
provided under division (K) above and remove or cause the removal of such
facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal
utility poles, or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of
nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.



      (5)   A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the
village if it sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the
jurisdiction of the village. Such notice shall include the name and contact
information of the new wireless provider and a listing of all locations
within the village affected by the sale or transfer. Upon transfer, the
successor shall enter into a master pole attachment agreement within 90 days
and immediately upon transfer, provide a substitute surety as required in
division (K) above.



(Ord. 3174, passed 9-17-18)



§ 121.04  DISPUTE RESOLUTION.



   The Circuit Court of Will County, Illinois shall have exclusive
jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates
for collocation of small wireless facilities on municipal utility poles
within the right-of-way, the village  shall allow the collocating person to
collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than $200 per year per
municipal utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of
the dispute.



(Ord. 3174, passed 9-17-18)



§ 121.05  INDEMNIFICATION.



   A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the village, its officers,
employees, agents, and representatives harmless against any and all liability
or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising out
of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the village improvements or
right-of-way associated with such improvements by the wireless provider or
its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and
privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless provider has no
obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses
as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the village or its
employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that
they may have against the village with respect to consequential, incidental,
or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability.



(Ord. 3174, passed 9-17-18)



§ 121.06  INSURANCE.



   The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider’s own
cost and expense, the following insurance:



   (A)   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum
protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of village
improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and
property damage.



   (B)   The wireless provider shall include the village as an
additional insured and provide it the primary coverage on the commercial
general liability policy and provide certification and documentation of
inclusion of the village in a commercial general liability policy prior to
the collocation of any wireless facility.



   (C)   A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirement required by the village. A wireless
provider that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the name of additional
insureds under this section. A wireless provider that elects to self-insure
shall provide to the village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial
ability to self-insure the insurance coverage limits required by the village.



(Ord. 3174, passed 9-17-18)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS



      131.   OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY



      132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER AND SAFETY



      133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION



      134.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



      135.   GAMBLING OFFENSES



      136.   DRUG OFFENSES



      137.   WEAPONS CONTROL



      138.   SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES



CHAPTER 130:  OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS



Section



   130.01   Assault



   130.02   Battery



   130.03   Reckless conduct



 



   130.99   Penalty



§ 130.01  ASSAULT.



   A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he engages
in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a
battery.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.02  BATTERY.



   A person commits a battery if he intentionally or knowingly without
legal justification and by any means causes bodily harm to an individual or
makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  RECKLESS CONDUCT.



   A person who causes bodily harm to or endangers the bodily safety of an
individual by any means, commits reckless conduct if he performs recklessly
the acts which cause the harm or endanger safety, whether they otherwise are
lawful or unlawful.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who commits an offense as established and defined in this
chapter shall be subject to a minimum fine of not less than $50 and a maximum
fine of not more than $750, unless otherwise specified herein.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02)



CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY



Section



Theft and Related Offenses



   131.01   Definitions



   131.02   Theft



Retail Theft



   131.15   Definitions



   131.16   Offense of retail theft



   131.17   Presumptions



   131.18   Detention



   131.19   Affirmative defense



   131.20   Civil liability



Damage and Trespass to Property



   131.30   Criminal damage to property



   131.31   Criminal trespass to land



   131.32   Graffiti prohibited



   131.33   Hours of operation



   131.34   Fishing regulations and fees



 



   131.99   Penalty



THEFT AND RELATED OFFENSES



§ 131.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OBTAINS CONTROL OVER PROPERTY.  The taking, carrying away or the sale,
conveyance, or transfer of title to, or interest in, or possession of
property.



   OWNER.  A person, other than the offender who has possession of or any
interest in the property involved even though such interest or possession is
unlawful, and without whose consent the offender has no authority to exert
control over the property.



   PERMANENT DEPRIVATION.  Means to:



   (1)   Defeat all recovery of the property by the owner;



   (2)   Deprive the owner permanently of the beneficial use of the
property;



   (3)   Retain the property with intent to restore it to the owner
only if the owner purchases or leases it back, or pays a reward or other
compensation for its return; or



   (4)   Sell, give, pledge, or otherwise transfer any interest in the
property or subject it to the claim of a person other than the owner.



   PROPERTY.  Includes real estate, money, commercial instruments,
admission or transportation tickets, written instruments representing or
embodying rights concerning anything of value, labor or services or otherwise
of value to the owner; things growing on, affixed to or found on land, or
part of or affixed to any building; electricity, gas and water; birds,
animals and fish, which ordinarily are kept in a state of confinement; food
and drink; samples, cultures, micro-organisms, specimens, records,
recordings, documents, blueprints, drawings, maps, and whole or partial
copies, descriptions, photographs, prototypes, or models thereof which
constitute, represent, evidence, reflect or record a secret scientific,
technical, merchandising, production or management information, design,
process, procedure, formula, invention or improvement.



   STOLEN PROPERTY.  Property over which control has been obtained by
theft.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)



§ 131.02  THEFT.



   A person commits theft when he knowingly:



   (A)   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the
owner;



   (B)   Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or



   (C)   Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to
have been stolen by another or under such circumstances as would reasonably
induce him to believe that the property was stolen, and:



      (1)   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or
benefit of the property;



      (2)   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in
such a manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit.



      (3)   Uses, conceals or abandons the property knowing such
use, concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently
of such use or benefits.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)



RETAIL THEFT



§ 131.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONCEAL MERCHANDISE.  Although there may be some notice of its
presence, that merchandise is not visible through ordinary observation.



   FULL RETAIL VALUE.  The merchant's stated or advertised price of the
merchandise.



   MERCHANDISE.  Any item of tangible personal property.



   MERCHANT.  An owner or operator of any retail mercantile establishment
or any agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer, direction, franchisee, or
independent contractor of such owner or operator.



   MINOR.  A person who is less than 19 years of age, is unemancipated
and resides with his parents or legal guardian.



   PERSON.  Any natural person or individual.



   PEACE OFFICER.  Any person who by virtue of his office or public
employment is vested by law with a duty to maintain public order or to make
arrests for offenses, whether that duty extends to all offenses or is limited
to specific offenses.



   PREMISES OF A RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT.  The retail mercantile
establishment, any common use areas in shopping centers and all parking areas
set aside by a merchant or on behalf of a merchant for the parking of
vehicles for the convenience of the patrons of such retail mercantile
establishment.



   MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT.  Any place where merchandise is displayed,
held, stored, or offered for sale to the public.



   SHOPPING CART.  Those push carts of the type which are commonly
provided by grocery stores, drug stores or other retail mercantile
establishments for the use of the public in transporting commodities in
stores and market, and, incidentally, from the stores to a place outside the
store.



   UNDER-RING.  To cause the cash register or other sales recording
device to reflect less than the full retail value of the merchandise.



(Ord. 1010, passed 10-18-82)



§ 131.16  OFFENSE OF RETAIL THEFT.



   A person commits the offense of retail theft when he knowingly:



   (A)   Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be
carried away or transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored,  or
offered for sale in a retail mercantile establishment with the intention of
retaining such merchandise or with the intention of depriving the merchant
permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such merchandise without
paying the full retail value of such merchandise;



   (B)   Alters, transfers or removes any label, price tag, marking,
indicia of value or any other markings which aid in determining value affixed
to any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail
mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise personally
or in consort with another at less than the full retail value with the
intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such
merchandise;



   (C)   Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered
for sale, in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on
which such merchandise is displayed to any other container with the intention
of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of such merchandise;



   (D)   Under-rings with the intention of depriving the merchant of
the full retail value of the merchandise; or



   (E)   Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail
mercantile establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the
time of such removal with the intention of depriving the merchant permanently
of the possession, use or benefit of such cart.



(Ord. 1010, passed 10-18-82)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.17  PRESUMPTIONS.



   If any person:



   (A)   Conceals upon his person or among his belongings, unpurchased
merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail
mercantile establishment; and



   (B)   Removes that merchandise beyond the last-known station for
receiving payments for that merchandise in that retail mercantile
establishment, such person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away,
or transferred such merchandise without paying the full retail value of such
merchandise.



(Ord. 1010, passed 10-18-82)



§ 131.18  DETENTION.



   (A)   As is or may be permitted by state law, any merchant who has
reasonable grounds to believe that a person has committed retail theft may
detain such person, on or off the premises of a retail mercantile
establishment in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time for
all or any of the following purposes:



      (1)   To request identification;



      (2)   So verify such identification;



      (3)   To make reasonable inquiry as to whether such person has
in his possession unpurchased merchandise and to make reasonable
investigation of the ownership of such merchandise;



      (4)   To inform a peace officer of the detention of the person
and surrender that person to the custody of the peace officer; or



      (5)   In the case of a minor, to inform a peace officer, the
parents, guardian or other private person interested in the welfare of that
minor of this detention and to surrender custody of such minor to such person.



   (B)   A merchant may make a detention as permitted herein off the
premises of a retail mercantile establishment only if such detention is
pursuant to an immediate pursuit of such person.



(Ord. 1010, passed 10-18-82)



§ 131.19  AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.



   A detention as permitted in this chapter does not constitute an arrest
or an unlawful restraint, nor shall it render the merchant liable to the
person so detained.



(Ord. 1010, passed 10-18-82)



§ 131.20  CIVIL LIABILITY.



   (A)   The parents or legal guardian of a minor who commits the
offense of retail theft as defined in § 131.15 shall be civilly liable for
the full retail value or cost of repair or cost of replacement of the
merchandise and actual damages not to exceed the limitation provided by state
law, including, but not limited to an act to authorize recovery of damages
from parents or legal guardians due to the wilful injury to person or
property by minors (ILCS Ch. 740, Act 115, §§ 1 et seq.) as now or
hereinafter amended.



   (B)   A conviction or plea of guilty of the retail theft is not a
prerequisite to the bringing of a civil suit hereunder. Recovery under an act
to authorize recovery of damages from parents or legal guardians due to the
wilful injury to person or property by minors (ILCS Ch. 740, Act 115, §§ 1
et seq.) may be had in addition to, and is not limited by, any other
provision of law which limits the liability of a parent or legal guardian for
tortious conduct of a minor.



(Ord. 1010, passed 10-18-82)



DAMAGE AND TRESPASS TO PROPERTY



§ 131.30  CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.



   Whoever performs any of the following acts, commits the offense of
criminal damage to property:



   (A)   Knowingly damage any real or personal property of another
without his consent;



   (B)   Recklessly by means of fire or explosive damages property of
another;



   (C)   Knowingly starts a fire on the land of another without his
consent;



   (D)   Knowingly injures a domestic animal of another without his
consent;



   (E)   Knowingly deposits on the land or in the building of another,
without his consent, any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound and
thereby intends to interfere with the use of the land or building.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.31  CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO LAND.



   (A)   Whoever enters upon the land or a building or any part thereof
of another, after having received, prior to such entry, notice from the
owner, occupant, or a peace officer in the lawful performance of his duties
that such entry is forbidden, or remains upon the land of another after
receiving notice from the owner, occupant or a peace officer in the lawful
performance of his duties to depart, commits the offense of criminal trespass
to land.



   (B)   A person has received notice from the owner, occupant, or a
peace officer in the lawful performance of his duties within the meaning of
division (A) above if he has been notified personally, either orally or in
writing, or if a printed or written notice forbidding such entry has been
conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such land or the
forbidden part thereof.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74; Am. Ord. 1510, passed 5-1-95)  Penalty, see 131.99



§ 131.32  GRAFFITI PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   GRAFFITI.  Graffiti in public view is hereby declared to be a nuisance
as set forth in the ordinances of the village and subject to the provisions
of the village ordinances regarding nuisances and abatement thereof.



   (B)   Nuisance Declared.  Graffiti in public view is hereby
declared to be a nuisance as set forth in the ordinances of the village and
subject to the provisions of the village ordinances regarding nuisances and
abatement thereof.



   (C)   Placement Upon Property.  It shall be unlawful for any person
to place graffiti upon the real or personal, public or private property of
another without that person's permission.



   (D)   Sign Permit Required.  It shall be unlawful for the owner
and/or occupant of fixed real or personal property which is in public view to
place or give permission for the placement of any graffiti on such property
without having first obtained a properly issued sign permit.



   (E)   Spray Paint, Markers Prohibited.  It shall be unlawful for
any person to possess, while in any public building or public facility or
while on private property, a spray paint container, paint, ink, marking pen
which contains a nonwater-soluble fluid, brush, applicator or any other
material for marking, scratching or etching with the intent to use such
material in violation of division (C) or (D) of this section.



(Ord. 1736, passed 4-5-98)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.33  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   The hours of operation for the Frankfort Prairie Park shall be from
dawn to dusk.



(Ord. 1993, passed 7-7-03)



§ 131.34  FISHING REGULATIONS AND FEES.



   Fishing shall be regulated by permit only for those 16 years of age and
over, with proof of a valid state fishing license, for the Frankfort Prairie
Park. The license fee rates follow:



   (A)   Resident   $1.00



   (B)   Non-Resident   $5.00



(Ord. 2004, passed 8-4-03)



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who commits an offense as established and defined
in this chapter for which another penalty is not otherwise herein provided
shall be subject to a minimum fine of not less than $50 and a maximum fine of
not more than $750, unless otherwise specified herein. 



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)



   (B)   (1)   (a)   The penalty for violation of § 131.32(C)
shall be a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $750.  In addition to
said fine, the offender may be ordered by the court to pay restitution to the
property owner for the costs of restoring the property to its state prior to
the application of graffiti.



         (b)   The penalty for violation of § 131.32(D) shall be
a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $750 and a separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.



         (c)   The penalty for violation of § 131.32(E) shall be
a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $750.



         (d)   The penalty for violation of § 131.33 shall be a
fine of not less than $50 nor more than $750.



         (e)   The penalty for violation of § 131.34 shall be a
fine of not less than $50 nor more than $750.



      (2)   Gang Member Penalties.  Any person convicted of a
violation of § 131.32(C), (D) or (E) who is found to have been a member of a
gang or a candidate for membership in a gang at the time the offense was
committed and who is found to have violated said subsection in conjunction
with gang- related activities, shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$250 nor more than $750 in addition to other penalties provided in this
section.



(Ord. 1736, passed 4-5-98; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02; Am. Ord. 1993,
passed 7-7-03; Am. Ord. 2004, 8-4-03)



CHAPTER 132:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER AND SAFETY



Section



General Provisions



   132.01   Disorderly conduct



   132.02   Loitering



   132.03   Smoking on public conveyances



   132.04   Storage of explosives



   132.05   Loud or unnecessary noises



   132.06   Mob action



   132.07   Gang signs prohibited



   132.08   Public intoxication



Curfew for Minors



   132.20   Minors prohibited on streets during certain hours



   132.21   Parental responsibility



   132.22   Detaining minors in violation of subchapter



   132.23   Truancy prohibited



 



   132.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 132.01  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   (A)   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or
disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace;



   (B)   With intent to annoy another, makes a telephone call, whether
or not conversation thereby ensues;



   (C)   Transmits in any manner to the Village Police Department or
Fire Protection District, a false alarm of fire, knowing at the time of such
transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such fire
exists;



   (D)   Transmits in any manner to any person, a false alarm to the
effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such a
place that its explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of
each such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that
such bomb or explosive is concealed in such place;



   (E)   Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer
or public employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed,
knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground
for believing that such an offense has been committed; or



   (F)   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful
purpose or deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any
window or other opening in it.



   (G)   Does or makes any unreasonable or offensive act, utterance,
gesture or display which, under the circumstances, creates a clear and
present danger of a breach of peace or imminent threat of violence; or



   (H)   Fails to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person known to
him to be a peace officer under circumstances where three or more persons are
committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, which acts
are likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance or
alarm; or



   (I)   Assembles with two or more persons for the purpose of using
force or violence to disturb the public peace; or



   (J)   Goes upon any school property, public or private within the
village at any time when other persons are present, for the purpose of making
or doing any unreasonable or offensive act, utterance, gesture, or does or
makes any unreasonable or offensive act, utterance, gesture or display, which
disrupts or interferes with the educational classes or social and athletic
activities then and there in progress;



   (K)   Transmits in any manner to any peace officer or public officer
or public employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed,
knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground
for believing that such an offense has been committed; or



   (L)   Fights by agreement or mutual consent with another person or
person; strikes, fights, or commits an assault and battery upon the person of
another, or aids, abets, assists or encourages any person to fight or to
commit an assault and battery upon another.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74; Am. Ord. 1736, passed 4-5-98)  Penalty, see §
132.99



§ 132.02  LOITERING.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      LOITERING.  Remaining idle in essentially one location and
including the concepts of spending time idly; to be dilatory; to linger; to
stay; to saunter; to delay; to stand around and also any activity described
by the colloquial expression “hanging around.”



      PUBLIC PLACE.  Any place to which the general public has access
and a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose,
but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the
public.  The term shall also include the front or immediate area of any
store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public
grounds, areas or parks.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander,
stand or remain idle either alone and/or in consort with others in a public
place in such manner so as to:



      (1)   Obstruct any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or
tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles,
traffic or pedestrians.



      (2)   Commit in or upon any public street, public highway,
public sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which
is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of
property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or
facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk
or any other public place or building, all of which prevents the free and
uninterrupted ingress, egress, and regress, therein, thereon and thereto.



   (C)   When any person causes or commits any of the conditions
enumerated in division (B) of this section, a police officer or any law
enforcement officer shall order that person to stop causing or committing
such conditions and to move on or disperse.  Any such person who fails or
refuses to obey such orders shall be guilty of a violation of this section.



Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.03  SMOKING ON PUBLIC CONVEYANCES.



   It is unlawful for any person to smoke or carry a lighted cigarette,
cigar or pipe in any public conveyance having a capacity of more than seven
passengers.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)  Penalty, see § 132.99



Cross-reference:



   Smoking prohibited in public places, see Ch. 138



   Tobacco regulations, see Ch. 119



§ 132.04  STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, EXPLOSIVE or
EXPLOSIVES shall mean any chemical compound or any mechanical mixture
containing any oxidizing and combustible units or other ingredients in such
proportions, quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, friction,
concussion, percussion or detonator of any part of the compound or mixture
may cause sudden generation of highly heated gases, that the resultant
gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructive effects upon life,
limb or contiguous objects, but does not mean gasoline, kerosene, naphtha,
turpentine, benzine, butane, propane colloided nitrocellulose in sheets or
rods or grains not under one-eighth of an inch in diameter, wet
nitrocellulose and wet nitro starch containing 20% or more moisture.
Manufactured articles such as fixed ammunition for small arms, fire crackers,
safety fuse, matches, and the like, shall not be held to be explosive when
the individual units contain explosives in such limited quantity, of such
nature or in such packing that it is impossible to produce a simultaneous or
a destructive explosion of such units, to the injury of life, limb or
property.



   (B)   No person shall keep or store any explosives in any house,
store or warehouse or other place within the corporate limits of said
village. This section shall not be deemed applicable to retailers of either
dynamite or gunpowder.



   (C)   No retailer of dynamite or gunpowder shall keep or store any
quantity thereof greater than 50 pounds weight in any storehouse, shop or
other place within the corporate limits of said village, except in fireproof
magazines constructed of material and design to be approved of by resolution
of the Village Board of Trustees.  Said quantity of 50 pounds weight shall
be kept confined in said fireproof magazines in closed tin or copper
canisters, and no such retailer of dynamite or gunpowder shall be permitted
to sell, retail or give away the same in said village after dusk in the
evening.



   (D)   It shall be the duty of the president of the Board of
Trustees, when complaint is made to him by any village officer, or upon the
affidavit of any citizen stating that there is probably cause to suspect any
person of keeping or concealing any dynamite, gunpowder or other explosive
contrary to the provisions of divisions (B) and (C) of this section, to take
with him any police officer or constable of this village, and search and
examine any place within the said corporate limits of said village to
ascertain the truth of such allegations or suspicion, and if it be found, on
examination of any premises as aforesaid, that dynamite or gunpowder is
therein stored or concealed contrary to the provisions of subsections (b) and
(c) of this section, the offender shall be forthwith prosecuted for a
violation thereof, and upon refusal of such offender to comply with the
provisions of this section within 24 hours after a written request so to do.



   (E)   No person, firm or corporation shall allow to be stored in any
freight depot in the village, any explosives overnight in any quantity.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.05  LOUD OR UNNECESSARY NOISES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause
to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise
which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of others.



   (B)   The following acts are examples of the noises prohibited by
this section:



      (1)   The throwing or propelling of any firecrackers, roman
candles or rockets of any type, or any articles of any explosive nature,
intended to be used as firecrackers.



      (2)   The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any
automobile, motorcycle, motorbus or other vehicle on any street or public
place of the village, except as a danger warning or the creation, by means of
any such signaling device, of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound or the
sounding of any horn or signaling device for an unnecessary period of time or
the use of any signaling device, except one operated by hand or electricity
or the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust,
and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held
up.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.06  MOB ACTION.



   (A)   Mob action consists of any of the following:



      (1)   The use of force or violence disturbing the public peace
by two or more persons acting together and without authority of law; or



      (2)   The assembly of two or more persons to do an unlawful
act; or



      (3)   The assembly of two or more persons, without authority
of law, for the purpose of doing violence to the person or property of any
one supposed to have been guilty of a violation of the law, or for the
purpose of exercising correctional powers or regulative powers over any
person by violence.



   (B)   Participating in mob action and not withdrawing on being
commanded to do so by any peace officer.



(Ord. 1736, passed 4-5-98)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.07  GANG SIGNS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to display,
demonstrate or throw a gang sign in any public place within the village.



(Ord. 1736, passed 4-5-98)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.08  PUBLIC INTOXICATION.



   (A)   Definitions.  For purposes of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      INTOXICATED PERSON or PERSON WHO IS INTOXICATED.  Any person who
appears mentally, physically or emotionally impaired due to alcohol, drugs or
controlled substances or a combination of them. This section imposes a
rebuttable presumption a person is intoxicated if a person exhibits at least
two of the following characteristics or conduct:



         (a)   Odor of intoxicating liquor on the breath;



         (b)   Blood shot eyes;



         (c)   Dilated pupils;



         (d)   Stumbling or staggering walk;



         (e)   Slurred speech;



         (f)   Unable to stand or walk unaided when not due to
any non-alcohol related physical condition or disability;



         (g)   Inability to adequately perform the field sobriety
tests utilized in determining if a person is under the influence while
operating a motor vehicle;



         (h)   Public urination;



         (i)   Public vomiting;



         (j)   Public nudity or indecency;



         (k)   Conduct which would be considered belligerent,
argumentative, threatening, intimidating or offensive.



      PUBLIC NUISANCE.  Conduct by a person which would be disorderly,
offensive or obnoxious to a reasonable person including but not limited to
the following actions: threatening or combative speech; lewd, sexually
suggestive or offensive conduct or speech; public nudity; public urination;
threatening, belligerent or combative actions or conduct; fighting; or any
disorderly conduct as prohibited in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-1.



      PUBLIC PLACE.  Any street, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, park,
recreational trail, public green or open space, parking lot, school,
governmental facility or office, church or place of worship, or building or
facility generally open to the public.



   (B)   Prohibition of intoxicated person in a public place.  No
person who is intoxicated shall be in a public place and:



      (1)   Be a public nuisance; or



      (2)   Engage in conduct which does or could injure
himself/herself or others; or



      (3)   Engage in conduct which does or could damage property.



(Ord. 2694, passed 2-22-11)  Penalty, see § 132.99



CURFEW FOR MINORS



§ 132.20  MINORS PROHIBITED ON STREETS DURING CERTAIN HOURS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under 16 years of age to
be on, about or remain upon any street, alley, public way or public place
situated within the corporate limits of the village between the hours of 9:30
p.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless such person is accompanied by a parent, guardian or
other person having custody of said minor person or unless the minor person
is engaged in lawful and permitted employment making it necessary to be in a
place or on such street, alley, public way or public place after 9:30 p.m. or
before 5:00 a.m.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person between 16 years of age
and under 18 years of age to be on, about or remain upon any street, alley,
public way or public place situated within the corporate limits of the
village between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Sunday through 5:00
a.m. Friday and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. on Friday
evening and Saturday evening unless such person is accompanied by a parent or
guardian, or other person having custody of said minor, or unless said minor
is engaged in lawful employment making it necessary to be in a place at a
time not otherwise permitted herein.



   (C)   Exemption. No child shall be guilty of this offense if
involved in, going to or coming from an activity involving the exercise of
the child's rights protected under the First Amendment to the United States
Constitution and or Article 1, Sections 2, 4, and 5 of the Constitution of
the State of Illinois.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74; Am. Ord. 1085, passed 10-18-82; Am. Ord. 2743,
passed 10-3-11)  Penalty, see § 132.99



§ 132.21  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   Any parent, legal guardian or other person commits improper supervision
of a minor when he permits a minor in his custody or control under 18 years
of age to violate the municipal curfew of the village.



(Ord 862, passed 4-15-74; Am. Ord. 1085, passed 10-18-82)  Penalty, see §
132.99



§ 132.22  DETAINING MINORS IN VIOLATION OF SUBCHAPTER.



   (A)   Every member of the police force is authorized to detain any
minor violating the provisions of this subchapter until the parent or
guardian of the minor shall take said minor into their custody, and said
police officer shall notify the parent or guardian as soon as is practicable
after taking the minor into custody.



   (B)   Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a
police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in
the public place.  The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest
under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense
in § 132.20(C) is present.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74; Am. Ord. 2743, passed 10-3-11)



§ 132.23  TRUANCY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Absence prohibited.  It shall be a violation of this chapter
for any person under the age of 18 who is enrolled in a public, private or
parochial school to absent himself from attendance at such school without the
permission of his legal guardian(s) or parent(s).  Any person who shall so
absent himself shall be guilty of the offense of truancy and be subject to
the penalties set forth below.  Emergency or unforeseen absences due to
illness or other reasonable cause beyond the control of the person so
absenting himself from school without the permission of his parent(s) or
legal guardian(s) shall not constitute truancy if such permission is obtained
from said parent(s) or legal guardian(s) and submitted in writing to the
proper school authorities within 24 hours of such absence.



   (B)   Initial contact and documentation: procedure.



      (1)   Upon encountering a school-age individual outside of
school during school hours, a police officer or truant officer shall:



         (a)   Question such individual in order to determine
whether the individual has violated this chapter and verify truancy with the
school via radio, telephone or personal visit; and



         (b)   Upon reasonably ascertaining that such individual
has violated this chapter, seize the individual and return him to the proper
authority at the school; and



         (c)   Complete a truancy report containing the following
information: full name, date of birth, address, telephone number, parent or
guardian's name, work place telephone number and school attended; and



         (d)   Forward a copy of the report to juvenile
investigations and the truant officer of Will County.



      (2)   A juvenile officer shall renew the report and complete
or update an applicable juvenile contact card.  Further, a school
representative or county truant officer may file a report of truancy directly
with a juvenile directly in cases of frequent truancy that is not documented
by police reports.



   (C)   Chronic truants: procedure.  A chronic truant, hereinafter
defined as an individual who has violated this section three times in one
year or has otherwise been shown to have absented himself from school three
times in one year, shall submit to a student and parent conference with
either a juvenile officer, county truant officer or school representative at
the request of same.  The following disposition or "staffing" may result:



      (1)   Station adjustment.



      (2)   Station adjustment with supervision by a juvenile
officer, if applicable.



      (3)   Referral or chronic truant to counseling and/or
appropriate agency to deal with the specialized problem.



      (4)   Referral to the court.



   (D)   Recommended dispositions in juvenile or adult court.



      (1)   The court shall consider the following as possible
dispositions of a chronic truancy case:



         (a)   Adult supervision for one year or for the balance
of the school year in which the offense was committed.



         (b)   Suspension of driver's license where applicable.



         (c)   Community service work.



         (d)   Fines of $150 to $750, which may be waived upon
the successful completion of the school year without unexplained absence.



   (E)   Referral to specific agencies.  Referral to specific agencies
available to address specific problems.



(Ord. 1736, passed 4-5-98)



§ 132.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who commits an offense as established and defined
in this subchapter shall be subject to a minimum fine of not less than $50
and a maximum fine of not more than $750 unless otherwise specified herein.



   (B)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of § 132.04 (B) and
(E) shall be fined not more than $750 for every offense.



   (C)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of § 132.04 (C) shall
be fined not less than $5 nor more than $750 for every offense.



   (D)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of § 132.04 (D) shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $750.



(Ord 862, passed 4-15-74)



   (E)   Any person who shall violate any provision of § 132.06 shall
be fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 for the first violation, and
shall be fined not less than $750 for the second and each subsequent
violation.  Each day that a violation of this section may continue shall be
deemed a separate violation hereof.  (Ord. 1736, passed 4-5-98)



   (F)   Any person found to have violated § 132.07 shall be fined not
less than $150 and not more than $750. 



(Ord. 1736, passed 4-5-98)



   (G)   Any person found to have violated any provision of § 132.08
shall be fined not less than $250 and not more than $500.  (Ord. 2694,
passed 2-22-11)



(Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02)



CHAPTER 133:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION



Section



   133.01   Impersonating a peace officer



   133.02   Resisting or obstructing a peace officer



 



   133.99   Penalty



§ 133.01  IMPERSONATING A PEACE OFFICER.



   A person commits a false personation when he falsely represents himself
to a member of any police, fraternal or veteran's organization, including the
Illinois Police Association, or a representative of any charitable
organization, or when any person exhibits or uses in any manner any decal,
badge or insignia of any police organization when not authorized to do so by
such police organization.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)  Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.02  RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER.



   Whoever knowingly resists or obstructs the performance by one known to
the person to be a peace officer of any authorized act within his official
capacity commits the offense of resisting or obstructing a peace officer.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)  Penalty, see § 133.99



§ 133.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who commits an offense as established and defined in this
chapter shall be subject to a minimum fine of not less than $50 and a maximum
fine of not more than $750 unless otherwise specified herein.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02)



CHAPTER 134:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



Section



General Provisions



   134.01   Definitions



   134.02   Public indecency



Prostitution



   134.15   Patronizing or soliciting for prostitute



   134.16   Pimping



   134.17   Pandering



   134.18   Keeping a place of prostitution



Obscenity



   134.30   Definitions



   134.31   Elements of offense of obscenity



   134.32   Interpretation of evidence



   134.33   Prima facie evidence



   134.34   Affirmative defenses



   134.35   (Reserved)



   134.36   Sale or exhibition of obscene materials



   134.37   Sale or exhibition of obscene materials to minors



 



   134.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 134.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PROSTITUTION.  Any person who performs, offers or agrees to perform
any act of sexual penetration as herein defined for money, or any touching or
fondling of the sex organs of one person by another person, for money or
anything of value, for the purpose of sexual arousal or gratification commits
an act of prostitution.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any place where the prohibited conduct may reasonably
be expected to be viewed by others.



   SEXUAL CONDUCT.  Any intentional or knowing touching or fondling by
the victim or the accused, either directly or through clothing, of the sex
organs, anus or breast of the victim or the accused or any part of the body
of a child under 13 years of age, for the purpose of sexual gratification or
arousal of the victim or accused.



   SEXUAL PENETRATION.  Any contact, however slight, between the sex
organ of one person and the sex organ, mouth or anus of another person, or
any intrusion, however slight, of any part of the body of one person or of
any animal or object into the sex organ or anus of another person, including
but not limited to cunnilingus, fellatio or anal penetration.  Evidence of
emission of semen is not required to prove sexual penetration.



§ 134.02  PUBLIC INDECENCY.



   Any person of the age of 17 years or upward who performs any of the
following acts in a public place commits a public indecency:



   (A)   An act of sexual penetration or sexual conduct as herein
defined; or



   (B)   A lewd exposure of the body done with the intent to arouse or
to satisfy sexual desire of the person.



Penalty, see § 134.99



PROSTITUTION



§ 134.15  PATRONIZING OR SOLICITING FOR PROSTITUTE.



   (A)   Any person who performs any of the following acts with a
person not his spouse commits the offense of patronizing a prostitute:



      (1)   Engages in an act of sexual penetration as defined in §
134.01 with a prostitute.



      (2)   Enters or remains in a place of prostitution with intent
to engage in an act of sexual penetration as defined in § 134.01.



   (B)   Any person who performs any of the following acts commits the
offense of soliciting for a prostitute:



      (1)   Solicits another for the purpose of prostitution.



      (2)   Arranges or offers to arrange a meeting of persons for
the purpose of prostitution.



      (3)   Directs another to a place knowing the direction is for
the purpose of prostitution.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.16  PIMPING.



   Any person who receives money or other property from a prostitute, not
for a lawful consideration, knowing it was earned in whole or in part from
the practice of prostitution, commits the offense of pimping.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.17  PANDERING.



   Any person who performs any of the following acts for money commits the
offense of pandering:



   (A)   Compels a person to become a prostitute; or



   (B)   Arranges or offers to arrange a situation in which a person
may practice prostitution.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.18  KEEPING A PLACE OF PROSTITUTION.



   Any person who has or exercises control over the use of any place which
could offer seclusion or shelter for the practice of prostitution, who
performs any of the following acts, keeps a place of prostitution, which is
hereby declared to be an offense:



   (A)   Knowingly grants or permits the use of such place for the
purpose of prostitution.



   (B)   Grants or permits the use of such place under circumstances
from which he could reasonably know that the place is used or is to be used
for purposes of prostitution.



   (C)   Permits the continued use of a place after becoming aware of
facts or circumstances from which he should reasonably know that the place is
being used for purposes of prostitution.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)  Penalty, see § 134.99



OBSCENITY



§ 134.30  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OBSCENE.  Any material or performance is obscene if:



      (1)   The average person, applying contemporary community
standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient
interest; and



      (2)   The average person, applying contemporary community
standards, would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently offensive
way, ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or
perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions or lewd
exhibition of the genitals; and



      (3)   Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-20)



   PUBLICATION or OTHER ARTICLE.  Any representation, description or
embodiment whatsoever, including but not limited to:



      (1)   Writings and pictures, whether or not printed.



      (2)   Photographs and photographic film, developed or
undeveloped.



      (3)   Phonograph records and other sound recordings.



      (4)   Sculptures.



   SALE or EXHIBITION.  Circulation, distribution, giving away and all
other forms of dissemination.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)



§ 134.31  ELEMENTS OF OFFENSE OF OBSCENITY.



   A person commits the offense of obscenity when, with knowledge of the
nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise reasonable
inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof, he:



   (A)   Sells, delivers or provides, or offers or agrees to sell,
deliver or provide any obscene writing, picture, record or other
representation or embodiment of the obscene; or



   (B)   Presents or directs any obscene play, dance or other
performance or participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it
obscene; or



   (C)   Publishes, exhibits, or otherwise makes available anything
obscene; or



   (D)   Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene
exhibition of his body for gain; or



   (E)   Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or
material with intent to disseminate it in violation of this subchapter; or



   (F)   Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material
represented or held out by him to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-20)



§ 134.32  INTERPRETATION OF EVIDENCE.



   (A)   Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults,
except that it shall be judged with reference to children or other specially
susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of the material or the
circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed for or directed
to such an audience.



   (B)   Where circumstances of production, presentation, sale,
dissemination, distribution, or publicity indicate that material is being
commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is
probative with respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the
conclusion that the matter is lacking in serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.



   (C)   In any prosecution for an offense under this subchapter,
evidence shall be admissible to show:



      (1)   The character of the audience for which the material was
designed or to which it was directed;



      (2)   What the predominant appeal of the material would be for
ordinary adults or a special audience, and what effect, if any, it would
probably have on the behavior of such people;



      (3)   The artistic, literary, scientific, educational or other
merits of the materials, or absence thereof;



      (4)   The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material
in this state;



      (5)   Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in
advertising or other promotion of the material;



      (6)   Purpose of the author, creator, publisher or
disseminator.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-20)



§ 134.33  PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE.



   The creation, purchase, procurement or possession of a mold, engraved
plate or other embodiment of obscenity specially adapted for reproducing
multiple copies, or the possession of more than three copies of obscene
material shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to disseminate.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-20)



§ 134.34  AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES.



   It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity that the dissemination:



   (A)   Was not for gain and was made to personal associates other
than children under 18 years of age;



   (B)   Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other
special justification for possession of such material.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-20)



§ 134.35  (RESERVED).



§ 134.36  SALE OR EXHIBITION OF OBSCENE MATERIALS.



   The sale or exhibition of any obscene publication or other article, as
judged with reference to ordinary adults, is declared to be a public nuisance
and is prohibited.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.37  SALE OR EXHIBITION OF OBSCENE MATERIALS TO MINORS.



   Any person, who with knowledge of the nature or contents thereof,
sells, offers to sell, exhibits or offers to exhibit to any person under the
age of 18 years, any publication or other article, obscene as judged with
reference to ordinary persons of the age of the person to whom the
publication or other article is sold, offered for sale, exhibited or offered
for exhibition, shall be guilty of an offense.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who commits an offense as established and defined in this
chapter for which no other penalty is set forth shall be subject to a minimum
fine of not less than $50 and a maximum fine of not more than $750 unless
otherwise specified herein.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02)



CHAPTER 135:  GAMBLING OFFENSES



Section



   135.01   Definitions



   135.02   Gambling



   135.03   Keeping a gambling place; revocation of license and permits



   135.04   Seizure of gambling devices



   135.05   Prohibition of video gaming within the corporate limits of
the village



   135.06   Raffles



 



   135.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Charitable games events, see §§ 115.40 - 115.42



§ 135.01  DEFINITIONS.



      For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GAMBLING DEVICE.  Any clock, tape machine, slot machine or other
machine or device for the reception of money or other things of value on
chance or skill or upon the action of which money or other things of value is
staked, hazarded, bet, won or lost or any mechanism, furniture, fixture,
equipment or other device designed primarily for use in a gambling place. A
GAMBLING DEVICE does not include:



   (1)   A coin-in-the-slot operated mechanical device played for
amusement which rewards the player with the right to replay such mechanical
device, which device is so constructed or devised as to make such result of
the operation thereof depend in part upon the skill of the player and which
returns to the player thereof no money, property or right to receive money or
property.



   (2)   Vending machines by which full and adequate return is made for
the money invested and in which there is no element of chance or hazard.



   LOTTERY.  Any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are
distributed by chance among persons who have paid or promised consideration
for a chance to win the prizes, whether the scheme or procedure is called a
lottery, raffle, gift, sale or some other name.



   POLICY GAME.  Any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or
guarantees by any instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token or other
device that any particular number, character, ticket or certificate shall in
the event of any contingency in the nature of a lottery entitle the purchaser
or holder to receive money, property or evidence of debt.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)



§ 135.02  GAMBLING.



   (A)   A person commits gambling when, within the corporate limits of
the village, he:



      (1)   Plays a game of chance or skill for money or other thing
of value, unless excepted in division (B);



      (2)   Makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest, or
any political nomination, appointment, or election;



      (3)   Operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents,
sells, bargains for the sale or lease of, manufactures, or distributes any
gambling device;



      (4)   Contracts to have or give himself or another the option
to buy or sell, or contracts to buy or sell, at a future time, any grain or
other commodity whatsoever, or any stock or security of any company, where it
is at the time of making such contract intended by both parties thereto that
the contract to buy or sell, or the option, whenever exercised, or the
contract resulting therefrom, shall be settled, not by the receipt or
delivery of such property, but by the payment only of differences in prices
thereof; however, the issuance, purchase, sale, exercise, endorsement or
guarantee, by or through a person registered with the Secretary of State
pursuant to ILCS Ch. 815, Act 5, § 8, or by or through a person exempt from
such registration under ILCS Ch. 815, Act 5, § 8, of a put, call, or other
option to buy or sell securities which have been registered with the
Secretary of State or which are exempt from such registration under ILCS Ch.
815, Act 5, § 3 is not gambling within the meaning of this division (A)(4);



      (5)   Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument, or
apparatus by means of which bets or wagers have been, or are, recorded or
registered, or knowingly possesses any money which he has received in the
courses of a bet or wager;



      (6)   Sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of
skill or chance, political nomination, appointment, or election;



      (7)   Sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to
sell, or transfers any ticket or share for any lottery;



      (8)   Sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to
sell, or knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket, slip, record,
document, or other similar device;



      (9)   Knowingly drafts, prints, or publishes any lottery
ticker or share, or any policy ticket, slip, record, document or similar
device, except for such activity related to lotteries, bingo games, and
raffles authorized by and conducted in accordance with the laws of Illinois
or any other state or foreign government;



      (10)   Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game, except
for such activity related to lotteries, bingo games, and raffles authorized
by and conducted in accordance with the laws of Illinois or any other state;
or



      (11)   Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting
odds, or changes in betting odds by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore,
or similar means; or knowingly installs or maintains equipment for the
transmission or receipt of such information; except that nothing in this
division prohibits transmission or receipt of such information for use in
news reporting of sporting events or contests.



   (B)   Participants in any of the following activities shall not be
convicted of gambling:



      (1)   Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the
happening of chance including without limitation contracts of indemnity or
guaranty and life or health or accident insurance;



      (2)   Offers of prizes, awards, or compensation to the actual
contestants in any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed,
strength, or endurance or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered in
such contest;



      (3)   Pari-mutuel betting as authorized by the law of this
state;



      (4)   Manufacture of gambling devices, including the
acquisition of essential parts therefor and the assembly thereof, for
transportation in interstate or foreign commerce to any place outside this
state when such transportation is not prohibited by any applicable federal
law;



      (5)   The game commonly known as “bingo,” when conducted
in accordance with ILCS Ch. 230, Act 25, §§ 1 et seq.;



      (6)   Lotteries when conducted by the State of Illinois in
accordance with ILCS Ch. 20, Act 1605, §§ 1 et seq.;



      (7)   Possession of an antique slot machine that is neither
used nor intended to be used in the operation or promotion of any unlawful
gambling activity or enterprise.  For the purpose of this division, an
ANTIQUE SLOT MACHINE is one manufactured 25 years ago or earlier;



      (8)   Raffles and poker runs when conducted in accordance with
ILCS Ch. 230, Act 15, §§ 0.01 et seq.;



      (9)   Charitable games when conducted in accordance with ILCS
Ch. 230, Act 30, §§ 1 et seq.; or



      (10)   Pull tabs and jar games when conducted under ILCS Ch.
230, Act 20, § 1 et seq.



      (11)   Gambling games conducted on riverboats when authorized
by ILCS Ch. 230, Act 10, §§ 1 et seq.



   (C)   Circumstantial evidence.  In prosecutions under divisions
(A)(1) through (11), circumstantial evidence shall have the same validity and
weight as in any criminal prosecution.



(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1)  (Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)  Penalty, see §
130.99



Statutory reference:



   ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1, has been amended to prohibit and exempt
additional activities.



§ 135.03  KEEPING A GAMBLING PLACE; REVOCATION OF LICENSE AND PERMITS.



   (A)   A gambling place is any real estate, vehicle, boat or any
other property whatsoever used for the purposes of gambling. Any person who
knowingly permits any premises or property owned or occupied by him or under
his control to be used as a gambling place shall commit the offense of
keeping a gambling place.



   (B)   When any premises is determined by a court having jurisdiction
to be a gambling place:



      (1)   The premises is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
and may be proceeded against as such.



      (2)   All licenses, permits or certificates issued by the
village authorizing the serving of food or liquor on such premises shall be
void and no license, permit or certificate so cancelled shall be reissued for
the premises until authorized by ordinance or resolution of the Village Board
of Trustees.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)  Penalty, see § 135.99



§ 135.04  SEIZURE OF GAMBLING DEVICES.



   (A)   Every gambling device which is incapable of lawful use is
contraband and shall be subject to seizure, confiscation and destruction by
the village. As used in this section, a GAMBLING DEVICE WHICH IS INCAPABLE OF
LAWFUL USE includes any slot machine, and includes any machine or device
constructed for the reception of money or other thing of value and so
constructed as to return on chance to the player thereof money, property or a
right to receive money or property.



   (B)   Every gambling device shall be seized and forfeited as
contraband to the village. Any money or other thing of value integrally
related to acts of gambling shall be seized and forfeited as contraband to
the village.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)



§ 135.05  PROHIBITION OF VIDEO GAMING WITHIN THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE
VILLAGE.



   Pursuant to Section 27 of the Video Gaming Act, (ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40,
§ 27) the village prohibits video gaming within its corporate limits.



(Ord. 2681, passed 11-1-10)  Penalty see § 135.99



§ 135.06  RAFFLES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      BUSINESS. A voluntary organization composed of individuals and
businesses who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial and civic interests of a community.



      CHARITABLE. An organization or institution organized and operated
to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those
eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.



      EDUCATIONAL. An organization or institution organized and
operated to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by
methods common to schools and institutions of learning which compare
favorably in their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in
tax-supported schools.



      FRATERNAL. An organization of persons having a common interest,
the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members
and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen
the burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared
for by the government.



      LABOR. An organization composed of workers organized with the
objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit
and the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective
occupations.



      LICENSEE. An organization which has been issued a license to
operate a raffle.



      NET PROCEEDS. The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles,
less reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other
reasonable operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.



      NON-PROFIT. An organization or institution organized and
conducted on a not-for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to any
one as a result of the operation.



      PERSON. An individual, firm, organization, public, or public, or
private corporation, government, partnership, or unincorporated association.



      RAFFLE. A form of lottery, as defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §
28-2(b), conducted by an organization licensed under this section, in which:



         (1)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of
value for a chance, represented and differentiated by a number or by a
combination of numbers or by some other means, one or more of which chances
is to be designated as a winning chance;



         (2)   The winning chance is to be determined through a
drawing or by some other method based on an element of chance by an act or
set of acts on the part of persons conducting or connected with the lottery,
except that the winning chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a
publicly exhibited sporting contest.



      RAFFLE ADMINISTRATOR(S). The Village Clerk of Frankfort.



      RAFFLE EVENT. An event at which at least one raffle is conducted
by a licensee.



      RELIGIOUS. Any church, congregation, society, or organization
founded for the purpose of religious worship.



      VETERANS. An organization or association comprised of members of
which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows
or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the
welfare of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in
such a way as to confer a public benefit.



   (B)   Classification of licenses.



      (1)   Class A: General raffle license. A general raffle
license shall permit an organization the ability to conduct a raffle that may
include multiple drawings to award prizes, but all drawings must occur on the
same day and at the same location and within the confines of the same raffle
event.



      (2)   Class B: Financial hardship raffle license. A Class B
raffle license allows a not-for-profit fund raising organization or group,
organized for the sole purpose of providing financial hardship assistance to
an identified individual or group of individuals suffering severe financial
hardship as a result of an injury, disability, accident, or disaster, to
conduct one raffle event for that purpose.



      (3)   Class C: Annual raffle license. An annual raffle license
permits an organization to regularly conduct raffles as defined herein within
12 consecutive calendar months. Such license shall permit no more than 52
raffle events per year.



   (C)   License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to
conduct or operate a raffle, or to sell, offer for sale, convey, issue, or
otherwise transfer for value a chance on a raffle, unless conduct pursuant to
a license duly issued by the village and in accordance with the provisions of
this section. Such license, when issued, is effective for all areas within
the village. Such license is not effective outside the village.



   (D)   Raffle application. Any person seeking to conduct or operate a
raffle shall file an application therefor with the Village Clerk on forms
provided by the village. Such application shall contain the following
information:



      (1)   The name, address, and type of organization;



      (2)   The length of existence of the organization and, if
incorporated, the date and state of incorporation;



      (3)   The name, address, telephone number, and date of birth
of the organization’s presiding officer, secretary, raffles manager, and
any other members responsible for the conduct and operation of the raffle;



      (4)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes to be awarded
in the raffle;



      (5)   The maximum retail value of each prize to be awarded in
the raffle;



      (6)   The maximum price charged for each raffle chance issued
or sold;



      (7)   The maximum number of raffle chances to be issued;



      (8)   The area or areas within the village in which raffle
chances will be sold or issued;



      (9)   The time period during which raffle chances will be sold
or issued;



      (10)   The date, time, and location at which winning chances
will be determined;



      (11)   A sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit
character of the applicant organization, signed by its presiding officer and
secretary;



      (12)   A certificate signed by the presiding officer of the
applicant organization attesting to the fact that the information contained
in the application is true and correct; and



      (13)   A fidelity bond in an amount equal to the aggregate
retail value of all prizes to be awarded shall accompany such application.



   (E)   Licensee qualifications.



      (1)   Raffle licenses shall be issued only to bona fide
religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational or veterans’
organizations that operate without profit to their members and which have
been in existence continuously for a period of five years immediately before
making application for a raffle license and which have had during that entire
five-year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their
objects, or to a non-profit fundraising organization that the licensing
authority determines is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial
assistance to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering
extreme financial hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident,
or disaster.



      (2)   The following are ineligible for any raffle license:



         (a)   Any person whose felony conviction will impair the
person’s ability to engage in the licensed position;



         (b)   Any person who is or has been a professional
gambler or gambling promoter;



         (c)   Any person who is not of good moral character;



         (d)   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined
in division (E)(2)(a), (b) or (c) of this section has a proprietary,
equitable or credit interest, or in which such a person is active or employed;



         (e)   Any organization in which a person defined in
division (E)(2)(a), (b) or (c) of this section is an officer, director, or
employee, whether compensated or not; and



         (f)   Any organization in which a person defined in
division (E)(2)(a), (b) or (c) of this section is to participate in the
management or operation of a raffle as defined in this section.



   (F)   License issuance.



      (1)   The Village Clerk shall receive all license
applications. If an application is approved, the Village Clerk shall
forthwith issue a raffle license to the applicant. The village shall act on a
license application within 30 days from the date of application.



      (2)   A Class A and B raffle license shall be valid for a
period of 60 days from and after its issuance. In no event shall a Class C
license be authorized for a period longer than one year.



      (3)   A raffle license shall contain the following:



         (a)   The area in which raffle chances will be sold or
issued;



         (b)   The period of time during which raffle chances
will be sold or issued; and



         (c)   The date, time, and location on or at which the
winning chances will be determined.



      (4)   Such license shall be prominently displayed at the time
and location of the determination of the winning chances.



      (5)   A license may be suspended or revoked for any violation
of this section.



   (G)   Licensing fees. A license fee of $25 shall be payable to the
village upon submission of a raffle application. When application for a
raffle license is filed, such application fee is nonrefundable, even if the
application is denied or in the event the raffle is cancelled for any reason.



   (H)   Conduct of raffles. The conducting of raffles is subject to
the following restrictions:



      (1)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the licensee.



      (2)   No person, except a bona fide member of the licensee may
participate in the management or operation of the raffle.



      (3)   No person may receive remuneration or profit for
participating in the management or operation of the raffle.



      (4)   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the
winning chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also
licensed under this section.



      (5)   Raffle chances may be sold, offered for sale, conveyed,
issued or otherwise transferred for value only within the area specified on
the license and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license.



      (6)   A person under the age of 18 years may participate in
the conducting of raffles or chances only with the permission of a parent or
guardian. A person under the age of 18 years may be within the area where
winning chances in a raffle are being determined only when accompanied by his
or her parent or guardian.



      (7)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed $50,000.



      (8)   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed $50,000.



      (9)   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle
chance sold, offered for sale, conveyed, issued, or otherwise transferred for
value shall not exceed $150.



      (10)   The maximum number of days during which chances may be
sold, offered for sale, conveyed, issued, or otherwise transferred for value
shall not exceed one year.



      (11)   The sale of raffle chances is only authorized within
the borders of the village.



   (I)   Raffles manager; fidelity bond. All operation of and the
conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single manager
designated by the organization. The manager shall give a fidelity bond in an
amount determined by the village equal to the amount to the aggregate retail
value of all prizes to be awarded in favor of the organization conditioned
upon his honesty in the performance of his or her duties. Terms of the bond
shall provide that notice shall be given in writing to the village not less
than 30 days prior to its cancellation. The Board of Trustees of the village
may waive this bond requirement by including a waiver provision in the
license issued to an organization under this section, provided that a license
containing such waiver provision shall be granted only by unanimous vote of
the members of the licensed organization.



   (J)   Records to be kept.



      (1)   Each licensee shall keep records of its gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds for each single gathering or occasion at which
winning chances in a raffle are determined. All deductions from gross
receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented with
receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the
recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee,
purpose, amount, and date of payment.



      (2)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles shall be
segregated from other revenues of the licensee, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit
organization pursuant to license therefor issued by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each licensee
shall have separate records of its raffles. The person who accounts for gross
receipts, expenses, and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not
be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the licensee.



      (3)   Each licensee shall report promptly after the conclusion
of each raffle to its membership. Each licensee shall report promptly to the
village its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the raffle, and
the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required herein. Each licensee
shall file its records and report with the Village Clerk within 60 days
following the conclusion of the raffle.



      (4)   Records required by this section shall be preserved for
three years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to
operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.



(Ord. 3143, passed 4-16-18)  Penalty, see § 135.99



§ 135.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who commits an
offense as established and defined in this chapter shall be subject to a
minimum fine of not less than $50 and a maximum fine of not more than $750
unless otherwise specified herein.



   (B)   Failure to comply with any of the requirements of § 135.06
shall constitute a violation, and any person shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not less than $250 nor more than $750 for each offense. Each day in
which a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02; Am. Ord. 3143,
passed 4-16-18)



CHAPTER 136:  DRUG OFFENSES



Section



Model Glue



   136.01   Definition



   136.02   Inhalation of glue



   136.03   Sale or possession of glue



   136.04   Sale to or possession by minor of glue; records to be kept



Other Drugs and Drug-Related Products



   136.05   Inhalants



   136.06   Cannabis prohibited



   136.07   Drug paraphernalia



Look-Alike Drugs, Including Synthetic Marijuana and Bath Salts



   136.20   Definitions



   136.21   Possession, distribution or sale of controlled substances



   136.22   Licensee to provide testing sample



   136.23   Violation by village licensee



 



   136.99   Penalty



MODEL GLUE



§ 136.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GLUE.  Any glue or cement of the type commonly used in the building of
model airplanes, boats and automobiles, containing toluene, acetone or other
solvent or chemical having the property of releasing toxic vapors.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)



§ 136.02  INHALATION OF GLUE.



   No person shall, for the purpose of causing a condition of
intoxication, euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or dulling of
the senses or nervous system, intentionally smell or inhale the fumes from
any glue; however, this section shall not apply to the inhalation of any
anesthesia for medical or dental purposes.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)  Penalty, see § 136.99



§ 136.03  SALE OR POSSESSION OF GLUE.



   No person shall, for the purpose of violating or aiding another to
violate any provision of this subchapter, intentionally possess, buy, sell,
transfer possession or receive possession of any glue.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)  Penalty, see § 136.99



§ 136.04  SALE TO OR POSSESSION BY MINOR OF GLUE; RECORDS TO BE KEPT.



   (A)   Sale of glue to or possession by minor prohibited.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, no
person under 18 years of age shall possess or buy any glue.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, no
person shall sell or transfer possession of any glue to another person under
18 years of age.



      (3)   A person may sell or transfer possession of glue to a
person under 18 years of age for building or other lawful use where the minor
has in his possession and exhibits the written consent of his parent or
guardian.



   (B)   Records of sale and transfer of glue to minor.



      (1)   A person making a sale or transfer of possession of glue
to a person under 18 years of age who exhibits the written consent of his
parent or guardian shall record the name, address, sex and age of the minor
and the name and address of the consenting parent or guardian. All data
required by this section shall be kept in a permanent type register available
for inspection by the Police Department.



      (2)   Any person above the age of 18 years of age making a
purchase of glue must produce identification as to his age and must sign his
name and address on the record of sale.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)  Penalty, see § 136.99



OTHER DRUGS AND DRUG-RELATED PRODUCTS



§ 136.05  INHALANTS.



   (A)   Use prohibited.  No person shall ingest, breathe, inhale or
drink any compound, liquid or chemical containing toluol, hexane,
trichloroethylene, acetone, toluene, ethyl acetate, methyl ethyl ketone,
tricholoroethan, isopropanol, methyl isobutyl ketone, methyl cellosolve
acetate, cyclohexanone, the alkaloids atropine, hyoscyamine, or scopolamine,
or any other substance for the purpose of inducing a condition of
intoxication, stupefaction, depression, giddiness, paralysis or irrational
behavior, or in any manner changing, distorting or disturbing the auditory,
visual or mental processes.  For the purpose of this Act, any such condition
so induced shall be deemed to be an intoxicated condition.



   (B)   Sale or delivery prohibited.



      (1)   No person shall knowingly sell or offer for sale,
deliver or give to any person under 17 years of age, unless upon written
order of such person's parent or guardian, any compound, liquid, or chemical
containing toluol, hexane, trichloroethylene, acetone, toluene, ethyl
acetate, methyl ethyl ketone, tricholoroethan, isopropanol, methyl isobutyl
ketone, methyl cellosolve acetate, cyclohexanone, or any other substance
which will induce an intoxicated condition, as defined herein, when the
seller, offeror, or deliverer knows or has reason to know that the compound
is intended for use to induce such condition.



      (2)   No person shall knowingly sell or offer for sale,
deliver, or give to any person any compound, liquid, or chemical containing
alkaloids atropine, hyoscyamine, or scopolamine when the seller, offeror, or
deliverer knows or has reason to know that the compound, liquid, or chemical
is intended for use to induce an intoxicated condition.



This chapter shall not apply to any person who commits any act described
herein pursuant to the direction or prescription of a practitioner authorized
to so direct or prescribe.  For purposes of this section, practitioner shall
mean any person authorized by law to practice medicine in all its branches in
this state, to practice dentistry in this state, to practice veterinary
medicine in this state, or to practice chiropody in this state.



(Ord. 1736, passed 4-5-98)



§ 136.06  CANNABIS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CANNABIS.  Includes marihuana, hashish any other substances
which are identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa,
whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, and resin extracted from any part
of such plant and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or
preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring
or synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or
indirectly by extraction or independently by means of chemical synthesis by a
combination of extraction and chemical synthesis, but shall not include the
mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake
made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin
extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake or the sterilized seed of such plant
which is incapable of germination.



      EXEMPT PERSON.  Includes all persons who may, under the laws of
the State of Illinois, lawfully sell, offer for sale, deliver, dispense,
distribute and possess, as the case may be, controlled substances, cannabis
and hypodermic syringes and hypodermic needles.



   (B)   Sale or possession of cannabis prohibited.  No person, other
than an exempt person, shall sell, offer for sale, dispense, distribute or
possess any cannabis.



(Ord. 1736, passed 4-5-98)  Penalty, see § 136.99



§ 136.07  DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   (A)   Defined.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.  All equipment, products, and materials of any
kind which contain on such equipment, products, and materials an indication
or suggestion that such items be used or are intended for use, or which
contain in the marketing thereof an indication or suggestion that such items
be used or are intended for use in planting, propagating, cultivating,
growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, production,
processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing,
containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body "Cannabis" as defined in this chapter and/or
Cannabis Control Act, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550 §§ 1 et seq., or a Controlled
Substance as defined in the Controlled Substance Act, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570,
§§ 100 et seq.



      (1)   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA includes, but is not limited to:



         (a)   Kits used, or intended for use, in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing cannabis or a
controlled substance;



         (b)   Isomerization devices used, or intended for use,
in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of
cannabis or a controlled substance;



         (c)   Testing equipment used, or intended for use, in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of
cannabis or a controlled substance;



         (d)   Scales and balances, when such scales and balances
have inscribed on them an indication or suggestion that they be used, or are
intended for use, in weighing or measuring cannabis or a controlled
substance, or scales and balances which contain in the marketing thereof an
indication or suggestion of such use;



         (e)   Dilutants and adulterants, such as quinine
hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose, used or intended for
use, in cutting cannabis or controlled substance;



         (f)   Separation gins and sifters used, or intended for
use, in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining
cannabis;



         (g)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing
devices when such items have inscribed on them an indication or suggestion
that they be used or are intended for use, in compounding cannabis or a
controlled substance, or when such items contain in the marketing thereof an
indication or suggestion of such use;



         (h)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other
containers when such items have inscribed on them an indication or suggestion
that they be used, or are intended for use, in packaging small quantities of
cannabis or a controlled substance, or when such items contain in the
marketing thereof an indication or suggestion of such use;



         (i)   Containers and other objects when such items have
inscribed on them an indication or suggestion that they be used, or are
intended for use, in storing or concealing cannabis or a controlled
substance, or when such items contain in the marketing thereof an indication
or suggestion of such use;



         (j)   Hypodermic syringes, needles, and other objects
used or intended for use, in parenterally injecting controlled substances
into the human body;



         (k)   Objects used, or intended for use when such items
have inscribed on them an indication or suggestion that they be used, or are
intended for use, in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis,
hashish, hashish oil, or cocaine into the human body, or when such items
contain in the marketing thereof an indication or suggestion of such use,
such as:



            1.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone,
plastic, or ceramic pipes, with or without screens, permanent screens,
hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;



            2.   Water pipes;



            3.   Carburetion tubes and devices;



            4.   Smoking and carburetion masks;



            5.   Roach clips: meaning objects used to hold
burning material, such as marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or
too short to be held in the hand;



            6.   Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials;



            7.   Chamber pipes;



            8.   Carburetor pipes;



            9.   Electric pipes;



            10.   Air-driven pipes;



            11.   Chillums;



            12.   Bongs;



            13.   Ice pipes or chillers.



      (2)   A court, in determining whether an object is DRUG
PARAPHERNALIA, shall consider the following factors:



         (a)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of
the object concerning its use;



         (b)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to
a direct violation of this subchapter;



         (c)   The proximity of the object to cannabis or a
controlled substance;



         (d)   The existence of any residue of cannabis or a
controlled substance on the object;



         (e)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of
an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons
whom he knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to
facilitate a violation of this subchapter; the innocence of an owner, or of
anyone in control of this subchapter shall not prevent a finding that the
object is intended for use as drug paraphernalia;



         (f)   Instruction, oral or written, provided with the
object concerning its use;



         (g)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object
which explain or depict its use;



         (h)   National and local advertising concerning the use
or intended use of the object; and information contained in sales catalogues
of which supplier has knowledge concerning use of the object;



         (i)   The manner in which the object is displayed for
sale;



         (j)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the
object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community,
such as licensed distributor of tobacco products;



         (k)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of
sales of the objects to the total sales of the business enterprise;



         (l)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community;



         (m)   Expert testimony concerning its use.



   (B)   Drug paraphernalia prohibited.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, or to
possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body cannabis or a
controlled substance.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or deliver,
or possess with intent to sell or deliver, any drug paraphernalia, knowing or
under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to
plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert,
produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body
cannabis or a controlled substance.



   (C)   Delivering drug paraphernalia to minors.  Any person 18 year
of age who violates this section by delivering drug paraphernalia to a person
under 18 years of age who is at least three years his junior, shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than $250 nor more than $750.



   (D)   Exemptions.  Nothing in this section shall limit the lawful
authority granted to:



      (1)   Persons who are authorized by ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550,
§§ 1 et seq. (Cannabis Control Act) to deal with cannabis;



      (2)   Persons registered under federal law to conduct research
with cannabis;



      (3)   Persons authorized by ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570, §§ 100 et
seq. (Controlled Substance Act) to deal with controlled substances;



      (4)   Authorized law enforcement personnel while in the course
of their duties.



(Ord. 1736, passed 4-5-98)  Penalty, see § 136.99



LOOK-ALIKE DRUGS, INCLUDING SYNTHETIC MARIJUANA AND BATH SALTS



§ 136.20  DEFINITIONS.



   The definitions contained in the Cannabis Control Act (ILCS Ch. 720,
Act  550, §§ 1 et seq.) and the Illinois Controlled Substance Act (ILCS
Ch. 720, Act 570, §§ 1 et seq.) apply to this subchapter.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BATH SALTS.  Any product whether disbursed as incense, potpourri,
plant fertilizers, insect repellants, salts or BATH SALTS, which contain any
of the following chemicals:



      (1)   JSW-018, JWG-200, JWH-073, CP-47, 497,
Cannabicyclohexanol, 3.4 Methylenedioxyprovalerone (MDPV), Methylone,
Mephedrone, 4-Methoxymethcathinone, 4-Fluoromethcathinone, and
3-Fluromethcathinone;



      (2)   Synthetic derivatives of cathinone and cathinone
substitutes, including pentedrone;



      (3)   Any other non-prescription substance, regardless of
form, that has a chemical substance and/or pharmacological effect similar to
that derived from the effect intended to be delivered from the ingestion of
those substances defined in this subchapter; and



      (4)   Such other definitions given the term under Illinois law.



   SYNTHETIC MARIJUANA.  Any product or substance, whether described as
tobacco, potpourri, herbs, incense, spice, aromatic, or any combination
thereof, and intended for the purpose of being smoked or otherwise ingested,
which includes one or more of the following hallucinogenic substances:



      (1)   1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole; some trade or other
names: JWF-0I8; or



      (2)   1-Butyl-3-(l-naphthoyl) indole; some trade or other
names: JWH-073; or



      (3)   1-[2-(4-morpholinyl) ethyl]-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole; some
trade or other names: JWH-200; or



      (4)   5-(1,1-dimethylheptyl-2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-phen
ol; some trade or other names: CP-47,497; or



      (5)   5-(1,1-dimethylheptyl)-2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-phe
nol (cannabicyclohexanol); some other trade or other names;
cannabicyclohexanol; CP-47,497 C8 homologue; or



      (6)   Any other non-prescription substance that has a chemical
structure and/or pharmacological effect substantially similar to the active
ingredient of marijuana, or tetrahydrocannabinol (THC); or



      (7)   Such other definitions given the term under Illinois law.



(Ord. 2763, passed 1-23-12)



§ 136.21  POSSESSION, DISTRIBUTION, SALE OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.



   Unless otherwise authorized or permitted by law, no person shall
possess, distribute, display, market, sell, exchange, offer or use:



   (A)   Any substance, including but not limited to, those substances
which are controlled, prohibited or regulated under or subject to the
Illinois Controlled Substance Act (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570, §§ 1 et seq.) or
the Cannabis Control Act (ILCS Ch. 720, Act  550, §§ 1 et seq.);



   (B)   Synthetic marijuana or bath salts;



   (C)   Any non-prescriptive substance that has a chemical structure
and or psychological effect on a person similar to the active ingredients
contained in any substance controlled or regulated under federal or state
laws or regulations, including the Illinois Controlled Substance Act and the
Cannabis Control Act.



(Ord. 2763, passed 1-23-12)  Penalty, see § 136.99



§ 136.22  LICENSEE TO PROVIDE TESTING SAMPLE.



   At the request of the village, a person or entity issued a license from
the village who is not otherwise authorized by law to possess the substance,
shall immediately provide the Village Police Department with sample(s) of any
substance(s) that there is a reasonable cause to believe is within the
provisions of this subchapter. The village shall provide the licensee with a
copy of the results of any tests conducted on the substance.



(Ord. 2763, passed 1-23-12)  Penalty, see § 136.99



§ 136.23  VIOLATION BY VILLAGE LICENSEE.



   Any violation of this subchapter by a person, business or any other
entity licensed by the village will result in the suspension or revocation of
their license.



(Ord. 2763, passed 1-23-12)



§ 136.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who commits an offense as established and defined
in this chapter for which another penalty is not provided shall be subject to
a minimum fine of not less than $50 and a maximum fine of not more than $750
unless otherwise specified herein. 



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)



   (B)   Any person who shall violate any provision of § 136.06 shall
be fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 for the first violation, and
shall be fined not less than $750 for the second and each subsequent
violation.  Each day that a violation of this section may continue shall be
deemed a separate violation hereof. 



(Ord. 1736, passed 4-5-98)



   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of § 136.07 for which another
penalty is not specifically provided shall be fined not more than $750 for
each and every violation thereof, and every day the violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. 



(Ord. 1736, passed 4-5-98; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02)



   (D)   In addition to, and not in lieu of, any other penalties
provided under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other remedies
available at law or equity, any person or entity convicted of violating §§
136.20 et seq. shall pay a fine of not less than $500 nor more than permitted
by law, with each day a violation continues to exist constituting a separate
and distinct offense. (Am. Ord. 2763, passed 1-23-12)



CHAPTER 137:  WEAPONS CONTROL



Section



   137.01   Definitions



   137.02   Discharge of firearms



   137.03   Discharge of toy firearms



   137.04   Brandishing or concealing dangerous weapons



   137.05   Exemption



 



   137.99   Penalty



§ 137.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FIREARM.  Shall have the meaning as defined in § 1.1 of the Firearm
Owners Identification Card Act,  ILCS Ch. 430, Act 65, § 1.1.



   HANDGUN.  Shall have the meaning as defined in § 5 of the Firearms
Concealed Carry Act, ILCS Ch. 430, Act 66, § 5.



(Ord. 2897, passed 3-17-14)



§ 137.02  DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.



   No person shall fire or discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm
within the village, except upon premises used by a duly licensed shooting
gallery, gun club or rifle club.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)  Penalty, see § 137.99



§ 137.03  DISCHARGE OF TOY FIREARMS.



   No person shall at any time discharge or set off anywhere within the
village or have in his possession for such a purpose any toy firearm, air
rifle, toy cannon or any gun which discharges projectiles either by air,
spring, explosive substance or any other force.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)  Penalty, see § 137.99



§ 137.04  BRANDISHING OR CONCEALING DANGEROUS WEAPONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry in a threatening
or menacing manner, without authority of law, any pistol, revolver, dagger,
razor, dangerous knife, stiletto, knuckles, slingshot or any object
containing noxious or deleterious liquid, gas or substance or other dangerous
weapon, or any device manufactured and designed to be substantially similar
in appearance or conceal the weapon on or about the person or vehicle.



   (B)   No person shall carry upon or about his person any pistol,
revolver, derringer, Bowie knife, dirk, slingshot, knuckles of lead, brass or
other metal or any other deadly weapon capable of being secreted upon the
person.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74)  Penalty, see § 137.99



§ 137.05  EXEMPTION.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to duly
constituted peace officers while engaged in the discharge of their official
duties.



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter as it relates to carrying a
handgun shall not apply to a person who is a licensee under and whose weapon,
activity and conduct is in conformance with the Firearm Concealed Cary Act,
ILCS Ch. 430, Act 66, §§ 1 et seq., and Illinois law.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74; Am. Ord. 2897, passed 3-17-14)



§ 137.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who commits an offense as established and defined in this
chapter shall be subject to a minimum fine of not less than $50 and a maximum
fine of not more than $750 unless otherwise specified herein.



(Ord. 862, passed 4-15-74; Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02)



CHAPTER 138:  SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES



Section



   138.01   Definitions



   138.02   Smoking prohibited



   138.03   Posting of signs; removal of ashtrays



   138.04   Outdoor patios



   138.05   Responsibilities



   138.06   Exemptions



   138.07   Discrimination prohibited



   138.08   Enforcement; complaints



 



   138.99   Penalty



Cross-references:



   Smoking on public conveyances, see § 132.03



   Tobacco regulations, see Ch. 119



§ 138.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ASHTRAY. Any receptacle that is designed for disposing of the debris
from smoking materials, including but not limited to, ash, cigar stubs or
cigarette butts or filters.



   BAR. An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic
beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more
than 10% of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises.
BAR includes but is not limited to taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges,
brew pubs, saloons, microbreweries, adult entertainment facilities and
cabarets.



   CLEARLY AND CONSPICUOUSLY. Signage designed so that letters, numbers
and symbols are of sufficient size to be clearly legible and visible to an
individual of normal vision from a distance of five feet.



   CONTIGUOUS AREA. A place that is:



      (1)   Physically attached to a non-vehicle public place or
place of employment; or



      (2)   Separated from a non-vehicle public place or place of
employment only by other places controlled by the proprietor of the public
place or place of employment



   CONTROLLED. Under the authority and responsibility of a proprietor.



   DRIFT. The physical movement of smoke, regardless of cause, into any
area where smoking is prohibited.



   EMPLOYEE. A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for
direct or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers his
or her services for a non-profit entity.



   EMPLOYER. A person, business, partnership, association or corporation,
including but not limited to a municipal corporation, trust or non-profit
entity, that employs the services of one or more individual persons.



   ENCLOSED AREA. All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed
or partially enclosed with (i) solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways,
or (ii) solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways,
that extend from the floor to the ceiling, including but not limited to
lobbies and corridors.



   ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA. Any sports pavilion,
stadium, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice
rink, bowling alley or other similar place where members of the general
public assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic
competitions or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural,
recreational or other events.



   ENTRANCE or EXIT. Any doorway in a building or facility that is used by
an individual for ingress from or egress to the outdoors.



   GAMING EQUIPMENT OR SUPPLIES. Gaming equipment/supplies as defined in
the Illinois Gaming Board Rules of the Illinois Administrative Code.



   GAMING FACILITY. An establishment utilized primarily for the purposes
of gaming and where gaming equipment or supplies are operated for the
purposes of accruing business revenue.



   HEALTHCARE FACILITY. An office or institution providing care or
treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental or emotional, or other
medical, physiological or psychological conditions, including but not limited
to hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes
and long-term care facilities, homes for the aging or chronically ill,
laboratories and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists,
physicians, dentists and all specialists within these professions. HEALTHCARE
FACILITY includes but is not limited to all waiting rooms, hallways, private
rooms, semiprivate rooms and wards within healthcare facilities.



   IDPH. The Illinois Department of Public Health.



   INFILTRATE. The transit or movement of smoke from one enclosed area to
another, regardless of cause, including but not limited to movement of smoke
induced or caused by changes in air flow.



   OUTDOOR PATIO. An area that either (i) is enclosed by a roof or other
overhead covering and walls or side coverings on not more than two sides or
(ii) has no roof or other overhead coverings regardless of the number of
walls, fences or other side coverings. OUTDOOR PATIO includes but is not
limited to beer gardens or other outdoor seating.



   OUTDOOR PATIO PATRON. An individual who is occupying an outdoor patio.



   PERMEABLE. Permitting smoke to pass through.



   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any area under the control of a public or private
employer that employees are required to enter, leave or pass through during
the course of employment, including but not limited to entrances and exits to
places of employment, including but not limited to offices and work areas;
restrooms, conference and classrooms, break rooms and cafeterias and other
common areas. A private residence or home-based business, unless used to
provide licensed child care, foster care, adult care or other similar social
service care on the premises, is not a PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT.



   PRIVATE CLUB.



      (1)   A not-for-profit association that:



         (a)   Has been in active and continuous existence for at
least three years prior to January 1, 2008, whether incorporated or not;



         (b)   Is the owner, lessee or occupant of a building or
portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times;



         (c)   Is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal,
social, patriotic, political, benevolent or athletic purpose, but not for
pecuniary gain; and



         (d)   Only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its
operation.



      (2)   For purposes of this definition, PRIVATE CLUB means an
organization that is managed by a board of directors, executive committee or
similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting, has established
bylaws, a constitution or both to govern its activities and has been granted
an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C.
§ 501.



   PRIVATE RESIDENCE. The part of a structure used as a dwelling,
including but not limited to a private home, townhouse, condominium,
apartment, mobile home, vacation home, cabin or cottage. For the purposes of
this definition, a hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or
other similar public accommodation, hospital, nursing home or long-term care
facility, assisted living facility or student dormitory shall not be
considered a PRIVATE RESIDENCE.



   PROPRIETOR. An owner, operator, manager, occupant, lessee or other
individual in control of a public place or a place of employment.



   PUBLIC PLACE.



      (1)   That portion of any building or vehicle used by and open
to the public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in
whole or in part by private persons or entities, the State of Illinois or any
other public entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission.



      (2)   A PUBLIC PLACE does not include a private residence
unless the private residence is used to provide licensed child care, foster
care or other similar social service care on the premises.



      (3)   A PUBLIC PLACE includes but is not limited to hospitals,
restaurants, retail stores, offices, commercial establishments, elevators,
indoor theaters, libraries, museums, concert halls, public conveyances,
educational facilities, nursing homes, auditoriums, enclosed or partially
enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention
facilities, polling places, private clubs, gaming facilities, all government
owned vehicles and facilities, including but not limited to buildings and
vehicles owned, leased or operated by the state or state subcontract,
healthcare facilities or clinics, enclosed shopping centers, retail service
establishments, financial institutions, educational facilities, ticket areas,
public hearing facilities, public restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies, bars,
taverns, bowling alleys, skating rinks, reception areas and no less than 75%
of the sleeping quarters within a hotel, motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and
breakfast or other similar public accommodation that are rented to guests,
but excludes private residences.



      (4)   A PUBLIC PLACE also includes but is not limited to any
portion of the living quarters, including but not limited to sleeping rooms,
dining areas, restrooms, laundry areas, lobbies and hallways, of a building
used in whole or in part as a student dormitory that is owned and operated or
otherwise utilized by a public or private institution of higher education.



   RESTAURANT.



      (1)   (a)   An eating establishment, including but not
limited to coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands and private and public
school cafeterias, that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests
or employees; and



         (b)   A kitchen or catering facility in which food is
prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere.



      (2)   RESTAURANT includes but is not limited to a bar area
within the restaurant.



   RETAIL TOBACCO STORE. A retail establishment that derives more than 80%
of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants or herbs and
cigars, cigarettes, pipes and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and
related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely
incidental. RETAIL TOBACCO STORE does not include a tobacco department or
section of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment with any
type of liquor, food or restaurant license.



   SMOKE or SMOKING. The carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling or exhaling
of any kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs or any
other lighted smoking equipment.



   SMOKING PRODUCTS AND ACCESSORIES. Smoking materials, including but not
limited to cigars, cigarettes or pipe tobacco, and smoking-related materials,
including but not limited to ashtrays, lighters, humidors, pipes or cigarette
cases.



(Ord. 2429, passed 12-3-07)



§ 138.02  SMOKING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Smoking is prohibited in any public place or in any place of
employment.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any
employer, owner, occupant, lessee, operator, manager or other person in
control of any public place or place of employment may designate a
non-enclosed area of a public place or place of employment, including but not
limited to outdoor areas, as an area where smoking is also prohibited,
provided that such employer, owner, lessee or occupant shall conspicuously
post signs prohibiting smoking in the manner described in § 138.03.



   (C)   Smoking is prohibited within a minimum distance of 15 feet
from entrances, exits, windows that open and ventilation intakes that serve
an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited under this chapter. Smoking is
further prohibited within a minimum distance of 15 feet from any non-enclosed
area where smoking is prohibited pursuant to division (B) above.



(Ord. 2429, passed 12-3-07)  Penalty, see § 138.99



§ 138.03  POSTING OF SIGNS; REMOVAL OF ASHTRAYS.



   (A)   “No Smoking” signs or the international “No Smoking”
symbol, consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette
enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it, shall be clearly and
conspicuously posted in each public place and place of employment where
smoking is prohibited by this chapter by the owner, operator, manager or
other person in control of that place.



   (B)   To meet the requirements of division (A) above, a proprietor
of a public place or place of employment shall post signs that:



      (1)   Are no smaller than five inches by seven inches; and



      (2)   Contain the international “No Smoking” symbol or the
words “No Smoking;” the telephone number designated by the IDPH for
registering complaints; the IDPH’s website for obtaining the complaint
form; and letters, numbers and symbols of sufficient size to be clearly
legible to an individual of normal vision from a distance of five feet.



   (C)   Each public place and place of employment where smoking is
prohibited by this chapter shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous
sign, in compliance with division (B) above, clearly stating that smoking is
prohibited.



   (D)   All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is
prohibited by this chapter by the owner, operator, manager or other person
having control of the area. A proprietor may store ashtrays and other
receptacles used for disposing of smoking materials in a location within an
area where smoking is prohibited if the location has no public access and the
location is used primarily for storage purposes.



(Ord. 2429, passed 12-3-07)  Penalty, see § 138.99



§ 138.04  OUTDOOR PATIOS.



   (A)   A proprietor may designate an area as an outdoor patio where
smoking is permitted only if the area:



      (1)   Is 15 feet or more from entrances, exists, windows that
open and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is
prohibited;



      (2)   Is a contiguous area of a public place or place of
employment;



      (3)   Is controlled by the proprietor of the public place or
place of employment;



      (4)   Has at least one side that consists of open space,
permeable material, a combination of open space and permeable material or a
combination of open space, permeable material and a non-permeable wall; and



      (5)   Has, if all walls are non-permeable, no overhead
covering or an overhead covering that consists of permeable material or a
combination of open space and permeable material.



   (B)   If an outdoor patio where smoking is permitted has a doorway
that provides access from an enclosed area to the patio for outdoor patio
patrons and does not have a wall that prevents individuals from entering the
outdoor patio, the proprietor shall:



      (1)   Inform individuals that the doorway is not an entrance
to the enclosed area but is a doorway for outdoor patio patrons; and



      (2)   Direct individuals who are not outdoor patio patrons to
an entrance to the enclosed area.



   (C)   A proprietor may designate smoking and nonsmoking sections of
an outdoor patio only if the smoking section is clearly and conspicuously
separated from the nonsmoking section and if the smoking area is at least 15
feet away from the entrances, exits, windows that open and ventilation
intakes.



   (D)   The proprietor shall not permit tobacco smoke to drift or
infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited.



(Ord. 2429, passed 12-3-07)  Penalty, see § 138.99



§ 138.05  RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   Individual responsibilities.



      (1)   An individual shall not smoke in an area where smoking
is prohibited by this chapter.



      (2)   An individual in an area where smoking is prohibited
shall stop smoking immediately when requested to stop smoking by the
proprietor of the public place or place of employment.



   (B)   Proprietor responsibilities.



      (1)   A proprietor shall:



         (a)   Not permit smoking in an area where smoking is
prohibited by this chapter;



         (b)   Not permit smoke to drift or infiltrate into a
building or facility through an entrance, a window, a ventilation system or
other means;



         (c)   Post signs and remove ashtrays according to §
138.03;



         (d)   Communicate that smoking is prohibited in a place
of employment to all existing employees and, at the time of application, all
applicants for employment.



      (2)   If a building or facility that is controlled by a
proprietor contains several places of employment or public places that are
controlled by other proprietors:



         (a)   The proprietor of the entire building or facility
shall comply with the requirements of division (B)(l) for the area controlled
by the proprietor of the place of employment or public place.



         (b)   The proprietor of each place of employment or
public place shall comply with the requirements in division (B)(l) for the
area controlled by the proprietor of the place of employment or public place.



      (3)   If an individual in an area controlled by a proprietor
is smoking in violation of this chapter, the proprietor shall inform the
individual that he or she is in violation of the this chapter and request
that the individual stop smoking immediately.



   (C)   No person shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner
retaliate against any individual for exercising any right, including but not
limited to reporting a violation, or performing any obligation under this
chapter.



(Ord. 2429, passed 12-3-07)  Penalty, see § 138.99



§ 138.06  EXEMPTIONS.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, smoking is allowed
in the following areas:



   (A)   Private residences or dwelling places, except when used as a
child care, adult day care or healthcare facility or any other home-based
business open to the public.



   (B)   Retail tobacco stores in operation prior to January 1, 2008.
The retail tobacco store shall annually file with the IDPH by January 31 an
affidavit stating the percentage of its gross income during the prior
calendar year that was derived from the sale of loose tobacco, plants or
herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes or other smoking devices for smoking
tobacco and related smoking accessories. Any retail tobacco store that begins
operation after January 1, 2008 may only qualify for an exemption if located
in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the business and smoke from
the business does not migrate into an enclosed area where smoking is
prohibited.



   (C)   Private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes and long-term
care facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are
smokers and have requested in writing to be placed or to remain in a room
where smoking is permitted and the smoke shall not infiltrate other areas of
the nursing home. In exercising this exemption, the nursing home or long-term
care facility shall ensure that any rooms designated for smoking also comply
with the statutes, ordinances and administrative rules under which the home
or facility is licensed and the fire protection and life safety codes
incorporated by reference therein. Nothing in this section shall require a
nursing home or long-term care facility that is smoke free to designate a
smoking area within the facility.



   (D)   Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and
are designated as smoking rooms, provided that all smoking rooms on the same
floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into
nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited. Not more than
25% of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be designated as
rooms where smoking is allowed. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking
may not be changed, except to permanently add additional nonsmoking rooms.



(Ord. 2429, passed 12-3-07)  Penalty, see § 138.99



§ 138.07  DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.



   No individual may be discriminated against in any manner because of the
exercise of any rights afforded by this chapter. No person or employer shall
discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against an employee,
applicant for employment or customer because that employee, applicant or
customer exercises any rights afforded by this chapter or reports or attempts
to prosecute a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 2429, passed 12-3-07)  Penalty, see § 138.99



§ 138.08  ENFORCEMENT; COMPLAINTS.



   The village Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter and may assess fines pursuant to § 138.99. Any person may register a
complaint with the village Police Department for a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 2429, passed 12-3-07)  Penalty, see § 138.99



§ 138.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A person, corporation, partnership, association or other
entity who violates this chapter shall be fined and/or enjoined pursuant to
this section. Each day that a violation occurs is a separate violation.



   (B)   A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited
under this chapter shall be fined in an amount that is not less than $100 and
not more than $250. In determining the amount of the fine, the village will
consider the type(s) of violation(s) committed, past violations documented
and whether payment was received from past violations, if applicable.



   (C)   (1)   A person who owns, operates or otherwise controls a
public place or place of employment who violates this chapter shall be fined:



         (a)   Not less than $250 for the first violation;



         (b)   Not less than $500 for the second violation within
one year after the first violation; and



         (c)   Not less than $2,500 for each additional violation
within one year after the first violation.



      (2)   In determining the amount of the fine, the village will
consider the type(s) of violation(s) committed, past violations documented
and whether payment was received from past violations, if applicable.



   (D)   In addition to any fine provided in this section, the village
may institute, in a circuit court, an action to enjoin violations of this
chapter.



(Ord. 2429, passed 12-3-07)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS



      151.   SIGN REGULATIONS



      152.   FLOOD REGULATIONS



      153.   DEDICATION OF SCHOOL AND PARK SITES



      154.   HISTORIC DISTRICT



      155.   LAND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



      156.   ZONING CODE



      157.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



      158.   LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS



         APPENDIX A:   OVERSTORY TREES



         APPENDIX B:   UNDERSTORY TREES



         APPENDIX C:   STREET TREES



         APPENDIX D:   EVERGREEN TREES



         APPENDIX E:   PRESERVATION TREES



         APPENDIX F:   STORMWATER  DETENTION/RETENTION TREES



         APPENDIX G:   UNACCEPTABLE TREES



      159.   LOW INTEREST LOAN PROGRAM FOR COMMERCIAL IMPROVEMENTS



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   150.01   Construction of buildings in districts zoned for commercial
or industrial use



   150.02   Construction of entrance to lots adjoining property zoned
for commercial, public or industrial use



   150.03   Restricting construction, placement or location of certain
structures upon land zoned for other than industrial purposes; exception



   150.04   Buildings required to display numerical addresses



   150.05   Improvement of parking facilities



Adoption of Certain Standards



   150.20   Adoption of the 2012 International Residential Code for One
and Two Family Dwellings



   150.21   Adoption of the 2012 International Building Code



   150.22   Adoption of the 2014 Illinois State Plumbing Code



   150.23   Adoption of the 2012 International Mechanical Code



   150.24   Adoption of the 2015 International Energy Conservation Code



   150.25   Adoption of the 2012 International Fire Code



   150.26   Adoption of the 2012 International Property Maintenance Code



   150.27   Adoption of the 2011 National Electrical Code



   150.28   Adoption of the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code



   150.29   Construction using most restrictive provisions



   150.30   Adoption of elevator safety codes



Fees and Charges



   150.40   Building permit and inspection fees



   150.41   Development review fee schedule



Contractors



   150.50   Definitions



   150.51   License required



   150.52   License application



   150.53   License fees and bonds



   150.54   Liability insurance required



   150.55   Issuance of license



   150.56   General contractor’s license



   150.57   Performance of certain duties required



   150.58   License revocation; reinstatement



Administration



   150.70   Administrative inspection procedure for all buildings and
structures



Grading and Landscaping



   150.75   Grading procedures



   150.76   Landscaping permit requirement



   150.77   Demolition permit requirements



 



   150.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 150.01  CONSTRUCTION OF BUILDINGS IN DISTRICTS ZONED FOR COMMERCIAL OR
INDUSTRIAL USE.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      (1)   FRONT ELEVATION.  Those side portions of a structure
which face or are contiguous with a public street, thoroughfare or way.



      (2)   GLASS.  All windows and entry doors together with frame
for same.



      (3)   SIDE ELEVATION.  That portion or portions of a
structure which do not face or are not contiguous with a public street,
thoroughfare or way.



      (4)   SOLID FINISH VENEER.  Brick or stone.  This does not
include materials such as, but not limited to, painted or unpainted plain
concrete or plain concrete blocks, plywood, wood veneers or imitation type
materials of any nature.



   (B)   Any buildings or improvements constructed on any real property
zoned or classified as commercial or industrial under the official zoning map
of the village and its zoning ordinance shall comply with all terms and
provisions of this section.



   (C)   All building or improvements designed or intended to be
constructed on any commercial or industrial zoned property shall have:



      (1)   A continuous poured concrete footing extending to a
depth below the standard frost line of 42 inches together with a continuous
concrete foundation wall which shall support all structural members of the
building.  Such foundation and footing shall meet the B.O.C.A.
specifications;



      (2)   A minimum 18-inch roof overhang on all front elevations;
and



      (3)   One hundred percent of the total surface area of the
front elevation constructed of solid finish veneer and glass.



   (D)   On commercial or industrial zoned property an auxiliary
building, as that term is defined in the zoning ordinance of the village,
which is set back a minimum of 200 feet from the front lot line with the
total front yard landscaped with grass, trees, bushes, shrubs, and the like,
may have the solid finish veneer and glass requirement reduced by action of
the Village Board of Trustees.



   (E)   No building permit or occupancy permit shall be issued for any
building on property zoned commercial or industrial until the provisions of
this section and all relative ordinances are met.



(Ord. 1126, passed 11-19-84)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.02  CONSTRUCTION OF ENTRANCE TO LOTS ADJOINING PROPERTY ZONED FOR
COMMERCIAL, PUBLIC OR INDUSTRIAL USE.



   (A)   The owners of any lots or parcels of real property within the
village, zoned for public or commercial use, shall prior to commencement of
any construction or building of any new or additional improvements thereon,
which includes but is not limited to any excavation or earthwork, construct
or cause to be constructed an entrance to and from any road that may be
adjacent thereto, which entrance shall conform to the standards marked
“Exhibit A” [attached to Ord. 1083] and shall be adopted by reference
thereto and specifically made a part hereof, the same being the Village
Standard Entrance Details for Commercial Lots.



   (B)   The owners of any lots or parcels of real property within the
village, zoned for public or industrial use, shall prior to commencement of
any construction or building of any new or additional improvements thereon,
which includes but is not limited to any excavation or earthwork, construct
or cause to be constructed an entrance to and from any road that may be
adjacent thereto, which entrance shall conform to the standards marked
“Exhibit B” [attached to Ord. 1083] and shall be adopted by reference
thereto and specifically made a part hereof, the same being the Village
Standard Entrance Details for Industrial Lots.



   (C)   Any person who shall hereafter desire to construct or
reconstruct for a commercial or industrial zoned lot or parcel of real
property, an entrance to and from an existing lot, shall construct same in
accordance with the applicable standard entrance details stated in divisions
(A) and (B) of this section.



   (D)   In addition to any other requirements contained herein, the
applicant shall, at the time of securing a building permit and prior to the
commencement of any building construction or work upon the building site,
give a letter of credit or a corporate surety bond with a bonding company
being acceptable to the village and authorized to conduct business in the
state payable to the village in an amount not less than $5,000 conditioned
upon the timely and faithful performance of all requirements and conditions
of this section.  Said bond shall be released by the village upon
completion, approval of work, and if applicable, acceptance of the work
required under this ordinance by the village.



(Ord. 1083, passed 8-16-82)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.03  RESTRICTING CONSTRUCTION, PLACEMENT OR LOCATION OF CERTAIN
STRUCTURES UPON LAND ZONED FOR OTHER THAN INDUSTRIAL PURPOSES; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   No mobile trailer or temporary, nonpermanent type structure
shall be erected, moved, placed or located upon a lot or parcel of land
within the village for the purpose of utilizing the same as an office or
similar type business use, unless said lot or parcel of land is zoned and
classified for industrial purposes.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to such a
structure upon a lot or parcel of land being utilized as an office or similar
business use for the purpose of constructing improvements upon the lot or
parcel of land upon which it is situated.



(Ord. 868, passed 7-1-74)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.04  BUILDINGS REQUIRED TO DISPLAY NUMERICAL ADDRESSES.



   All principal buildings in all zoning districts within the corporate
limits of the village shall prominently and conspicuously post and display
the correct numerical address.  The numbers shall be displayed either on the
building or posted at the front entry to the property so that such street
number is clearly visible and of such size that it is easily identifiable
from the street abutting such front yard.



(Ord. 1170, passed 10-6-86)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.05  IMPROVEMENT OF PARKING FACILITIES.



   (A)   Hard surfaces required.



      (1)   All new industrial facilities must improve all parking
surfaces with an acceptable bituminous asphalt or concrete material and
comply with the design standards of this section.



      (2)   To assure installation of an acceptable bituminous
asphalt or concrete surface and full compliance with the other design
requirements of this section, a parking lot permit must be obtained from the
village prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit for the use of an
existing industrial facility adjoining or adjacent to any residential area or
zoned district.



   (B)   Parking lot design standards.



      (1)   The design and construction of all industrial parking
facilities shall meet all the technical requirements contained herein.



      (2)   Construction standards for all required industrial
parking lots shall meet or exceed the load requirement of its designated use.



      (3)   All pavement edges must be enclosed with concrete
curbing which will meet the minimum requirements for curb construction
outlined in the village’s design standards.



      (4)   All driveways and approaches must meet the requirements
outlined in the village’s design standards.



(Ord. 1535, passed 9-18-95)  Penalty, see § 150.99



ADOPTION OF CERTAIN STANDARDS



§ 150.20  ADOPTION OF THE 2012 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE FOR ONE AND
TWO FAMILY DWELLINGS.



   The 2012 Edition of the International Residential Code for One and Two
Family Dwellings, first edition, published by the International Code Council,
Inc., be and is hereby adopted as a Residential Building Code of the village
for the control of buildings and structures as therein provided; and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of the 2012
International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings are hereby
referred to, adopted by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out
in this subchapter, except with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes to such Code as follows:



   (A)   Section R101.1 Title.  These provisions shall be known as the
Residential Codes for One and Two-Family Dwellings of the Village of
Frankfort, and shall be sited as such, and will be referred to herein as
“this code.”



   (B)   Section R102.5 Appendices.  Hereby adopted.



      Appendix A   SIZING AND CAPACITIES OF GAS PIPING



      Appendix B   SIZING OF VENTING SYSTEMS SERVING APPLIANCES
EQUIPPED WITH DRAFT HOODS, CATEGORY I APPLIANCES, AND APPLIANCES LISTED FOR
USE AND TYPE B VENTS



      Appendix C   EXIT TERMINALS OF MECHANICAL DRAFT AND DIRECT
VENT VENTING SYSTEMS



      Appendix F   RADON CONTROL METHODS



      Appendix G   SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS.  Delete the
following sections under Section AG105 Barrier Requirements:



                  Section 9.1. Delete this provision in its
entirety.



                  Section 10.1. Delete this provision in
its entirety.



      Appendix H   PATIO COVERS



      Appendix J   EXISTING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES



   (C)   Section R105.2 Work Exempt from Permit. Delete this section in
its entirety:



      Building, Electrical, Gas and Mechanical.



   (D)   Section Rl05.3 Application for Permit.  Add the following to
the list of application requirements:



      8.   Three sets of all drawings for a project shall be
prepared, signed and sealed by an architect licensed in the State of
Illinois, and submitted to the village for review with application.



      9.   Include window and sliding glass door energy conservation
information, R and U Values.



      10.   Include HVAC heating and cooling load calculations.



   (E)   Section Rl05.5 Expiration.  Hereby amended to read as follows:



      Delete one hundred eighty (180) days in this section and replace
it with ninety (90) days.



   (F)   Section 108.2 Schedule of Permit Fees.  Hereby amended to
read as follows:



      Fee Schedule.  A fee for each plan examination, building permit
and inspections shall be paid in accordance with the schedule as set forth in
applicable village ordinances, including Ordinance Nos. 1347 and 1449
entitled, “An Ordinance Amending Building Permit Fees and Inspection
Charges for the Village of Frankfort, Will County, Illinois,” as it now
exists or from time to time is amended.



   (G)   Section R109.1 Types of Inspections. Hereby amended to read as
follows:



      1.   INITIAL ON-SITE SEDIMENT CONTROL INSPECTION



         A.   Sediment and erosion control measures must be
installed and maintained during the duration of the entire project in
accordance with the applicable village ordinances, including Village of
Frankfort Design Standards, Ordinance No. 2487, as from time to time amended.



      2.   FOOTING INSPECTIONS



         1.   Inspections required prior to placement of concrete.



         2.   If poor soil conditions exist, Illinois
state-licensed professional engineer will be required to provide a signed and
sealed written determination, and inspection prior to placement of concrete.



         3.   Installation of stone drive.



      3.   FOUNDATION INSPECTION



         1.   Inspection of concrete forms in-place prior to any
concrete being poured.



         2.   Reinforcing steel in-place.



         3.   Forms centered on footing.



         4.   Installation of stone drive.



      4.   FOUNDATION BACKFILL INSPECTION



            a.   Dampproofing in-place.



            b.   Drain tile in-place.



            c.   Anchor bolt installation and location.



            d.   Upon approval of the drain tile inspection,
the foundation can be backfilled.  The Building Department will permit
construction of the deck over the basement or crawlspace areas only, prior to
or after backfilling.  This will help provide extra safety at the job site
and structural integrity to the foundation.



            e.   Submit spot survey (top of foundation
elevation and all setback dimensions).



            f.   Sediment control inspection.



      5.   UNDERGROUND PLUMBING INSPECTION



         A.   Basement Floor - inspection necessary prior to
placement of concrete.



      6.   SANITARY SEWER & WATER INSPECTION



      7.   ROUGH ELECTRIC INSPECTION



      8.   ROUGH PLUMBING INSPECTION



      9.   ROUGH MECHANICAL INSPECTION



      10.   ROUGH BUILDING INSPECTION



         A.   No insulation may be installed until the rough
inspections have been approved.



      11.   INSULATION INSPECTION



         A.   No wall/ceiling coverings may be applied until an
insulation inspection has been performed and approved by the village.



      12.   MASONRY THRU-WALL “SILL” FLASHING AND WINDOW
FLASHING INSPECTION



         A.   Prior to the installation of brick veneer, or stone.



      13.   CONCRETE FLAT WORK INSPECTION



         A.   Basement floors



         B.   Garage floors



         C.   Patios and stoops



         D.   Driveways



         E.   Sidewalks and service walks



      14.   EXTERIOR INSULATION FINISH SYSTEM INSPECTION



         The following inspections shall be required for all
E.I.F.S. installation:



         A.   Substrate/flashing inspections



         B.   E.P.S. board inspection



         C.   Base coat application inspection



         D.   Final inspection



         E.   The installer must adhere to all manufacturers’
requirements for installation, and include a drainage system or equivalent.



      15.   FINAL PLUMBING INSPECTION



      16.   FINAL ELECTRIC INSPECTION



      17.   FINAL MECHANICAL INSPECTION



      18.   FINAL BUILDING INSPECTION



      19.   FINAL GRADE INSPECTION



         A.   Erosion control methods installed.



      20.   ASPHALT INSPECTION (Minimum Standards)



         A.   Residential driveway apron (public R.O.W.)



            4" compacted asphalt



            8" compacted crushed stone CA-6, Grade 8



         B.   Residential driveway



            2-1/2" asphalt



            8" compacted crushed stone CA-6, Grade 8



      21.   LANDSCAPE PERMIT INSPECTION (per applicable village
ordinances, including Ordinance No.. 2341, as from time to time amended):



         A.   Provide complete landscaping plans.



         B.   Indicate foundation and all top of grade elevations.



         C.   Provide drawing showing the location of all lawn
sprinkler heads on final plat of survey.



   (H)   Section R109.1-1 Requests for Inspections is added as follows:



      A.   CONCRETE INSPECTIONS.  The owner or contractor shall
call a request for an inspection into the Building Department at least 24
hours prior to the requested inspection.  All forms and/or concrete will be
inspected prior to the placement.



      B.   BUILDING INSPECTIONS.  The owner or contractor shall
call a request for an inspection into the Building Department at least 48
hours prior to the requested inspection.  For rough inspections, no
insulation can be installed, or any type of covering placed over the area
remodeled or constructed.



      C.   FINAL INSPECTIONS.  The owner or contractor shall call a
request for an inspection into the Building Department at least 48 hours
prior to the requested inspection. A building shall not be used or occupied
in whole or in part until a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by the
Building Official.  Before final occupancy certificate is issued, all
outstanding re-inspection and other village fees and costs must be paid, and
a $10,000 bond must be posted in a form acceptable to the village, to secure,
in part, that the construction and improvements comply with all applicable
village building codes for that property.



      D.   ON-SITE IMPROVEMENT INSPECTIONS.  The Director of
Building and Zoning, or approved agent of the village, shall authorize the
inspection of all on-site improvements for commercial, industrial and
residential construction projects.  On-site improvements include, but are
not limited to, curb, gutters, grading, drainage, paving and driveways. The
cost of all inspections and reports required under this provision shall be
paid by developer/contractor.



   (I)   Section R113.4 Violation Penalties.  Hereby amended to read
as follows:



      Any person who violates any provisions of this code or who fails
to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs,
alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, or the requirements
of this code, shall be subject to the following penalties as prescribed by
law:



      1.   Civil Remedies.  The village can enforce this code as
provided by law, including seeking injunctive relief for any violations.



      2.   Ordinance Violations.  In addition but not in lieu of
any other penalties, any person violating this code is subject to a fine of
not less than $250 or more than $750 per day for each day any violation
exists, with each calendar day an offense exists constituting a separate
offense.



   (J)   Section R114.2 Unlawful Continuance.  Hereby amended to read
as follows:



      Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure
after having been served with a stop order, except such work as that person
is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall be
penalized as provided by this chapter.



   (K)   Section Table R301.2(1) Climatic and Geographic Design
Criteria.  Hereby amended to read as follows:



 


Roof Snow Load



34 lbs.

 

Wind Speed




90 mph

 

SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY



B

 

SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM

 

Winter Design Temp



0 degrees Fahrenheit

 

Flood Hazards






Per Ordinance





 

Weathering



Severe

 

Frost Line Depth



42 inches

 

Termite



Moderate to Heavy

 

Decay



Slight to Moderate

 


 





 



   (L)   Section R311 Means of Egress.  Add the following:



      Section R311.4.1 Landing at Doors.  Temporary exterior
landing/stairs are permitted for a period not to exceed six months from date
of installation.



   (M)   Section R315 Where required.  Hereby amended to read as
follows:



      4.   Carbon Monoxide Detectors.  All residential buildings
constructed after the effective date of this section shall be equipped with
carbon monoxide detectors.  This provision shall also apply to existing
residential buildings equipped with new oil and gas combustion furnaces and
boilers.



         a)   Power Source.  Required carbon monoxide detectors
shall receive their primary power from the building wiring when such wiring
is served from a commercial source, and when primary power is interrupted,
shall receive power from a battery. Wiring shall be permanent and without a
disconnecting switch other than those required for over-current protection.



         b)   Location.  Carbon monoxide detectors shall be
installed in the immediate vicinity where the fossil fuel-burning appliance,
boiler or furnace is located.  Carbon monoxide detectors must also be
installed within fifteen (15) feet of all sleeping rooms.



         c)   Compliance.  All approved carbon monoxide
detectors herein required shall comply with all federal, state and local
standards for such devices.  Carbon monoxide detectors shall bear the label
of a nationally recognized standards testing laboratory, which indicates that
each such detector that has been tested and listed as a single carbon
monoxide detector.



         d)   FOSSIL FUEL.  Includes coal, natural gas, kerosene
oil, propane and wood.



   (N)   Section R302.2, 302.3, and Table 302.6 Townhomes and
Two-Family Dwellings. Revised one hour fire rated construction to 2 hour fire
rated construction minimum, with no exceptions.



   (O)   Section R402.I Wood Foundations.  Hereby amended to read as
follows:



      THE FOLLOWING SECTIONS WILL BE DELETED IN THEIR ENTIRETY:



      3.   Section R403.1 General



      4.   Figure R403.1(2) & Figure R403J(3)



      5.   Section R403.2 Footing for Wood Foundations



      6.   Section R404.2 Wood Foundation Walls



      7.   Section R404.2.1 Identification



      8.   Section R404.2.2 Stud Size



      9.   Section R404.2.3 Height of Backfill



      10.   Table R404.2.3



      11.   Table R404.2.4 Backfilling



      12.   Section R404.2.5 Drainage and Dampproofing



      13.   Section R404.2.6 Fastening



      14.   Section R405.2 Wood Foundations



      15.   Section R406.3 Dampproofing for Wood Foundations



      16.   Section R406.3.1 Panel Joint Sealed



      17.   Section R406.3.2 Below Grade Moisture Barrier



      18.   Section R406.3.3 Porous Fill



      19.   Section R406.3.4 Backfill



   (P)   Section R403.1 Footings.  The following is added at the end
of Section R403.1:



      All open and screened porches that are roofed require a minimum
8" wide trench footing foundation that extends at least 42" below finished
grade.



      Trench footings are not permitted for brick veneer, solid masonry
and 1-1/2 story or greater wall construction.



   (Q)   Section R703.4 Attachments. Table R703.4 Weather-Resistant
Siding Attachment and Minimum Thickness:



 


Siding Material

 
Nominal Thickness (Inches)


Vinyl siding
 
0.046



 



   (R)   Section R703.7.5 Flashing.  The following shall be added at
the end of Section R703.7.5:



      “Foundation/Sill Flashing the minimum shelf angle, coping, base
flashing, lintel and window sill flashing shall be:



      Minimum flashing shall be rubberized asphalt flashing: 
Manufacturers’ standard composite flashing product, consisting of a pliable
and highly adhesive rubberized-asphalt compound bonded to a high density,
cross-laminated polyethylene film, to produce an overall thickness of 0.040
inch (1.0 mm) or a rubberized flashing material of similar thickness.  Six
mil (6 mil) polyethylene is not acceptable.”



   (S)   Section R703.8 Flashing.  The following shall be added at the
end of Item 1:



      “Exterior Window and Door Flashing shall be:



      Minimum flashing shall be a multilayer composite employing
polyethylene and fiberglass with an integral adhesive strip that produces a
perm rating of less than .30 perms, and complying with ASTM  E331. 
Infiltration barrier joint tape is not acceptable.”



      Window and door flashing must be installed in accordance with the
American Architectural Manufacturers Association (AAMA) guidelines.



   (T)   Section R703.11 Vinyl Siding. Vinyl siding shall be certified
and labeled as conforming to the requirements of ASTM D 3679 by an approved
quality control agency and shall have a minimum thickness of 0.046 inches.



   (U)   Section R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems. Delete in its
entirety.



(Ord. 1478, passed 10-17-94; Am. Ord. 1557, passed 3-4-96; Am. Ord. 1595,
passed 11-4-96; Am. Ord. 1877, passed 1-7-02; Am. Ord. 2417, passed 9-17-07;
Am. Ord. 2480, passed 6-16-08; Am. Ord. 2595, passed 6-15-09; Am. Ord. 2930,
passed 7-21-14; Am. Ord. 3156, passed 5-21-18)



§ 150.21  ADOPTION OF THE 2012 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.



   The 2012 International Building Code, first edition, published by the
International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as a Building Code
of the village for the control of buildings and structures as therein
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of the 2012 International Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof as if full set out in this section, except with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes to such code as follows:



   (A)   Section 101.1 Title.  Hereby amended to read as follows:



      Title:  These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of
the Village of Frankfort, hereinafter sometimes referred to as “this
code”.



   (B)   Section 101.2.1 Appendices.  Hereby adopted:



      Appendix A   EMPLOYEE QUALIFICATIONS



      Appendix B   BOARD OF APPEALS



      Appendix C   GROUP U - AGRICULTURAL BUILDINGS



      Appendix I   PATIO COVERS



   (C)   Section 101.4.3 Plumbing.  Hereby amended by referencing and
adopting the 2014 Illinois State Plumbing Code.



   (D)   Section 105.2 Work Exempt from Permit.  Hereby amended by
deleting this section in its entirety:



      Building, Electrical, Mechanical and Plumbing.



   (E)   Section 105.5 Expiration.  Hereby amended to:



      Delete one hundred eighty (180) days and in this section replace
it with ninety (90) days.



   (F)   Section 109.2 Schedule of Permit Fees. Hereby amended to read
as follows:



      Fee Schedule:  A fee for each plan examination, building permit
and inspections shall be paid in accordance with the schedule as set forth in
applicable village ordinances, including Ordinance Nos. 1347 and 1449
entitled, “An Ordinance Amending Building Permit Fees and Inspection
Charges for the Village of Frankfort, Will County, Illinois,” as it now
exists or from time to time is amended.



   (G)   Section 110.3 Required Inspection.  Hereby amended to read as
follows:



      1.   INITIAL ON SITE SEDIMENT CONTROL INSPECTION



         A.   Sediment and erosion control measures must be
installed and maintained during the duration of the entire project in
accordance with the applicable village ordinances, including Village of
Frankfort Design Standards Ordinance No. 2487 or most recent edition.



      2.   FOOTING INSPECTIONS



         A.   Inspections required prior to placement of concrete.



         B.   If poor soil conditions exist, Illinois State
Licensed Soil Engineer will be required to provide a signed and sealed soil
determination, and inspection prior to placement of concrete.



         C.   Installation of stone drive.



      3.   FOUNDATION INSPECTION



         A.   Inspection of concrete forms in-place prior to any
concrete being poured.



         B.   Reinforcing steel in-place.



         C.   Forms centered on footing.



         D.   Installation of stone drive.



      4.   FOUNDATION BACKFILL INSPECTION



         A.   Dampproofing in-place.



         B.   Drain tile in-place.



         C.   Anchor bolt installation and location.



         D.   Upon approval of the drain tile inspection, the
foundation can be backfilled.  The Building Department will permit
construction of the deck over the basement or crawlspace areas only, prior to
or after backfilling.  This will help provide extra safety at the job site
and structural integrity to the foundation.



         E.   Submit spot survey (top of foundation elevation and
all setback dimensions).



         F.   Sediment control inspection.



      5.   UNDERGROUND PLUMBING INSPECTION



         A.   Basement Floor - inspection necessary prior to
placement of concrete.



      6.   SANITARY SEWER & WATER INSPECTION



      7.   ROUGH ELECTRIC INSPECTION



      8.   ROUGH PLUMBING INSPECTION



      9.   ROUGH MECHANICAL INSPECTION



      10.   ROUGH BUILDING INSPECTION



         A.    No insulation may be installed until the rough
inspections have been approved.



      11.   INSULATION INSPECTION:



         A.   No wall/ceiling coverings may be applied until an
insulation inspection has been performed and approved by the village.



      12.   MASONRY THRU-WALL “SILL” FLASHING INSPECTION



         A.   Prior to the installation of brick veneer, or stone.



      13.   CONCRETE FLAT WORK INSPECTION



         A.   Basement floors.



         B.   Garage floors/interior concrete.



         C.   Driveways/parking areas.



         D.   Sidewalks and service walks.



         E.   Patios.



      14.   EXTERIOR INSULATION FINISH SYSTEM INSPECTION:



         The following inspections shall be required for all
E.I.F.S. installation:



         A.   Substrate/flashing inspections.



         B.   E.P.S. board inspection.



         C.   Base coat application inspection.



         D.   Final inspection.



         E.   The installer must adhere to all manufacturers’
requirements for installation, and include a drainage system or equivalent.



      15.   FINAL PLUMBING INSPECTION



      16.   FINAL ELECTRIC INSPECTION



      17.   FINAL MECHANICAL INSPECTION



      18.   FINAL BUILDING INSPECTION



      19.   FINAL GRADE INSPECTION



      20.   ASPHALT/PARKING AREA INSPECTION



      21.   LANDSCAPE PERMIT INSPECTION (per applicable village
ordinances, including Ordinance No. 2341, as from time to time amended):



         A.   Provide complete landscaping plans.



         B.   Indicate foundation and all top of grade elevations.



         C.   Provide drawing showing the location of all lawn
sprinkler heads on final plat of survey.



   (H)   Section 110.3-1 Requests for Inspection is added as follows:



      A   CONCRETE INSPECTIONS.  The owner or contractor shall call
a request for an inspection into the Building Department at least 24 hours
prior to the inspection.  All forms and/or concrete will be inspected prior
to the placement.



      B.   BUILDING INSPECTIONS.  The owner or contractor shall
call a request for an inspection into the Building Department at least 48
hours prior to the inspection.  For rough inspections, no insulation can be
installed, or any type of covering placed over the area remodeled or
constructed.



      C.   FINAL INSPECTIONS.  The owner or contractor shall call a
request for an inspection into the Building Department at least 48 hours
prior to inspection.  A building shall not be used or occupied, in whole or
in part, until a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by the Building
Official.



         For purposes of this section, the terms “used or
occupied” shall be deemed to include, but are not limited to, the following:



         1.   The temporary or permanent storage of furniture,
equipment, and/or personal or household effects within the building or
structure.



         2.   Use of the building or structure for the purposes
of interviewing, training and instructing individuals, or other similar
activities.



      D.   ON-SITE IMPROVEMENT INSPECTIONS.  The Director of
Building and Zoning, or approved agent of the village, shall authorize the
inspection of all on-site improvements for commercial, industrial and
residential construction projects.  On-site improvements include, but are
not limited to, curb, gutters, grading, drainage, paving and driveways.  The
cost of all inspections and reports required under these provisions shall be
paid by developer/contractor. (Ord. 1557, passed 3-4-96)



   (I)   Section 114.4 Violation Penalties is hereby amended to read as
follows:



      Any person who violates any provision of this code or who fails
to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs,
alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, or the requirements
of this code, shall be subject to the following penalties as prescribed by
law.



      1.   Civil Remedies.  The village can enforce this code as
provided by law, including seeking injunctive relief for any violations.



      2.   Ordinance Violations.  In addition but not in lieu of
any other penalties, any person violating this code is subject to a fine of
not less than $250 or more than $750 per day for each day any violation
exists, with each calendar day a violation exists constituting a separate
offense.



   (J)   Section 114.2 Notice of violation. Hereby amended by adding
the following language:



      Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure
after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions,
shall be penalized as provided by this chapter and be liable for a fine of
not less than $250 nor more than $750 per day for each day a violation exists.



   (K)   Section 310 Residential Group R.  Add the following:



      Section 310.3 Required Dwelling Unit and Guest Room Separation. 
Hereby amended by adding the following language:



      Groups R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 containing two or more dwelling units
shall be separated by tenant separation or party walls with a fire resistance
rating of a minimum of two (2) hours, and shall be constructed of a
non-combustible masonry/concrete materials.  Any dwelling units located
above another dwelling unit shall be separated by a floor system with a fire
resistance rating of a minimum of two (2) hours, and shall be constructed of
pre-cast concrete or poured in place concrete.



   (L)   Section 705.4 Materials.  Delete the following:



      Exception:  Construction of Type V construction.



   (M)   Section 708.4 Continuity.  Hereby amended by adding the
following language:



      “The minimum tenant separation shall be two (2) hours
separation from floor to ceiling or roof deck above.”



   (N)   Section 907.2 Where Required. Hereby amended by adding the
following language:



      1)   An automatic fire detection system shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with the provisions of this code and the NFPA72 in
all buildings of groups A-B-E-F-H-I-M-R-S-U.



      2)   Carbon Monoxide Detectors.  All commercial and
industrial buildings constructed after the effective date of this section
shall be equipped with carbon monoxide detectors.  This provision shall also
apply to existing commercial and industrial buildings equipped with new or
replacement oil and gas combustion furnaces and boilers.



         a)   Power Source.  Required carbon monoxide detectors
shall receive their primary power from the building wiring when such wiring
is served from a commercial source, and when primary power is interrupted,
shall receive power from a battery.  Wiring shall be permanent and without a
disconnecting switch other than those required for over-current protection.



         b)   Location.  Carbon monoxide detectors shall be
installed in the immediate vicinity where the fossil fuel-burning appliance,
boiler or furnace is located.



         c)   Compliance.  All approved carbon monoxide
detectors herein required shall comply with all federal, state and local
standards for such devices.  Carbon monoxide detectors shall bear the label
of a nationally recognized standards testing laboratory, which indicates that
each such detector has been tested and listed as a single carbon monoxide
detector.



            FOSSIL FUEL.  Includes coal, natural gas, kerosene
oil, propane and wood



   (O)   Section 1405.4 Flashing.  The following shall be added at the
end of Section 1405.4:



      “The minimum shelf angle, coping, base flashing, lintel and
window sill flashing shall be:



      Rubberized Asphalt Flashing:  Manufacturers’ standard
composite flashing product, consisting of a pliable and highly adhesive
rubberized-asphalt compound bonded to a high density, cross-laminated
polyethylene film to produce an overall thickness of 0.040 inch (1.0 mm), or
a rubberized flashing material of similar thickness. 6 mil polyethylene is
not acceptable.”



      “Minimum flashing around exterior window and door openings
shall be a multi-layer composite employing polyethylene and fiberglass, with
an integral adhesive strip that produces a perm rating of less than .30
perms, and complying with ASTM E331.  Infiltration barrier joint tape is not
acceptable.”



   (P)   Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems.  Hereby amended by deleting this
chapter in its entirety and referring to, adopting and incorporating the 2014
Illinois State Plumbing Code as provided under this subchapter.



   (Q)   Section 3107 Signs.  Hereby amended by referring to, adopting
and incorporating the Village of Frankfort Code of Ordinances, Chapter 151.



   (R)   Section 3412.2 Applicability.  Hereby amended to read as
follows:



      Structures existing prior to the date of adoption in the Village
of Frankfort, December 3, 2001.



   (S)   Section 903.2 Where Required. Amend as follows:



      Delete the first paragraph and add the following:



      A.   A complete automatic fire  suppression system shall be
installed and maintained in full operating condition, as specified in this
code in all buildings as follows:



      B.   All buildings four (4) or more stories or fifty feet
(50') in height.



      C.   In any building greater than seven thousand five hundred
(7,500) square feet in floor area - inclusive of all floor stories and
mezzanines.



      D.   As required in locations indicated in sections 903.2.1
through 903.2.15 except as amended below:



         Section 903.2.1.1.1 Use Group A-1. In lieu of 12,000 square
feet revise to 7,500 square feet.



         Section 903.2.1.3.1 Use Group A-3. In lieu of 12,000 square
feet revise to 7,500 square feet.



         Section 903.2.1.4.1 Use Group A-4. In lieu of 12,000 square
feet revise to 7,500 square feet.



         Section 903.2.3.1 Use Group E. In lieu of 12,000 square
feet revise to 7,500 square feet.



         Section 903.2.4.1 Use Group F-1. In lieu of 12,000 square
feet revise to 7,500 square feet.



         Section 903.2.7.1 Use Group M. In lieu of 12,000 square
feet revise to 7,500 square feet.



         Section 903.3.1.1 NFPA 13 Sprinkler Systems. Add the
language “and the Village of Frankfort Fire code” to the last line.



         Section 903. 3.1. 2 NFPA 13 R Sprinkler Systems. Add the
language “and the Village of Frankfort Fire Code” to the last line.



         Section 903.3.1.3 NFPA 13 D Sprinkler System. Add the
language “and the Village of Frankfort Fire Code” to the last line.



         Section 907. 2.1 Use Group A. Delete this section in its
entirety and replace with the following:



            Section 90 7. 2.1 Use Group A. A fire detection
system shall be installed and maintained in all buildings of use group A
where such buildings are not required to have fire suppression systems.



         Section 907.2.2 Use Group B. Delete this section in its
entirety and replace with the following:



            Section 907. 2. 2 Use Group B. A fire detection
system shall be installed and maintained in all buildings of use group B
where such buildings are not required to have fire suppression systems.



         Section 907. 2. 4 Use Group F. Delete this section in its
entirety and replace with the following:



            Section 907. 2. 4 Use Group F. A fire detection
system shall be installed and maintained in all buildings of use group F
where such buildings are not required to have fire suppression systems.



         Section 907. 2. 7 Use Group M. Delete this section in its
entirety and replace with the following:



            Section 907. 2. 7 Use Groups M and S. A fire
detection system shall be installed and maintained in all buildings of use
group M and S where such buildings are not required to have fire suppression
systems.



(Ord. 1478, passed 10-17-94; Am. Ord. 1557, passed 3-4-96; Am. Ord. 1595,
passed 11-4-96; Am. Ord. 1877, passed 1-7-02; Am. Ord. 2595, passed 6-15-09;
Am. Ord. 3156, passed 5-21-18)



§ 150.22  ADOPTION OF THE 2014 ILLINOIS STATE PLUMBING CODE.



   The Illinois State Plumbing Code 2014 Edition, including the
supplements thereto, as adopted by the Illinois Department of Public Health
pursuant to authority included in the Illinois Plumbing License and Code Law,
is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the Village of Frankfort, except
with amendments and deletions as follows:



   (A)   Delete #11 in Table A, Section 890 Appendix A.  Delete the
following:  Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe.



   (B)   Delete #4 in Table A, Section 890 Appendix A.  Delete the
following:  Chlorinated Polyvinyl Chloride (CPVC) pipe.



   (C)   Delete #2 in Table A, Section 890 Appendix A. Delete the
following:  Chlorinated Polyvinyl Chloride (CPVC) pipe/tubing.



   (D)   Amend #2 in “Agency Notes.”  Amend the following to
read:  Type L copper tubing, approved for above ground uses only Type K
copper for below ground.



   (E)   Delete in its entirety.  Section 890. 1500 Installation of
wet venting.



   (F)   Amend Section 890.1340 by amending #4 to provide that the size
of the item stated in this section “shall not be less than 3 inches in
diameter.”



   (G)   Delete #12 in Table A, Section 890 Appendix A, Approved
Materials for Water Service Pipe. Delete the following: Polyvinyl chloride
(PVC) pipe.



(Ord. 1478, passed 10-17-94; Am. Ord. 1595, passed 11-4-96; Am. Ord. 1877,
passed 1-7-02; Am. Ord. 2128, passed 11-15-04; Am. Ord. 2595, passed 6-15-09;
Am. Ord. 3156, passed 5-21-18)



§ 150.23  ADOPTION OF THE 2012 INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE.



   The 2012 International Mechanical Code, first edition, published by the
International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as a Building Code
of the village for the control of buildings and structures as therein
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of the 2012 International Mechanical Code are hereby referred to
adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section, except
with additions, insertions, deletions and changes to such code as follows:



   (A)   Section 101.1 Title.  Hereby amended to read as follows:



      Title:  These regulations shall be known as the International
Mechanical Code of the Village of Frankfort, hereinafter referred to as
“this code.”



   (B)   Section 106.5.2 Fee Schedule.  Hereby amended to read as
follows:



      Fee Schedule.  A fee for each plan examination, building permit
and inspections shall be paid in accordance with the schedule as set forth in
applicable village ordinances, including Ordinance Nos. 1347 and 1449
entitled, “An Ordinance Amending Building Permit Fees and Inspection
Charges for the Village of Frankfort, Will County, Illinois,” as it now
exists or from time to time is amended.



   (C)   Section 106.5.3 Fee Refund.  Paragraphs 2 and 3 of this
section are hereby amended to read as follows:



      1.   Fifty percent (50%) of the permit fee paid if a refund is
requested by the applicant within thirty (30) days from the date of the
issuance of the permit and no work has been done under the permit issued in
accordance with this code.



      2.   Fifty percent (50%) of the plan review fee paid when an
application for a permit for which a plan review has been paid is withdrawn
or cancelled by the applicant within thirty (30) days from the date of plan
submittal and the village or its consultant has not initiated any review of
the plan, and the village consultant has refunded to the village the fifty
(50%) percent of the paid plan review fee.



   (D)   Section 108.4 Violation Penalties. Hereby amended to read as
follows:



      Any person who violates any provision of this code, or who fails
to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs,
alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, or the requirements
of this code, shall be subject to the following penalties as prescribed by
law.



      1.   Civil Remedies.  The village can enforce this code as
provided by law, including seeking injunctive relief for any violations.



      2.   Ordinance Violations.  In addition but not in lieu of
any other viable penalties, any person violating this code is subject to a
fine of not less than $250 and not more than $750 per day for each day any
violation exists, with each calendar day a violation exists constituting a
separate offense.



   (E)   Section 108.5 Stop Work Orders.  Hereby amended to read as
follows:



      No person shall continue any work in or about the building,
structure or improvements after having been served with a stop work order,
except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation
of unsafe conditions.



(Ord. 1478, passed 10-17-94; Am. Ord. 1595, passed 11-4-96; Am. Ord. 1877,
passed 1-7-02; Am. Ord. 2595, passed 6-15-09; Am. Ord. 3156, passed 5-21-18)



§ 150.24  ADOPTION OF THE 2015 INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.



   The 2015 International Energy Conservation Code, first edition,
published by the International Code Council, Inc., shall be and is hereby
adopted as a building code of the village for the control of buildings and
structures as therein provided; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions, and terms of the 2015 International Energy
Conservation Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as
if fully set out in this section, except with additions, insertions,
deletions, and changes to such code which are as follows:



   (A)   Section 101.1 Title.  Hereby amended to read as follows:



      Title: This code shall be known as the International Energy
Conservation Code of the Village of Frankfort, hereinafter referred to as
“this code.”



(Ord. 1478, passed 10-17-94; Am. Ord. 1595, passed 11-4-96; Am. Ord. 1877,
passed 1-7-02; Am. Ord. 2595, passed 6-15-09; Am. Ord. 2637, passed 2-16-10;
Am. Ord. 2809, passed 10-15-12; Am. Ord. 3156, passed 5-21-18)



§ 150.25  ADOPTION OF THE 2012 INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.



   The 2012 International Fire Code, first edition, published by the
International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as a Fire Code of
the village regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property
from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of
hazardous substances, materials and devices, from conditions hazardous to
life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the village;
providing for the issuance of permits for hazardous uses or operations, and
each and all of the regulations,  provisions, conditions and terms of the
2012 International Fire Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this section, except with additions,
insertions, deletions and changes to such code as follows:



   (A)   Section 101.1 Title.  Hereby amended to read as follows:



      Title:  These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the
Village of Frankfort, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”



   (B)   Section 101.2.1 Appendices.  Hereby adopted:



      Appendix A   BOARD OF APPEALS



      Appendix B   FIRE - FLOW REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDINGS



      Appendix C   FIRE HYDRANT LOCATIONS AND DISTRIBUTION



      Appendix E   HAZARDOUS CATEGORIES



      Appendix F   HAZARDOUS RANKING



   (C)   Section 109.4 Violations/Penalties.  Hereby amended to read
as follows:



      Any person who violates any provision of this code or who fails
to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs,
alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to
the following penalties as prescribed by law.



      1.    Civil Remedies.  The village can enforce this code as
provided by law, including seeking injunctive relief for any violations.



      2.   Ordinance Violations.  In addition but not in lieu of
any other viable penalties, any person violating this code is subject to a
fine of not less than $250 or more than $750 per day for each day any
violation exists, with each day a violation existing constituting a separate
offense.



   (D)   Section 5704.2.9.6.2 Separation between adjacent stable or
unstable liquid tanks is amended to limit the maximum capacity of the tank
not to exceed 1,000 gallons.



   (E)   Section 5706.2.4.4 Location where above ground tanks are
prohibited is amended to limit the maximum capacity of the tank not to exceed
1,000 gallons.



   (F)   Chapter 57 Maximum capacity within established limits is
amended to limit the maximum capacity of the tank not to exceed 1,000 gallons.



   (G)   The requirements, terms, conditions and provisions of each of
the following ordinances adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Mokena Fire
Protection District and the Board of Trustees of the Frankfort Fire
Protection District are adopted by reference and incorporated herein.



      (1)   Mokena Fire Protection District, Will and Cook Counties,
Illinois, Fire Prevention Ordinance No. 2007-3, as it now exists and is from
time to time is amended, a copy of which is on file with the Village of
Frankfort.



      (2)   Frankfort Fire Protection District, Will County,
Frankfort Illinois, Ordinance No. 179, as it now exists and is from time to
time is amended, a copy of which is on file with the Village of Frankfort,
except that in Section 902, Definitions, Total Area is hereby amended to read:



         For the purposes of calculating total square feet and fire
areas the total area shall be:



         The aggregate floor area within the exterior walls of a
building; regardless of fire walls, fire barriers, or fire resistance-rated
horizontal assemblies. This floor area includes all mezzanines, basements,
balconies, porches, roof overhangs, extensions and enclosed extensions.



(Ord. 1478, passed 10-17-94; Am. Ord. 1595, passed 11-4-96; Am. Ord. 1877,
passed 1-7-02; Am. Ord. 2595, passed 6-15-09; Am. Ord. 3156, passed 5-21-18)



§ 150.26  ADOPTION OF THE 2012 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.



   The 2012 International Property Maintenance Code, first edition,
published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted
as a Building Code of the village for the control of buildings and structures
as therein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
conditions and terms of the 2012 International Property Maintenance Code are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this section, except with additions, insertions, deletions and changes to
such code as follows:



   (A)   Section 101.1 Title.  Hereby amended to read as follows:



      Title:  These regulations shall be known as the 2012
International Property Maintenance Code of the Village of Frankfort,
hereinafter referred to as “this code.”



   (B)   Section 103.5 Fee Schedule.  Hereby amended to read as
follows:



      A fee for each plan examination, building permit and inspection
shall be in accordance with the schedule as set forth in applicable village
ordinances.



   (C)   Section 106.4 Violation Penalties.  Hereby amended to read as
follows:



      Any person who violates any provision of this code or who fails
to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs,
alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to
the following penalties as prescribed by law.



      1.   Civil Remedies.  The village can enforce this code as
provided by law, including seeking injunctive relief for any violations.



      2.   Ordinance Violations.  In addition but not in lieu of
any other viable penalties, any person violating this code is subject to a
fine of not less than $250 or more than $750 per day for each day any
violation exists, with each calendar day a violation exists constituting a
separate offense.



   (D)   Section 302.4 Weeds.  Hereby to read as follows:



      Delete weed height of 10 inches and replace with weed height of
six (6) inches.  The following is hereby added to Section 302.4:



      All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from
weeds or plant growth in excess of six inches. All noxious weeds shall be
prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; provided, however, this term shall
not include cultivated flowers and gardens.



   (E)   Section 304.14 Insect Screens. Hereby amended by adding the
following language:



      Every door, window and other outside opening utilized or required
for ventilation purposes serving any structure containing habitable rooms,
food preparation areas, food service areas, or any areas where products to be
included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed,
manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved, tightly
fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch, and every swinging door
shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.



   (F)   Section 602.3 Heat Supply.  Hereby amended to read as follows:



      Every owner and operator of a building who rents, leases or lets
one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory or guest room on terms
either express or implied to furnish heat to the occupants thereof, shall
supply sufficient heat to maintain the room temperatures at the minimum of 68
degrees Fahrenheit in all habitable rooms, bath rooms and toilet rooms.



   (G)   Section 602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces.  Hereby amended to read
as follows:



      Every enclosed occupied work space shall be supplied with
sufficient heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 68 degrees
Fahrenheit during all working hours.



(Ord. 1478, passed 10-17-94; Am. Ord. 1595, passed 11-4-96; Am. Ord. 1877,
passed 1-7-02; Am. Ord. 2595, passed 6-15-09; Am. Ord. 3156, passed 5-21-18)



§ 150.27  ADOPTION OF THE 2011 NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE.



   The 2011 National Electrical Code (NFPA-70) published by the National
Fire Protection Association is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of the
village.  Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties and terms
of the NFPA-70, 2011 Edition, are hereby referred to as adopted and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes to such code as follows:



   (A)    The following codes and standards are adopted by reference as
part of the village’s adoption of the above National Electrical Code:



      (1)   (a)   The Electrical Industry Association (E.I.A.)
and the Telephone Industry Association (T.I.A.) Standards.



         (b)   Amendments to EIA/TIA Standard 570.



         (c)   Section 5.3.5.2 of the EIA/TIA is amended to add a
minimum of one wire run shall be installed to each of the following rooms in
residences (where applicable):



            Kitchen



            All Bedrooms



            Family/Guest Room



            Den/Study



      (2)   ANSI (American National Standards Institute).



         #Z21.83-98 - Fuel Cell Power Plants (Referenced in Code
Section #1202.10)



      (3)   U.L. (Underwriters Laboratories).



         #910-98 - Test for Flame - Propagation and Smoke-Density
Values for Electrical and Optical-Fiber Cables Used in Space Transporting
Environmental Air (Referenced in Code Section #1202.8)



         #2043-96 - Standard for Fire Test for Heat and Visible
Smoke Release for Discrete Products and Their Accessories Installed in
Air-Handing Spaces (Referenced in Code Section 1202.8.1)



      (4)   NFPA (National Fire Protection Association).



         #37-98 - Installation and Use of Stationary Combustion
Engines and Gas Turbines (Referenced in Code Section #1202.9)



         #110-99 - Emergency and Standby Power Systems (Referenced
in Code Section 1202.6)



         #111-96 - Stored Electrical Energy Emergency and Standby
Power Systems (Referenced in Code Section 1202.6)



   (B)   The following articles are deleted from the Electrical Code:



      Article 230.43 - Wiring Methods



      Article 320 - Armored Cable:  Type AC



      Article 322 - Flat Cable Assemblies:  Type FC



      Article 324 - Flat Conductor Cable (FCC) usually under carpets



      Article 326 - Integrated Gas Spacer Cable



      Article 328 - Medium Voltage Cable (Type MV) 2001 Volts or higher



      Article 334 - Non-Metallic Sheathed Cable/Type NM, NMC & NMS



      Article 338 - Service - entrance Cable/Type SE & USE



      Article 352.10.A - Concealed.  In walls, floors & ceilings



      Article 352.10.C - Cinders.  In cinder fill.



      Article 352.10.F - Exposed



      Article 362 - Electrical Non-Metallic Tubing (flexible corrugated)



      Article 382 - Non-Metallic Extensions



      Article 394 - Concealed Knob-and-Tube Wiring



      Article 398 - Pertaining to open wiring on insulators



   (C)   Adopt the following: “All conductors shall be installed in
approved metallic raceways”. Exceptions:  See Article 352.10 (B), (D), (E)
and (G).



   (D)   The following articles of the Electrical Code are amended:



      (1)   Article 230.43 is amended to read, “All electrical
utility services shall only be installed in rigid metal conduit (or other
material as approved), or intermediate metal conduit (or other material as
approved) above ground and entering the building.”



         (a)   All underground branch-circuit and feeder
conductors shall be protected against over- current by an over-current device
installed at the point where the conductors receive their supply and all
sub-panels will have a main breaker located at the panel.



         (b)   All conduits entering a building shall be sealed
with duct seal or other approved method to prevent moisture and condensation
from forming inside the conduit.



      (2)   Article 210.5 (C) is amended to add the following: 
“All 120-208 Volt services, feeders, and branch circuits shall have phases
marked Black (A), Red (B) and Blue (C).  All 277-480 Volt services, feeders,
and branch circuits shall be phased marked Brown (A), Orange (B), and Yellow
(C).”



      (3)   Article 320 of the N.E.C. and substitute as follows
(NFPA-70):



         Armored Cable (Type A.C.) - Exceptions:



         Armored cable may be permitted for use in concealed work in
dry locations where it is finished in existing walls or partitions where it
is not possible to install conduit, EMT or other approved raceway.



      (4)   Multi-Family Residence Buildings.



         Articles 210-52H and 210-70a of the Electrical Code are
amended to add:



         A duplex receptacle shall be installed in each public
hallway on each floor, and in each public reception room or foyer in
multi-family residences.



         (Ord. 1595, passed 11-4-96; Am. Ord. 1877, passed 1-7-02)



   (E)   The following provisions are added to the Electrical Code:



      (1)   All wiring between the meter box and inside service
panel, exceeding ten feet (10'), shall require proper wire over current
protection.



      (2)   All new single family dwellings over 2,000 square feet
(2,000 s.f.) shall have a minimum of a 200 ampere, 3-wire service, and shall
be underground whenever possible, unless otherwise approved by the village.



         (a)   Residential Services.  Shall be installed on the
side of the house closest to the utility pedestal that will feed the meter. 
The service shall not be installed on the rear of the house unless approved
by the village.



      (3)   A maximum of three (3) conduits per one and one half
inch (1-1/2") 8-B (3-1/2" Octagon box x 1-1/2" deep) or four conduits per
1,900 (4" square box x 1-1/2" deep) box shall be allowed.



      (4)   All lights over a bathtub or a shower will be G.F.C.I.
protected.



         (a)   In commercial and industrial buildings, all
receptacles within five feet (5') of water shall be G.F.C.I. receptacles. 
This includes washrooms, whether they are public or private, or around sinks,
showers, tubs, or water fountains.



      (5)   In all cases duly licensed by a commission in the State
of Illinois that provides a test for electrical competency, a bonded
electrical contractor shall install electrical services and wiring.



      (6)   Studs, plates and joists must be drilled so as not to
break the front half of the wood.  If it is broken and the conduit is
exposed, a metal plate must be placed across the opening.



      (7)   Jacuzzi, spa or whirlpool tubs shall be hard wired to a
J Box, with a switch, or G.F.C.I.- protected receptacle where it can be
plugged.  No cords from motors shall protrude through a wall or the floor to
be wired.  All tub motors will have an access panel with a minimum size of
fourteen inches by fourteen inches (14" x 14").



         (a)   One hundred twenty-five (125) Volt receptacles
located within ten feet (10') (3,048 mm) of the inside walls of spas and hot
tubs shall be protected by ground-fault circuit-interrupters.  One hundred
twenty-five (125) Volt receptacles located within five feet (5') (1,524 mm)
of the inside walls of hydro massage bathtubs shall be protected by a
ground-fault circuit-interrupter.



         (b)   All hydro massage bathtubs and whirlpool tubs
shall be protected by a faceless ground- fault circuit interrupter located
within the same room as the tub.



      (8)   Any 120 volt sump pump or ejector pump shall have a
single receptacle, not a duplex receptacle, and shall be on a separate
circuit, non-G.F.C.I. type.



      (9)   Electrical Metallic Tubing (EMT).  Shall not be used
underground, outside exposed to the weather, on outside walls, on roofs
exposed to permanent moisture, nor in concrete slab in contact with the earth
or fill, where during installation or afterwards, it will be subject to
mechanical injury.  Plastic, visqueen or similar materials under the tubing
is considered the same as earth or fill.



      (10)   Low Voltage Wiring.  Low voltage wiring for lighting
circuits, TV cable controls, building automation, telephone, intercoms,
communications, including signaling circuits on commercial and industrial
buildings or where there are metal studs being used, may be run exposed only
in accessible areas.  When such wiring is installed in inaccessible areas or
subject to mechanical injury, or in plenums, all wiring shall be installed in
conduit or approved raceway, and all such work requires a permit.



      (11)   For smoke and carbon monoxide requirements, see IRC
Code 2012 or Illinois Public Act 094-0741.



(Ord. 1595, passed 11-4-96; Am. Ord. 1877, passed 1-7-02; Am. Ord. 2595,
passed 6-15-09; Am. Ord. 3156, passed 5-21-18)



§ 150.28  ADOPTION OF THE 2012 INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE.



   The 2012 International Fuel Gas Code, second edition, published by the
International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as a Building Code
of the village for the control of buildings and structures as therein
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, except with
additions, insertions, deletions and changes to such code as follows:



   (A)   Section 101.1 Title.  Hereby amended to read as follows:



      Title:  These regulations shall be known as the 2012
International Fuel Gas Code of the Village of Frankfort, hereinafter referred
to as “this code.”



   (B)   Section 106.6.2 Fee Schedule.  Hereby amended to read as
follows:



      Fee Schedule.  A fee for each plan examination. Building permit
and inspections shall be paid in accordance with the schedule as set forth in
applicable village ordinances, including Ordinance Nos. 1347 and 1449
entitled, “An Ordinance Amending Building Permit Fees and Inspection
Charges for the Village of Frankfort. Will County, Illinois,” as it now
exists or from time to time is amended.



   (C)   Section 106.6.3 Fee Refund.  Hereby amended to read as
follows:  Paragraphs 2 and 3 of this section are hereby amended to read as
follows:



      1.   Fifty percent (50%) of the permit fee paid if a refund is
requested by the applicant within thirty (30) days from the date of the
issuance of the permit and no work has been done under the permit issued in
accordance with this code.



      2.   Fifty percent (50%) of the plan review fee paid when an
application for a permit for which a plan review has been paid is withdrawn
or cancelled by the applicant within thirty (30) days from the date of plan
submittal and the village or its consultant has not initiated any review of
the plan and the village consultant has refunded to the village fifty percent
(50%) of the paid plan review fee.



   (D)   Section 108.4 Violation Penalties.  Hereby amended to read as
follows:



      Any person who violates any provisions of this code or who fails
to comply with any of the requirements thereof, or who erects, constructs,
alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall be subject to
the following penalties as prescribed by law.



      1.   Civil Remedies.  The village can enforce this code as
provided by law, including seeking injunctive relief for any violations.



      2.   Ordinance Violations.  In addition but not in lieu of
other viable penalties, any person violating this code is subject to a fine
of not less than $250 or more than $750 per day for each day any violation
exists, with each calendar day a violation exists constituting a separate
violation.



   (E)   Section 108.5 Stop Work Orders.  Hereby amended to read as
follows:



      No person shall continue any work in or about the structure after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation of unsafe conditions.



(Ord. 1877, passed 1-7-02; Am. Ord. 2595, passed 6-15-09; Am. Ord. 3156,
passed 5-21-18)



§ 150.29  CONSTRUCTION USING MOST RESTRICTIVE PROVISIONS.



   Each of the codes adopted herein shall be constructed collectively, and
if there are any inconsistencies between such codes, the most restrictive
provisions to the applicant shall apply.



(Ord. 1478, passed 10-17-94; Am. Ord. 1595, passed 11-4-96; Am. Ord. 1877,
passed 1-7-02; Am. Ord. 2595, passed 6-15-09; Am. Ord. 3156, passed 5-21-18)



§ 150.30  ADOPTION OF ELEVATOR SAFETY CODES.



   (A)   Codes adopted. The Village of Frankfort adopts by reference
the following codes and standards as its codes and standards for the
construction, operation, inspecting, testing, maintenance and repair of all
equipment, parts and devices subject to village regulation under Section 10
of the Elevator Safety and Regulation Act (ILCS Ch. 225, Act 312, § 10):



      (1)   American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME):



         (a)   Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators (ASME
A17.1-2007/CSA B44-07) and Performance-Based Safety Code for Elevators and
Escalators (ASME A17.1-2007/CSA B44.7-07);



         (b)   Guide for Inspection of Elevators, Escalators, and
Moving Walks (ASME 17.2-2007);



         (c)   Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators
(ASME A17.3-2005) (upgrades required by application of the Safety Code for
Existing Elevators and Escalators must be completed no later than January 1,
2009, except that upgrades to the hydraulic cylinder system and the
firefighter control system must be completed by January 1, 2011);



         (d)   Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway
Chairlifts (ASME A18.1-2005); and



         (e)   Standard for the Qualification of Elevator
Inspectors (ASME ZEI-2007).



      (2)   American National Standards Institute (ANSI):



         (a)   Safety Requirements for Personal Hoists and
Employee Elevators (ANSI A10-4-2007).



      (3)   American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE):



         (a)   Automated People Mover Standards Part 1 (ASCE
21-2005);



         (b)   Automated People Mover Standards Part 2 (ASCE
21-1998);



         (c)   Automated People Mover Standards Part 3 (ASCE
21-2000).



      (4)   And any later editions to the foregoing codes together
with any other codes and standards applicable to the Elevator Safety
Regulation Act which are from time to time adopted by the State of Illinois
Joint Committee on Administrative Rules and promulgated and utilized by the
Office of the State Fire Marshal of the State of Illinois.



   (B)   Upgrades. Upgrades to all existing elevators, escalators and
other devices required by ASME A17.3-2005, Safety Code for Existing
Elevators, shall be completed no later than January 1, 2009, except that
upgrades to the hydraulic cylinder system and firefighter control system
shall be completed by January 1, 2011.



   (C)   Fees. Fees associated with the inspection of elevators and
other devices subject to this section shall be administratively established
and set by the Village Administrator of the Village of Frankfort after
consultation with the Village President and Board of Trustees.



   (D)   Compliance with applicable codes. Any person, entity, business
or corporation owning, operating, maintaining or managing any building,
structure, property or facility with any equipment, parts or devices subject
to village regulation under this section must fully comply with all
applicable village codes and standards including those provided herein.



(Ord. 2513, passed 9-15-08)  Penalty, see § 150.99



FEES AND CHARGES



§ 150.40  BUILDING PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES.



   In addition to, and not in lieu of, all other costs, reimbursable
expenses and other fees charged, the applicant for a building permit shall
pay, at the time of permit approval, the following fees for construction and
inspection for new construction, remodeling, and building additions for
various zoning classifications and specified project descriptions as follows:



   (A)   E-R through R-5 zoned property (residential dwellings).



      (1)   A fee of $0.40 per square foot of total building area.



      (2)   In addition, the applicant shall pay the village for all
consultant building code review charges incurred during its review of
multi-family and single-family dwelling construction.



   (B)   B-1 through B-5 zoned property (commercial).



      (1)   A fee of $0.50 per square foot of building area.



      (2)   In addition, the applicant shall pay the village for all
consultant building code review charges incurred during its review of all
commercial construction.



   (C)   I-1 and I-2 zoned property (industrial).



      (1)   A fee of $0.50 per square foot of building area.



      (2)   In addition, the applicant shall pay the village for all
consultant building code review charges incurred during its review of all
industrial construction.



   (D)   All zoning districts — remodeling.



 

Value of Permit
 
Cost of Permit


$0 - $100.00
 
$0


$100.01 - $1,000.00
 
$75


$1,000.01 - $2,500.00
 
$125


$2,500.01 - $5,000.00
 
$150


Over $5,000.00
 
$150*


 
* plus $15 per $1,000 of valuation



 



   (E)   Remodeling permit fees.  Remodeling permit fees shall be set
from time to time from by the Board of Trustees.



   (F)   Plan review fee.  In addition to other fees, at the time of
the application, the applicant shall pay a plan review fee in an amount based
upon the cost of construction as defined below.  For the purpose of this
section, it shall include, but not be limited to, the following types of
construction: commercial, industrial and residential, including new
construction, remodeling, and all repair work other than no fee permits. 
Construction cost shall be as determined by the most current publication of
the RS Means Construction Cost Data Book unit costs.  Should the
construction type not be listed in RS Means Construction Cost Data Book, the
value of construction, as noted on the building permit application, may be
used at the discretion of the Building Official.



 

Construction Costs
 
Review Fee


$0 - $2,000.00
 
$25


$2,000.01 - $10,000.00
 
$50


$10,000.01 - $25,000.00
 
$75


$25,000.01 - $100,000.00
 
$100


Over $100,000.00
 
Will be based on 10% of the village building permit fee



 



   (G)   Accessory/repair permit fees.



 

Type of Permit
 
Permit
 
Review
 
Total




Air conditioner (hard wire)
 
$30
 
$25
 
$55


Asphalt/resurface
 
$10
 
$25
 
$35


Basketball court
 
No fee
 
No fee
 
No fee


Boiler
 
$30
 
$25
 
$55


Brick pavers (patio, driveway, service walk)
 
$30
 
$25
 
$55


Commercial/industrial parking lot sealing
 
No fee
 
No fee
 
No fee


Concrete patio or driveway, walks (new)
 
$10
 
$25
 
$35


Concrete stoop, patio or walks repair replacement
 
$10
 
$25
 
$35


Deck
 
$45
 
$25
 
$70


Demolition
 
$45
 
$25
 
$70


Dog run
 
$20
 
$25
 
$45


Drain tile
 
$30
 
$30
 
$60


Elevator*
 
$200
 
$50
 
$250


Electric service upgrade/temporary service
 
$45
 
$25
 
$70


Electrical work/alarm system
 
$45
 
$25
 
$70


Fascia, soffit and gutter replacement
 
No fee
 
No fee
 
No fee


Fence
 
$30
 
$25
 
$55


Fill/land balance
 
$90
 
$25
 
$115


Fireplace
 
$25
 
$25
 
$50


Fire alarm system*
 
$45
 
$25
 
$70


Fire suppression*
 
$100
 
$50
 
$150




 



 

Type of Permit
 
Permit
 
Review
 
Total




Foundation repair
 
No fee
 
No fee
 
No fee


Furnace replacement
 
$30
 
$25
 
$55


Gazebo/pagoda
 
$30
 
$25
 
$55


Garage door
 
No fee
 
No fee
 
No fee


Hot water heater replacement
 
No fee
 
No fee
 
No fee


Hot tub or spa
 
$70
 
$25
 
$95


Landscaping “pertaining to grading”**
 
$100
 
$25
 
$125


Lawn sprinkler**
 
$125
 
$25
 
$150


Mailbox
 
$25
 
$10
 
$35


Mud jacking
 
No fee
 
No fee
 
No fee


Parking lot expansion
 
$45
 
$25
 
$70


Playhouse/swing set
 
No fee
 
No fee
 
No fee


Plumbing replacement of fixtures
 
$55
 
$25
 
$80


POD residential property
 
$15
 
No fee
 
$15


Radio or TV tower antenna
 
$10
 
$25
 
$35


Re-inspection fees
 
$50
 
No fee
 
$50


Re-roof
 
No fee
 
No fee
 
No fee


Satellite dish
 
$25
 
$25
 
$50


Sewer repair
 
$30
 
$25
 
$55


Shed
 
$45
 
$25
 
$70


Siding replacement
 
No fee
 
No fee
 
No fee


Starting work without permit
 
$75
 
No fee
 
$75


Stop work order
 
$75
 
No fee
 
$75




 



 

Type of Permit
 
Permit
 
Review
 
Total




Swimming pool in-ground**
 
$350
 
$50
 
$400


Swimming pool above ground**
 
$150
 
$50
 
$200


Tank removal/install
 
$45
 
$25
 
$70


Temporary office trailer
 
$90
 
$25
 
$115


Tuck pointing/masonry work
 
No fee
 
No fee
 
No fee


Water softener
 
No fee
 
No fee
 
No fee


Well (total fee, including 3-year operating permit of $45)
 
$275
 
$25
 
$345


Window replacement
 
No fee
 
No fee
 
No fee




 



      *Outside consultants are used for these reviews, for which the
fees are passed onto the permit applicant.



      **Requires a $1000 bond to be posted to insure that all issues
are met with the project.



        Bond will be refunded once final inspections have passed.



   (H)   Consultant fees.  If the village, at its sole discretion,
retains consultant(s) to review plans, workmanship, materials and other
issues associated with the building or construction of any improvements,
then, in addition to those other fees and costs under this section, the
applicant shall also pay the village all costs incurred and associated with
such consultant(s).



(Ord. 1319, passed 9-17-90; Am. Ord. 1347, passed 4-29-91; Am. Ord. 1449,
passed 3-7-94; Am. Ord. 1951, passed 3-3-03; Am. Ord. 2595, passed 6-15-09)



§ 150.41  DEVELOPMENT REVIEW FEE SCHEDULE.



 


DEVELOPMENT REVIEW FEES




ANNEXATION



0 - 5acres   $  750


6 - 10 acres   $1,500


1 - 50 acres   $2,000


51 - 100 acres   $3,000


Over 100 acres - additional per acre   $    20



 



 




ZONING



Rezoning
 


Within corporate limits   $  800


Outside corporate limits (unincorporated)   $  150


Variances
 


Single family (per variance)   $  200


Commercial/industrial (per variance)   $  300


Special uses
 


Special use (except for liquor sales)   $  500


Liquor sales   $  200


Planned unit development
 


  0 -  10 acres   $2,750


  11 - 25 acres   $3,750


  26 - 50 acres   $4,750


  51 - 100 acres   $6,500


  Over 100 acres - additional per acre   $    40


 


  Major PUD change   $  800


  Minor PUD change   $  400




 



 


STAFF REVIEW


(non-PUD projects only)


Site plan (per lot)   $  300


Architecture (per building)   $  200


Photometrics (per lot)   $  100


Signage (per lot)   $  100



 



 


PRELIMINARY PLAT



0 - 10 acres   $1,250


11 - 25 acres   $2,000


26 - 50 acres   $2,500


51 - 100 acres   $4,000


Over 100 - additional per acre   $    40



 



 






FINAL PLAT



0 - 10 acres   $  500


11 - 25 acres   $  750


26 - 50 acres   $1,000


51 - 100 acres   $1,500


Over 100 acres - additional per acre   $    20


 



REPLAT, CONSOLIDATION, LOT SPLIT



0 - 10 acres   $  500


11 - 50 acres   $1,000


51 - 100 acres   $1,500


Over 100 acres - additional per acre   $    20




 



 


SPECIAL EXCEPTION



All zoning districts   $  750



 



 




VACATION



All easement vacations*   $  200


*Any land vacated by the village is subject to compensation as estab- lished
by the village.



 

Note 1: Fractional acres are rounded up to the next unit.


Note 2: Legal, engineering, landscaping or other professional reviews/
consultations are assessed on an hourly basis.


Note 3: Publication of one legal notice is included with an application,
additional publication fees are billed to the applicant.



 



(Ord. 1870, passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord. 2592, passed 6-1-09)



CONTRACTORS



§ 150.50  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONTRACTOR.  Any person, partnership, corporation or other business
entity engaged in the business of constructing, altering or repairing
buildings or other structures or lots and all trades and crafts associated
with such work, including, but not restricted to, general building
contractors, excavating contractors, cement or concrete contractors, masonry
contractors, carpentry contractors, heating, air conditioning, ventilating,
mechanical, electrical and plumbing contractors and subcontractors.



      (1)   Any person who engages in the construction, repair or
alteration of any building or structure within the village for which a
building permit is required, is presumed to be a contractor and must be
licensed hereunder unless such presumption is rebutted.



      (2)   A homeowner engaged in constructing, altering or
repairing his personal residence or lot shall not be considered a contractor
for purposes of this subchapter. 



   GENERAL CONTRACTOR.  A contractor who uses one or more trades or
subcontractors to perform the required construction to complete any project
for which a building permit is required.



   SUBCONTRACTORS.  A contractor who performs only that type of work that
is classified as a trade (for example plumbing, electrical, and the like).



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-23-87)



§ 150.51  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall act or perform any services as a contractor or
subcontractor within the village without first having obtained a
contractor’s license therefor as provided in this subchapter.



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-23-87)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.52  LICENSE APPLICATION.



   All applications for contractor’s license required in § 150.51 shall
be made in writing to the Department of Community Development, upon forms
furnished by the village. Each application shall state the name and business
address of the applicant, whether it is a contractor or subcontractor’s
license application and if the latter, the trade or trades involved, the
number of the applicant’s employees who would be operating under such
license and a statement that the applicant is familiar with all pertinent
village ordinances, code and regulations including building codes and agrees
to fully comply with same.



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-23-87) 



§ 150.53  LICENSE FEES AND BONDS.



   (A)   License fees. The fees for a contractor’s license, as
required in § 150.51, are as follows:



      (1)   General contractor license fee: to be set by the Board
of Trustees; and



      (2)   Subcontractor and all other contractors license fee: to
be set by the Board of Trustees.



   (B)   Bonds. Each applicant for a license, as required in § 150.51
shall, before receiving such a license, deposit with the Village Building
Department a license and letter of credit or permit bond issued by a company
approved and authorized to issue bonds by the state in a form suitable to the
village in the following penal sums:



      (1)   As set by the Board of Trustees for a general contractor
in the amount of $25,000; or



      (2)   As set by the Board of Trustees for a subcontractor in
the amount of $15,000.



   (C)   Surety Bond. 



      (1)   In addition to the bond required in division (B) of this
section, each applicant for a general contractor’s license, as required in
§ 150.51, shall, before receiving such a license, file with the Building
Department of the village a surety performance bond approved by the village
in the amount as set by the Board of Trustees for each new construction
permit.  The surety performance bond shall remain in full force 12 months
following the issuance of an occupancy permit.  The bond shall run to the
village and shall be conditioned that all work performed by or on behalf of
the general contractor, for each new construction permit, shall be performed
in full compliance with all ordinances, regulations and policies of the
village and that all work performed by him will not become a hazard to the
health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the village.  If the village
solely determines the work is not being performed in conformance with village
requirements or is or could be a hazard to village residents, the village
shall give the general contractor written notice to fully correct such
deficiencies within 48 hours of the notice.  Notwithstanding, however, if
the village solely determines corrective measures must be immediately
undertaken due to a hazard to residents, the village, at the general
contractor’s sole cost, may institute such action from the hazard.  If the
general contractor fails to timely undertake and complete the corrective
steps as required by the notice, or compensate the village within 48 hours
from their taking corrective action to safeguard from a hazard and in
addition to any other remedies available, the village may call such surety
performance bond to the amount necessary to perform or otherwise compensate
the village for all such work.



      (2)   For the purposes of notice, notice shall be given to the
general contractor, either personally or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, addressed to the general contractor at the location stated in its
general contractor’s license application.  If notice is given by mail, it
is deemed received upon mailing.



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-23-87; Am. Ord. 1356, passed 9-3-91; Am. Ord. 1564,
passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2384, passed 4-30-07)



§ 150.54  LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall act as a contractor or subcontractor within
the village, nor shall be licensed, unless said contractor or subcontractor
deposits with the Village Building Department, a certificate of insurance
issued to the contractor or subcontractor by a company approved and
authorized to issue such insurance by the state for the full period of the
license period in the following amounts:



      (1)   General Contractor Insurance Requirements.



         (a)   Comprehensive broad form:



            1.   General liability, as set by the Board of
Trustees.



            2.   Auto insurance, as set by the Board of
Trustees.



         (b)   Workers’ compensation and employers’
liability: Broad form coverage in amounts required by law.



      (2)   Subcontractor.



         (a)   Comprehensive broad form:



            1.   General liability, as set by the Board of
Trustees.



            2.   Auto insurance, as set by the Board of
Trustees.



         (b)   Workers’ compensation and employers’
liability: Broad form coverage in amounts required by law.



   (B)   The certificate of insurance shall provide the insurance is
not cancelable during the policy period without 90 days prior written notice
to the village.



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-23-87; Am. Ord. 1356, passed 9-3-91)  Penalty, see §
150.99



§ 150.55  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   The Village Department of Community Development shall issue licenses
upon proper application and compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter, and payment of the fee set out in § 150.53.  All licenses shall
be valid for one year from date of issue unless otherwise revoked as
prescribed in this subchapter.



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-23-87)



§ 150.56  GENERAL CONTRACTOR’S LICENSE.



   Any person licensed as a general contractor shall not be required to
secure an additional license for the performance of carpentry, masonry,
cement or concrete contracting.



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-23-87)



§ 150.57  PERFORMANCE OF CERTAIN DUTIES REQUIRED.



   All contractors licensed under § 150.51 shall comply with the
provisions of all applicable village codes and ordinances and, in addition
thereto, to at least once each week or more often as directed by the Village
Building Inspector shall remove or cause to be removed from the site of
contractor’s activities all trash, refuse and waste materials. 
Contractors shall at all times keep the site of activities in an orderly
condition, free from standing water, unguarded dangerous implements or
conditions and health and safety hazards, and contractors shall not obstruct
traffic on streets or sidewalks or permit dirt or waste materials to fall or
be carried onto such public ways.



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-23-87)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.58  LICENSE REVOCATION; REINSTATEMENT.



   (A)   Any license issued under the provisions of this subchapter may
be revoked by the Village Department of Community Development for any
violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter; such revocation shall
be in addition to any fine or penalty imposed. No person whose license has
been revoked as herein provided shall be eligible for a new license for a
period of one year from the date of such revocation.  All appeal from the
action of the Village Department of Community Development to revoke a
contractor’s license shall be filed within ten days of such action with the
Village Board of Trustees who shall conduct a hearing on such revocation.



   (B)   The Village Department of Community Development may refuse to
issue a license in the event that any of the provisions of this subchapter
which conditions are precedent to the issuance of the license have not been
met. Any appeals from an action of the Village Community Development to
refuse to issue a contractor’s license should be filed within ten days of
such refusal with the Village Board of Trustees who shall conduct a hearing
on such refusal to issue a license.



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-23-87)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 150.70  ADMINISTRATIVE INSPECTION PROCEDURE FOR ALL BUILDINGS AND
STRUCTURES.



   (A)   For the purposes of protecting the health, safety and welfare
of the residents of the village; to facilitate minimizing or eradicating
certain potentially public endangering conditions; and to authorize the
Village Clerk in conjunction with other village representatives to implement
the herein, the following procedure is hereby established to effectuate
administrative inspections of all buildings, residences, enclosures,
commercial and industrial establishments and all other premises situated
within the corporate limits of the village.



   (B)   On written application made under oath by any duly authorized
officer, agent or representative of the village, including fire, health,
building, plumbing, electrical and sanitation inspectors, liquor commissioner
and Village Engineer, setting forth with sufficient particularity the
locality requested to be inspected and the cause and reason necessitating
said request, the Village Clerk shall forthwith send a request to consent to
administrative inspection in a form substantially similar to division (G) of
this section, by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to
a named occupant, if known, otherwise “To Occupant.” Within five days
from date of mailing, said addressee shall file the signed consent in the
office of the Village Clerk.



   (C)   If the consent is not filed as described in division (B) of
this section or if the person making application for the inspection includes
a statement to the effect that there are exigent circumstances necessitating
immediate inspection, the Village Attorney shall petition the Circuit Court
in the appropriate county to issue a search warrant for said premises or area
described in the application by filing with the Court, a written complaint of
the individual making the original request for inspection  under oath or
affirmation, which state facts sufficient to show probable cause and
describes with particularity the place or area to be inspected and directed
for execution by the person specifically named therein.



   (D)   The search warrant shall be executed within 96 hours of its
issuance with a duplicate of same left with any occupant of the premises
being inspected, or if no person is available, left in a conspicuous place in
the premises.



   (E)   All necessary and reasonable force may be used to effect entry
into any building or property, or part thereof, to effectuate the search
warrant.



   (F)   A warrant may be executed at any time.



   (G)   Consent to administrative inspection.



   NOTICE AND CONSENT TO ADMINISTRATIVE INSPECTION



To:                              



   The                                   of the Village
of Frankfort has filed an application with the
            (officer)



the undersigned requesting to inspect the following property:



   (LEGAL)



   Pursuant to Ordinance       of the Village of Frankfort, he has
stated the following reasons necessitating the inspection:



   The inspection is to be conducted between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and
5:00 P.M. by a representative of the Village of Frankfort during the week of
                  .  If consent is not filed here by mail or in
person with the office of the Clerk of the Village of Frankfort within five
(5) days from the date this notice was dispatched, a search warrant may be
issued by the Circuit Court of Will County, Illinois authorizing the
inspection.



                                          
                                             



                           CLERK OF THE VILLAGE OF
FRANKFORT



   I,                     , of                      
, being the                               of (legal)
                                       �
�     owner, occupant



hereby consent to and authorize the representative of the Village of
Frankfort to conduct an administrative inspection of the entire premises
located on the above described property during the week of            
                .



                                            
                                                 



(Ord. 896, passes 8-4-75)



GRADING AND LANDSCAPING



§ 150.75  GRADING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Grading survey.  At the time of application for any building
permit for new construction within the village, the applicant (General
Contractor) shall furnish the village a current plat of survey, which, among
other things, shall contain and/or portray the following information:



      (1)   The elevation of the four corners of the lot;



      (2)   The footprint of the structure in relation to all
property lines;



      (3)   Proposed elevation of top of foundation and actual
elevation of curb, if any;



      (4)   All drainage swales and direction of surface water flow
on the property;



      (5)   Location of all public utilities, including telephone
and electrical pedestals;



      (6)   Utility service routing lines which should be run
parallel with and at least three feet within side property lines;



      (7)   Proposed finished grade.



   (B)   Certification of top of foundation wall elevation.  After
installation of founding and drain tile, construction of the first floor deck
may commence prior to or after backfilling, but before any further work, the
applicant (General Contractor) shall submit to the village certification from
an Illinois licensed surveyor or engineer that the top of the foundation
elevation and the structure footprint conforms with the approved engineered
grading plans and village ordinances.



   (C)   Final grade certificate.  Within six months after issuance of
an occupancy permit, but prior to the issuance of any landscaping permit for
the property, the building permit applicant shall deliver to the village a
current certification signed by an Illinois licensed surveyor or engineer
stating the property as developed.



      (1)   Conforms to all applicable ordinances and regulation of
the village including those regulating surface water drainage;



      (2)   Conforms to all village approved final engineering plans
specifications;



      (3)   Conforms with the grading survey, including the final
grade.



   (D)   Timely installation of landscaping.



      (1)   Landscaping shall be installed within three months of
occupancy permit issuance. If the occupancy is granted in the months of
October, November, December, January, or February, the three- month timeline
shall begin on the first date of March to occur following occupancy.



      (2)   At a minimum, landscaping shall include front yard sod
(no seed) and rear yard grass cover (seed or sod).



      (3)   If all landscaping is not completed prior to the permit
within the allowed time, the village shall complete the landscaping, either
itself or by its agent, and deduct all costs and expenses from the $1,000
deposit held by the village. In addition, the village will have other such
remedies to require the property owner to complete landscaping as required.



      (4)   If the applicant (General Contractor) fails to submit
the final grading certificate to the village within the time permitted under
this section, the General Contractor shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $50 nor more than $500 for each day the violation occurs and in addition
thereto, such failure is prima facia evidence for the revocation of the
General Contractor’s license to conduct business in the village.



(Ord. 1469, passed 7-18-94; Am. Ord. 2416, passed 9-17-07)



§ 150.76  LANDSCAPE PERMIT REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   Landscaping applications.  Prior to the landscaping of any
new building, the property owner(s) must submit a detailed application
showing, among other things:



      (1)   Plat of survey conforming to the grading survey;



      (2)   Location, type and size of any and all trees, shrubs,
fencing, other landscaping amenities, grass areas and location of berms,
drainage easements and swales, if applicable;



      (3)   Location of underground sprinklers, if any (additional
permit required for sprinkling systems);



      (4)   Location of drain tiles, down spouts and sump pump
discharge.



   (B)   Landscaping permit.  The village will issue a landscaping
permit to the property owner upon completion of the following:



      (1)   Submittal of landscaping application in conformance with
village ordinances and regulations;



      (2)   Payment to the village of a permit fee in an amount to
be determined from time to time;



      (3)   Receipt and approval of all certifications required
under all ordinances and regulations regulating grading with the village
(Grading Certificate);



      (4)   A security deposit in the sum of $1,000 to ensure all
landscaping will be completed within six months of the date of the issuance
of the landscaping permit.



   (C)   Time to complete landscaping.  All landscaping must be
completed within six months of the date of the issuance of the permit. The
Village Administrator is authorized to extend the permit date for 30 days
based solely on adverse weather conditions.



   (D)   Failure to timely complete landscaping.  If all landscaping
is not completed prior to the permit within the allowed time, the $1,000
deposit is forfeited by the property owner to the village. In addition, the
village will have other such remedies to require the property owner to
complete landscaping as required.



   (E)   Deposit refund/certification.  If the landscaping is timely
completed in accordance with the permit, the village will return the $1,000
deposit to the property owner, without interest. At the time of request for
and prior to any refund, the property owner(s) shall give the village a
current topographical survey by an Illinois licensed surveyor or engineer
certifying, among other things:



      (1)   The final finished grade after installation of all
landscaping complies with all applicable village ordinances and regulations.
The final village approved engineering grade and drainage plans and
specifications for the development of the property; and



      (2)   There are no obstructions within drainage way.



(Ord. 1469, passed 7-18-94)



§ 150.77  DEMOLITION PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   A building permit shall be required for the demolition of a
building or structure, or part thereof, greater than 300 square feet in area.
The following supporting documents must be submitted with the completed
building permit application:



      (1)   Plat of survey;



      (2)   Site grading plan to include:



         (a)   Name, address, and phone number of the civil
engineers responsible for the preparation of the plan;



         (b)   Scale of the drawing;



         (c)   Site address;



         (d)   Location of the proposed areas of excavation,
fill, storage and disposal of earth materials;



         (e)   Delineation of the measures that will be used to
control surface erosion and runoff from the site per the requirements of the
EPA and the storm water pollution and prevention plan.



         (f)   Applicant shall provide plan for site restoration
efforts that included final grading of the property after the structure or
structures have been removed, sod installation, or grass seed and blanket
installation not dependent on the time of the year, unless a new construction
building permit has already been issued and construction proceeds in a timely
fashion, typically within 30 days of the start of the demolition process; and



         (g)   Applicant shall have site restored in accordance
of the approved plan, within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the
demolition permit; and



      (3)   Identifying tree plan to include:



         (a)   Location;



         (b)   Size;



         (c)   Species; and



         (d)   Means of protection.



   (B)   Construction site safety and cleanliness standard.



      (1)   All demolition sites shall be enclosed by a continuous
chain link fence six feet in height which shall be anchored sufficiently to
resist wind loads of 30 pounds per square foot without deflection of more
than three inches between the top and bottom of fence. The fence shall not
contain any advertisements and shall include a fabric mesh to be affixed to
the back of the fence that should encompass the fence from the top rail to
the bottom rail around the perimeter of the property. Demolition permits will
not be issued until building department personnel have verified the placement
of said fence.



      (2)   The construction site fence shall be placed around the
perimeter of the property or, for work in an area substantially smaller than
the entire property, around the site of construction large enough to ensure
sufficient room for movement of tools and workers and the safety of the
public. This fence shall remain around the perimeter of the property until
the excavated hole has been filled and graded.



      (3)   All dumpsters or debris collectors shall be stored
behind the construction site fence and shall be regularly serviced to avoid
overfilling. Construction materials and materials waiting for disposal shall
be gathered daily and piled in a neat and orderly manner. Any person or
entity applying for a demolition permit is responsible to comply with any and
all applicable regulations pertaining to the safe disposal of construction
debris and materials.



      (4)   The applicant or any subsidiaries shall take all
necessary steps to ensure that dirt and debris from the construction site is
not to be transmitted by vehicles leaving the site to the public way. In the
event that dirt or debris is removed from the construction site onto the
public way, the responsible party shall be accountable for restoring the area
to its previous condition, within a timely manner, at least daily. Mitigation
measures can include, but are not limited to: stoning or paving of
construction site entrances, wheel wash stations, and street sweepers.



(Ord. 3008, passed 1-19-16)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate the provisions of § 150.03 shall
be fined for not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each offense.  Each
day that a person so violates the provisions hereof, shall be deemed to be a
separate offense.



(Ord. 868, passed 7-1-74)



   (B)   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of §
150.05 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense
and shall be subject to revocation or suspension of the business license for
that establishment.  Each day that a violation exists shall be deemed to be
a separate offense.



(Ord. 1535, passed 9-18-95)



   (C)   (1)   At any violation of any provisions of §§ 150.20
through 150.27 or any of the codes adopted herein as codes established for
the village shall be punished by a fine of not less than not less than $50
nor more than $750 for each offense and that each day that violation exists
shall be considered a separate offense.



      (2)   In addition to the penalties in (B)(1) above, the
village shall have all other remedies available to it either in law or jury.



(Ord. 1478, passed 10-17-94)



   (D)   In addition to and not in lieu of any other remedies or any
provision of penalties provided or available in law or equity, any person,
entity, business or corporation which violates § 150.30 shall pay a fine of
not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each day of such violation with
each day constituting a separate violation.



   (E)   In addition to all other remedies to the village at law or
equity, any contractor who violates or fails to comply with any of the
provisions of §§ 150.50 through 150.58 shall be fined not less than $50 or
not more than $750 for each offense.  A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or
continues. 



(Ord. 1198, passed 11-23-87)



   (F)   In addition to and not in lieu of any other remedies or any
provision of penalties provided or available in law or equity, any person,
entity, business or corporation which violates § 150.77 shall pay a fine of
not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each day of such violation with
each day constituting a separate violation.  (Ord. 3008, passed 1-19-16)



(Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02; Am. Ord. 2513, passed 9-15-08)



CHAPTER 151: SIGN REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   151.001   Statement of purpose



   151.002   General standards



   151.003   Design and construction



   151.004   Uniform sign plan



   151.005   Definitions



   151.006   Prohibited signs



   151.007   Exemptions



Sign Administration



   151.020   Building permit required



   151.021   Permit process for permanent signs



   151.022   Permit issuance



   151.023   Permit and inspection fees



   151.024   Sign permit expiration



   151.025   Sign appeals process



Signs Permitted by Zoning District



   151.040   Residential Zoning District (ER, R1, R2, R3 and R4)



   151.041   Commercial Zoning District (B1, B2, B3 and B4)



   151.042   Industrial Zoning District (I1 and I2)



   151.043   Office Research Zoning District (OR)



   151.044   Downtown Historic District (HI)



Sign Standards for Specific Sign Types



   151.060   Fuel station signs



   151.061   Automotive dealer signs



   151.062   Theater signs



   151.063   Church, school, park district or other public/quasi-public
institutions



   151.064   Directory/directional signs



Temporary Signs Permitted by Zoning District



   151.075   Special event signs



   151.076   Residential Zoning Districts (ER, HR, R1, R2, R3 and R4)



   151.077   Commercial, Industrial, and Office Research Districts (B1,
B2, B3, B4, I1, I2, and OR)



   151.078   Downtown Historic District (HI)



   151.079   Civic organizations



   151.080   Political signs (all districts)



Signage Enforcement



   151.100   Enforcement official



   151.101   Maintenance; removal



   151.102   Legal non-conforming status of existing signs



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 151.001  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to create the legal framework
for a comprehensive and balanced system of signage control and thereby to
provide an attractive and effective balance between signage and the
environment. This chapter shall be enforced and administered with the support
of the signage regulations stated in the village Building Code (2000
International Building Code). These provisions are available to the public
for their use and review at the Village Administration Building, 432 W.
Nebraska Ave., Frankfort, Illinois. In any instances of conflict between
these two regulatory documents, the more restrictive shall apply.



   (B)   With these concepts in mind, this chapter is adopted for the
following purposes:



      (1)   To authorize the uses of signs which are:



         (a)   Compatible with their surroundings;



         (b)   Appropriate to the type of activity to which they
pertain;



         (c)   Expressive of their identity of individuals or of
the community as a whole; and



         (d)   Legible in the circumstances in which they are
seen.



      (2)   To preserve the Village of Frankfort's reputation as a
community of natural beauty rendering it highly attractive to visitors and
potential future residents, the Village Board has determined the unregulated
and uncontrolled erection and maintenance of signs results in a gaudy and
garish atmosphere that is out of harmony with the character of the village.
The Village Board further determines that the lack of regulation and control
of signs results in costly and unfair competition for the public eye through
the proliferation, increased height, and size of signs, and that the safety
of the general public requires that the structural elements and location of
the signs be regulated.



      (3)   To preserve, protect, and promote the public health,
safety, and welfare of its residents.



      (4)   To provide a positive economic climate for the business
and industry of the village by promoting the reasonable, orderly, and
effective display of signage and encouraging better communication with the
public, and to provide information to the traveling public.



      (5)   To enhance the physical appearance of the village by
preserving the scenic and natural beauty of the area.



      (6)   To protect the general public from damage and injury
which may be caused by the faulty and uncontrolled construction and use of
signs within the village.



      (7)   To protect the pedestrians and motorists from damage or
injury caused by the distractions, obstructions, and hazards created by
certain signs.



      (8)   To protect the public investment in streets and highways
by reducing distractions that may increase traffic accidents.



      (9)   To protect the physical and mental well-being of the
general public by recognizing and encouraging a sense of appreciation for the
visual environment.



      (10)   To preserve the value of private property by assuring
the compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses.



      (11)   To encourage sound practices and lessen the
objectionable effects of competition in respect to and placement of signs.



   (C)   It is also the intent of this chapter to recognize that the
eventual elimination of existing signs that do not conform with the
provisions of this chapter is as important as is prohibiting new signs that
would violate these regulations.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



§ 151.002  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   Permanent business signs are intended to be used for business
identification. The design of permanent signs and the information placed on
them should be focused on identifying the location of the business and its
name.



   (B)   Temporary signs are intended to be used for advertising.
Temporary signs are expected to contain information regarding sales, special
events, business promotions, and other events which occur over a limited time.



   (C)   Both faces of a dual faced sign shall contain the same words,
artwork and logo.



   (D)   All signs erected, maintained, constructed, relocated,
modified, or altered in any way for each zoning district must adhere to the
following  regulations. Any signage not provided for in the following
provisions shall be deemed prohibited.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



§ 151.003 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION.



   The general requirements for all signs are listed in the village
Building Code, Chapter 29, and are incorporated into this section in its
entirety by reference.



   (A)   Electrical requirements.



      (1)   The electrical components, connections, and
installations of all signs shall conform to the provisions of the village
Electric Code. Electric signs shall be constructed of incombustible material.
Electric signs shall be rain-tight, except that service hole fitted with
waterproof covers shall be provided to each compartment of such signs. All
electric signs hereafter installed or erected in the village shall bear the
label of Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc.



      (2)   No electrical equipment or electrical apparatus of any
kind which causes interference with radio or television reception shall be
used in the operation of illuminated signs.



      (3)   All sources of illumination shall be kept in good
working order.



   (B)   Wind pressure and load requirements. All signs shall be
designed to withstand a wind pressure as required in the Building Code of the
village and/or other applicable village chapter and codes.



   (C)   Signs structure and support requirements.



      (1)   All signs shall be designed so that all framework for
the lateral support of the sign shall be contained within the sign's body or
within the structure of the building to which the sign is attached so as not
to be visible to the public.



      (2)   Exposed guy wires, chains or other similar connections
attached to the ground posing a threat to pedestrian safety are not permitted
to serve as supports for a sign.



      (3)   If the supports or anchors of the sign are not
galvanized or constructed of a non-combustible, corrosive-resistant material,
they shall be painted as necessary to prevent corrosion and peeling.



   (D)   Sign face. No sign or sign structure shall have any nails,
tacks, wires, or sharp edges protruding from it. Exposed neon tubing shall be
prohibited on all signs located on an exterior wall surface or displayed on a
storefront window.



   (E)   Miscellaneous advertising objects. No person shall place on or
suspend from any building or structure, any goods, wares, merchandise, or
other advertising objects other than a sign as defined with these provisions.



   (F)   Glass requirements. Any glass forming a part of any sign shall
be designed to the ANSI Z97.1 standard and shall be in compliance with all
applicable village codes and chapters.



   (G)   Location. No signs shall cover wholly or partially any
opening, nor project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is
attached. No sign shall project into or otherwise encroach upon a public
right-of-way.



   (H)   Lettering. All letters, figures, characters, or
representations in cut-out or irregular form, maintained in conjunction with,
attached to, or superimposed upon any sign shall be safely and securely built
into or attached to the sign.



   (I)   Obstruction of exits. No sign shall be erected so as to
obstruct any fire escape, required exit, window, or door opening intended as
a means of egress.



   (J)   Obstruction of ventilation. No sign shall be erected which
interferes with any opening required for ventilation.



   (K)   Clearance from electrical power lines and communication lines.
Signs shall maintain all clearances from electrical conductors in accordance
with all applicable village codes and chapters, except where specified within
this chapter.



   (L)   Clearance from surface and underground facilities. Signs and
their supporting structures shall maintain clearance and noninterference with
all surface and underground facilities and conduits for water, sewage, gas,
electricity, or communications equipment or lines. Furthermore, placement
shall not interfere with natural or artificial drainage or surface or
underground water.



   (M)   Sign illumination requirements.



      (1)   Signs shall be illuminated only by steady, stationary,
shielded and shaded light sources directed solely at the sign, or internal to
it so that the light intensity or brightness does not create either a
nuisance to adjacent property or a traffic hazard for motorists or
pedestrians.



      (2)   No exposed reflective-type bulb and no strobe light or
incandescent lamp shall be used on the exterior surface of any sign.



      (3)   Illuminated signs shall produce no more than 30 foot
candles of illumination, four feet from the sign.



      (4)    Whenever external illumination is used for a sign, the
source of light shall be located, shielded, and directed in such a manner
that the light source is not visible from a public street or private
residence.



   (N)   Raceways. If a sign is mounted to a raceway, the color of the
raceway shall match the color of the exterior of the building.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



§ 151.004  UNIFORM SIGN PLAN.



   (A)   Required. A uniform sign plan is required for all planned unit
developments and all multi-tenant developments before any signs for such
development may be erected on the property. All owners, tenants, subtenants
and purchasers of individual units within the development shall comply with
the approved uniform sign plan.



   (B)   Elements. The uniform sign plan shall include the following
information for all signs:



      (1)   The design, materials of construction, colors
(graphically depicted), lighting and dimensions shall be clearly illustrated.



      (2)   A site plan drawn to scale to show the location of each
sign.



      (3)   Elevations: All signs are to be illustrated and
dimensioned in elevation drawings. When a sign is attached to a building, the
illustration shall be a composite of the sign and the building, rendered to
scale.



      (4)   Additional information must be included to establish
regulations to ensure that signs are consistent and attractive. The required
information is as follows:



         (a)   Size standard: The size for the monument sign and
wall sign shall be defined and outline in the uniform sign plan if different
from the standards set forth in this chapter.



         (b)   Sign color: Each wall sign must be of a common
color except anchor tenants may have up to three colors. The colors selected
shall be coordinated with colors of the materials used for the associated
building.



         (c)   Sign material: The uniform sign plan shall note
the materials for the monument sign, as well as establishing a specific type
of material for all wall signs, including a common method of illumination.



   (B)   Review. The uniform sign plan shall be subject to approval by
the code official.



   (C)   Review criteria. A uniform sign plan for planned unit
developments and multi-building, multi-tenant occupied buildings shall not be
approved until and unless the code official finds that:



      (1)   The plan provides that signs of a similar type and
function within the development will have a consistent color scheme and
material construction;



      (2)   The plan provides for signs that meet the size
limitations, location requirements and other applicable requirements of this
chapter.



   (D)   Amendment procedure. Amendment to a uniform sign plan must be
approved by the code official in accordance with the following procedure:



      (1)   Application must be filed by the owner of the land
affected by the proposed change, or an agent, lessee or contract purchaser
specifically authorized by the owner in writing.



      (2)   All amendments shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter.



   (E)   Effect. After approval of a uniform sign plan, or an amended
uniform sign plan, no sign shall be erected, placed, painted, or maintained,
except in accordance with such plan, and such plan may be enforced in the
same way as any provision of this chapter. In case of any conflict between a
provision of a uniform sign plan and one or more provisions of this chapter,
the stricter of the two shall apply.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



§ 151.005  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY SIGNS TO THEATERS. Theater posters that display current,
forthcoming movies or performances and show times.



   A-FRAME SIGN. A temporary double-sided sign typically connected at the
top and separated at the bottom to form an "A" when in use. For the purpose
of this chapter an A-framed sign is also referred to as a sandwich board
sign. See Figure 1.




Figure 1 - A-frame sign










   ANCHOR TENANT. The major or primary tenant in a multi-tenant building
or shopping center with a minimum floor area of 25,000 square feet.



   ANIMATED SIGN. A sign or any part of which by design, changes physical
position by any movement, or creates the appearance of movement.



   APPROVED COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL. Any material more than 1/20 of an inch
in thickness which burns at a rate of not more than 2 1/2 inches per minute
when subjected to the American Society for Testing Material (ASTM) standard
test for flammability in sheets six-hundredths inches in thickness.



   AREA. That area enclosed by one continuous line, connecting the extreme
points or edges of a sign. This area does not include the main supporting
sign structure, but all other ornamental attachments, inner connecting links,
and the like, which are not a part of the main supports of the signs are to
be included in determining sign area. The area shall be determined by drawing
an imaginary square or rectangle envelopes so as to completely enclose each
entire symbol, word, phrase, title, and or name appearing on the sign and
computing the sum of all such geometric figures.




Figure 2 - Calculating area of both wall and freestanding signs










   ATTENTION-GETTING DEVICES. Any pennant, flag, valance, banner,
propeller, spinner, streamer, search-light or similar device or ornamentation
designed for or intended to attract attention to it for the purpose of
promotion or advertising.



   AWNING.  Any structure made of cloth, metal, or other material
attached to a building which is constructed so as to permit its being raised
or retracted to a position against the building when not in use, or any
structure designed to simulate such construction, such as a "back-lit"
awning. For purposes of this chapter, an AWNING containing the name of the
business, logo or a combination of business name and logo, and or colors
indicative to the corporate logo will be considered a wall sign.



   BANNER SIGN. Any sign intended to be hung either with or without
frames, possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations
applied to paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind. National flags, flags of
political subdivisions, and symbolic flags of any institution shall not be
considered banners for the purposes of this section.



   BARE BULB ILLUMINATION. The use of lighting, which includes but is not
limited to exposed illumination material other than approved sign faces. Such
prohibited illumination may include both internal and external bulbs.



   BEACON. Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere
or directed at one or more points not on the same site as the light source.
Also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.



   BENCH SIGN or AD SIGN. A sign located on any part of the surface of a
bench or seat placed on or adjacent to a public right-of-way.



   BILLBOARD, POSTERBOARD or PAINTED WALL. A single or double-faced sign
permanently fixed to or placed upon the premises, which may have "changeable
copy", which is used for display of information not associated with the
establishment located on the same premises as the sign. Such signs include
walls of a building that are painted to display information that does not
relate to a business or other establishment located in the building.



   BOX SIGN. A translucent back-lit panel, larger than three square feet,
which is applied to the facade of the building.



   BUILDING FRONTAGE. The length of a building facade that is closest to
and most nearly to with a public right-of-way.



   BUILDING LINE. The line as established by the vertical face of the
building or an extension thereof.



   BUSINESS NAME. Name of a business as represented on a business license
or as registered with state or federal Internal Revenue Service Departments.



   CANOPY. A structure, other than an awning, made of cloth, metal, or
other material with frames attached to a building, or carried by a frame
supported by the ground or sidewalk. For purposes of this chapter, a CANOPY
containing the name of the business, logo or a combination of business name
and logo, and or colors indicative to the corporate logo will be considered a
wall sign.



   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. A sign upon which letters, words, or characters
can separately be placed and replaced in or upon the surface area either
manually or electronically for the purpose of changing the information
contained on the sign.



   CONTRACTOR/CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A temporary sign giving the name or names
of principal contractors, architects, and lending institutions responsible
for construction on the site where the sign is placed together with other
information included thereon.



   DEVELOPMENT SIGN. A temporary sign used to identify an approved future
development.



   DIRECTIONAL SIGNS. Signs limited to directional messages, principally
for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, such as "one-way," "entrance,"
drive-thru,", and "exit," but does not identify the establishment itself or
other goods or services available at the establishment and does not contain
advertising messages.



   DIRECTORY SIGN. A sign upon which the name and locations of occupants
or the use of a building is given.



   ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. The CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER of the village shall
have the duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.



   EXTERIOR WALL SURFACE. The most exterior part of a wall, sunscreen, or
any screening or material covering a building.



   FACADE. Exterior wall of a building that is exposed to public view.



   FESTOON LIGHTING.  A group of two or more incandescent light bulbs
hung or strung overhead between two points, not on a building or structure,
which are visible to persons on a public right-of-way, or which are not
shaded or hooded so as to prevent the direct rays of light from being visible
from beyond the property on which the lights are located.



   FLAG. A symbol or a crest of either a nation or an organization of
nations, a state, a municipality or a fraternal, religious, civic
organization, or corporation. For the purpose of this chapter, any FLAG
containing the corporate logo of a business will be considered a wall sign.



   FLASHING SIGN. Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign which
exhibits changing natural or artificial light or color effects by any means
whatsoever.



   FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign completely self-supported by two  six-by-six
or four-by-four wood posts, not exceeding two foot, or a solid base
constructed of a masonry material which is independent of any building or
other structure and anchored in or upon the ground. See Figure 3.




Figure 3 - Freestanding sign










   FRONTAGE. (See BUILDING FRONTAGE or STORE FRONTAGE.)



   HEIGHT, FREESTANDING SIGNS.  The vertical distance from average
adjacent ground level, within five feet of the sign, to the top of the sign
including the support structure and any design element. See Figure 3.



   HEIGHT, WALL SIGN. The vertical dimension of the imaginary box drawn so
as to completely enclose each entire symbol, word, phrase, title, or name
appearing on the sign and computing the sum of all such geometric figures.




Figure 4 - Wall sign height










   HUMAN SIGN. Animals, or human beings, live or simulated, holding, or
carrying a sign, designed or used so as to attract attention to the premises
or activity.



   ILLUMINATED SIGN (EXTERNAL). A sign illuminated by a source of light
which is cast upon the exterior surface or face of the sign to illuminate the
sign by reflection.



   ILLUMINATED SIGN (INTERNAL). A sign which is illuminated by
incandescent and other types of lighting sources from within or behind the
sign so to reflect light through the sign.



   INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL. Any material which will not ignite at or below
a temperature of 1200° Fahrenheit and will not continue to burn or glow at
that temperature.



   INFLATABLE SIGNS. Any hollow item or character expanded or enlarged by
the use of air or gas for the purposes of advertisement, including tethered
balloons. For purposes of this chapter, an INFLATABLE SIGN shall be
considered a temporary sign.



   INFORMATIONAL TRAFFIC SIGN. A sign directing and guiding automotive or
pedestrian traffic which bears no advertising matter.



   INSTITUTIONAL SIGN. A sign identifying a public, charitable, or
religious institution which is located on the premises of such an institution.



   LOGO. A symbol, color, or other graphic representation specifically
attributable to a business. LOGOS shall not include slogans, phrases, or
words that arc not considered part of the business name. The LOGO must be a
registered trademark of the subject business.



   MEMORIAL SIGN.  A commemorative sign or tablet cut into masonry or
inlaid as a part of a building.



   MOVING SIGN. Any sign, which by design, rotates, moves, or gives the
visual impression of rotation or moving.



   MULTIPLE TENANT/MULTIPLE STOREFRONT USE/COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, OR
OFFICE RESEARCH.A commercial, industrial or office research development in
which there exists a number of separate activities, in which there are
appurtenant shared facilities (such as parking or pedestrian areas), and
which is designed to provide a single area in which the public can obtain
varied products and/or services. Distinguishing characteristics of a MULTIPLE
TENANT/MULTIPLE STOREFRONT COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL OR OFFICE RESEARCH
development may, but need not, include common ownership of the real property
upon which the center is located, common-wall construction, and
multiple-occupant commercial or industrial use of single structure.



   NAMEPLATE. A sign which displays only the name and/or address of the
occupant and is non-electrical.



   NATURE OF BUSINESS. A descriptive word or term whose purpose is to
describe the primary function of a business, excluding definition of product
(i.e. pets, spas, pools), product advertisement and slogans.



   NEON SIGNS. Any sign that is partially or completely illuminated by one
or more directly visible neon tube light sources, or similar types of
lighting, such as bare bulb illumination or simulated neon.



   NON-CONFORMING SIGN. Any sign which does not conform to this chapter.



   OFF-PREMISE SIGN. A sign which directs attention to a commercial use,
business, commodity, service, or activity not conducted, sold or offered upon
the premises where the sign is located.



   ON-PREMISE SIGN. A sign related solely to a use, business, or
profession conducted, or to a principal commodity, service, or entertainment
sold, provided, or offered upon the premises where the sign is located.



   PARKING SIGN.A sign which identifies a parking area for automobiles,
trucks, motorcycles, or any other motor vehicle.



   PENNANT. A series of small flags of triangular or other geometric
design tied together by a rope or other means; and used as an
attention-getting device.



   POLE SIGN. A freestanding sign which is supported by one or more
uprights or braces greater than two feet in height that are no more than 12
inches in diameter and not attached or braced by any other structure.



   POLE-MOUNTED SHINGLE SIGN. A small (four square feet or less) shingle
sign mounted on a wood pole or post.



   POLITICAL/CAMPAIGN SIGN. A sign or poster identifying or publicizing a
candidate seeking public office or identifying or publicizing a public issue
or advocating a position with respect to a public issue.



   PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign not designed to be permanently attached to a
building or anchored to the ground; any sign that is not permanently affixed
to a building, structure or the ground; a sign designed to be moved from
place to place. These signs include but are not limited to signs attached to
wood or metal frames designed to be self-supporting and movable, paper,
cardboard or canvas signs wrapped around supporting poles.



   PROJECTING SIGN. Any sign other than a wall sign affixed to any
building or wall whose leading edge extends beyond such building or wall, but
whose face is perpendicular to the building.



   PROJECTION SIGNS. A sign created by projecting light onto a surface
such as a building or similar structure.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The land or interest therein, acquired for or
devoted to any public way for vehicular or pedestrian travel which has been
laid out in pursuance of any municipal, township, county, state, or federal
law.



   PUBLIC SIGN. A sign or notice erected or whose erection was required by
a unit of government.



   PYLON SIGN. (See POLE SIGN.)



   RACEWAY. The structural support for letter and symbols of a wall
mounted sign.



   REAL ESTATE SIGN. A sign erected for purposes of identifying a parcel
or building to be available for sale, rental or lease.



   RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION SIGN
(PERMANENT). A permanent sign designed to identify a residential, commercial,
or industrial subdivision, planned unit development, or other development
which is located at the entrance to the development.



   ROAD FRONTAGE. Frontage of a building located on a public right-of-way
or main point of ingress/egress to a commercial or industrial development.



   ROOF LINE. Either the edge of the roof or top of the parapet whichever
forms the top line of the building silhouette. Where a building has several
levels, the roof line shall be the roof or parapet of that portion of the
building.



   ROOF SIGN.  A sign erected, constructed, or maintained in whole or in
part upon or over the roof of a building or a structure.



   SANDWICH BOARD SIGN. (See A-FRAME SIGN.)



   SIGN. Any device designed to inform, advertise, notify, or otherwise
impart information about any business, special event. or other public or
private purpose or attract the attention of persons on or off the premises on
which the sign is located. SIGNS shall mean any surface, fabric, device, or
display which bears lettered, pictorial, or sculptured matter, including
forms shaped to resemble any human, animal, or product, designed to convey
information visually and which is exposed to public view. For purposes of
this chapter, a SIGN shall include colors on a canopy or awning that are
indicative of the corporate logo. SIGN includes but is not limited to every
type of sign listed in this section.



   SIGN STRUCTURE. A structure constructed for the primary purpose of
displaying a sign.



   SLOGAN. A brief attention-getting phrase used in advertising, promotion
or identification of a product or company.



   SOFFIT SIGN. A sign no greater than four square feet suspended from a
soffit, roof overhang, covered walkway, covered porch, or open lattice
walkway.



   SPECIAL EVENT SIGN. A temporary sign used to advertise a one time event
or sale.



   STORE FRONTAGE. The length of a building facade specifically
attributable to a single commercial or industrial business that includes the
principal point of access to the business.



   STRUCTURE FRONTAGE. (See BUILDING FRONTAGE.)



   STRUCTURAL TRIM. Any molding, batten, capping, nailing strip, lattice
or platform, which is attached to a sign structure.



   SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION SIGN, PERMANENT. A permanent sign that is
placed at the entrance to a residential development in order to identify the
name of the development.



   TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign, banner, pennant, valance, or advertising
display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard,
wood/plywood, or other light materials, with or without a frame, that is not
permanently mounted to the ground or building.



   THEATER. A fully-enclosed building with fixed seats arranged in an
auditorium fashion, where motion pictures or live entertainment acts are
presented.



   UNIFORM SIGN PLAN. A plan designed to show the relationship of signs
for any cluster of buildings, a planned unit development, or any single
building housing a number of users, or in any arrangement of buildings or
shops which constitute a visual entity as a whole.



   VEHICLE SIGN. Any advertising or business sign attached to a
transportation vehicle for the purpose of identification or advertising a
business, public or quasi-public institution.



   WALL SIGN. A sign or individual letters, symbols, or combinations
thereof painted, mounted, or attached to the exterior of a building or
structure in a plan parallel to that of the wall to which it is painted,
mounted or attached.



   WINDOW SIGN. A sign or individual letters, symbols, or combinations
thereof placed inside or upon a window facing the outside and which is
intended to be seen from the exterior.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05; Am. Ord. 2691, passed 1-24-11)



§ 151.006  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain:



   (A)   Any sign which is not included under the types of signs
permitted in a district or the general regulations of this section.



   (B)   Any sign which advertises or publicizes an activity not
conducted on the premises upon which such sign is maintained, except as
permitted for temporary signs in residential districts.



   (C)   Changeable copy signs, except as outlined in this chapter.



   (D)   Projecting signs, except as permitted in the Historical
district.



   (E)   Flashing signs.



   (F)   Any sign which rotates, revolves, or has any visible moving
part, or gives the appearance of movement.



   (G)   Pennants, streamers, festoons lighting, and other
attention-getting device.



   (H)   Inflatable signs, except as permitted by § 151.075(C)(3) of
this chapter.



   (I)   Any signs attached to any tree, fence, or public utility pole
other than warning signs issued by public utilities.



   (J)   Bare bulb illumination.



   (K)   Flame as a source of light.



   (L)   Portable signs, except as permitted via a temporary sign
permit as described in this chapter.



   (M)   Any sign or sign structure which constitutes a hazard to
public health or safety.



   (N)    Billboards, as defined in this chapter.



   (O)   Vehicle signs, unless the vehicle is used for deliveries or an
activity related to the subject business. The parking of a vehicle containing
a vehicle sign in a manor that serves as an advertisement for the business is
strictly prohibited.



   (P)   Roof signs or signs where any portion of the sign extends
above the roof of the building where the sign is located.



   (Q)   Pylon or pole signs, as defined in this chapter.



   (R)   Any sign and or sign structure which obstructs the view of,
may be confused with or purports to be, a governmental or traffic
direction/safety sign.



   (S)   No sign shall be permitted to contain statement, words, or
pictures of any obscene, pornographic, immoral character, or which contain
advertising matter which is untruthful.



   (T)   Signs which emit visible smoke, vapor, particles, or odor.



   (U)   Projection signs.



   (V)   Signs painted on a fence.



   (W)   Strings of light bulbs used in connection with commercial
premises for commercial advertising purposes, other than traditional holiday
decorations.



   (X)   Beacon.



   (Y)   Neon and other similar type signs (visible or exposed bare
bulb) located in such a manner as to attract public attention from outside
the building. Specifically, this refers to neon and other similar signs that
contain a message clearly intended for public recognition outside the
building, or is clearly legible from the public right-of-way or adjacent
property, including but not limited to, such signs as “drive thru,”
“vacant,” “sale” and other similar signs. For the purpose of this
chapter, simulated neon is included in this regulation.



   (Z)   Any sign attached to gas pumps or gas pump islands that can be
read or understood from a location off the property except as provided for in
this chapter.



   (AA)   Box signs, except as outlined in this chapter.



   (BB)   Backlit canopies/awnings.



   (CC)   Outdoor umbrella that contain any business name, logo,
slogan, or contains more than two colors.



   (DD)   Internally illuminated wall signs in the B-4 and H-1
districts.



   (EE)   Freestanding signs in the H-1 district.



   (FF)   Plastic awnings.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05; Am. Ord. 2593, passed 6-1-09)



§ 151.007  EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions and regulations of this chapter shall not apply to the
following signs, nor shall the area of such signs be included in the area of
signage permitted for any establishment, provided they do not violate any
regulations as outlined in this chapter under § 151.006.



   (A)   Traffic or other municipal street graphics such as railroad
crossing signs, legal notices, and such temporary emergency signs as may be
authorized by the Village Board.



   (B)   Signs of public utility companies indicating danger or which
serve as an aid to public safety or which show the location of underground
facilities or of public telephones. Such signs shall not exceed five square
feet, unless otherwise required or mandated by state statute.



   (C)   Address numbers located on the lot to which the sign is
appurtenant and not exceeding four square feet in area.



   (D)   Signs located in the interior of any building or within an
enclosed interior lobby or court of any building; the signs are to be
designed and located to be viewed exclusively by patrons of such use or uses.



   (E)   Seasonal decorations temporarily displayed in connection with
a local festivity approved by the Village Board; or for a national holiday.
Such decorations may not be used for advertising purposes, or for sale of
product, and shall have a time limit on display of 45 days.



   (F)   "No Trespassing" signs or other such signs regulating the use
of a property, such as "No Hunting,"  "No Fishing," and the like, of no more
than two square feet in area.



   (G)   United States flag, and/or any other single flag emblems or
insignia of any nation or political subdivision. Flags used as "attention
getting devices" or oversized flags that may cause a noise nuisance or act as
a life safety hazard are subject to removal upon investigation by a code
official.



   (H)   Memorial signs or tablets which identify the names of
buildings and the date of erection, and nameplate signs when cut into any
masonry surface or inlaid so as to be part of the building or when
constructed of bronze or other incombustible material; not to exceed six
square feet in area.



   (I)   Public identification signs erected, required, or authorized
by governmental bodies, or authorized for a public purpose by any law,
statute, or chapter, including community identification signs as approved by
the village.



   (J)   Information signs such as "business hour signs," "help wanted
signs," not to exceed one square foot in area.



   (K)   “Open” signs. One illuminated open sign may be displayed
in any location within a business establishment with the word “open” on
it. The sign shall be limited to one color and may not exceed two square feet
in size. Open signs may not flash, flicker or alternate colors.



   (L)   Any sign inside an athletic field or other enclosed outdoor
space, where the sign is not legible from more than three feet beyond the lot
line on the site on which it is located.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05; Am. Ord. 2593, passed 6-1-09)



SIGN ADMINISTRATION



§ 151.020  BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person or firm shall erect, alter, repair, or relocate any sign
without first obtaining a sign permit for such work from the code official of
the village. No permit shall be issued until the code official determines
that such work is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the
village Building Code. Each permitted sign shall be assigned an
identification number and a tag containing the identification number shall be
affixed to the sign.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



§ 151.021  PERMIT PROCESS FOR PERMANENT SIGNS.



   (A)   Every applicant for sign permit shall be accompanied by plans,
drawn to scale, and including:



      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the owner or
persons entitled to possession of the sign and of the sign contractor.



      (2)   The location by street address of the proposed sign
structure.



      (3)   The dimensions of the sign, and where applicable, the
dimensions of the wall surface it is to be attached.



      (4)   The distance the sign is set back from the property
line, building/store frontage, and the road on which the associated building
or planned unit development is located.



      (5)   The dimensions of the sign's supporting members.



      (6)   A color sample of the proposed sign.



      (7)   The proposed location of the sign in relation to the
face of the building, in front of which or above which it is to be erected.



      (8)   The proposed location of the sign in relation to the
boundaries of the lot upon which it is to be situated.



      (9)   When the sign is proposed to be attached to an existing
building, a current photograph of the face of the building to which the sign
is to be attached.



      (10)   If the proposed sign is to be illuminated in any
manner, the proposed method of illumination and the amount of light generated
in foot-candles is to be submitted.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



§ 151.022  PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the code official upon receipt of an
application to examine such plans and other data, including the premises upon
which the sign is proposed. If the application and supporting data are
determined to be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
Article 29 of the village Building Code, a permit shall be issued.



   (B)   If a permit is not obtained within 90 days after the applicant
has been notified that the plans are approved, the code official shall assume
that the application is withdrawn and may destroy the plans and supporting
documentation. Renewed action on the plans shall require a new set of plans
and new fees.



   (C)   The code official shall examine and reject or approve in
writing within 15 working days following any full completed application for
sign permit. If the application does not conform to the requirements of the
chapter, the applicant will be notified in writing within this time stating
the reasons for the rejection.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



§ 151.023  PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES.



   (A)   The permit fee shall be:



 

Sign Valuation
 
Required Fees


Under $100
 
$10


$100 - $500
 
$50


Over $500
 
$50 plus $10 per $100 valuation over $500


Maximum Fee
 
$200


All Temporary Signs
 
$30



 



   (B)   The inspection and identification fee shall be $30 for all
newly erected or substantially repaired or remodeled signs. A sign is
considered substantially repaired or remodeled when the cost of the work
exceeds $300.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



§ 151.024  SIGN PERMIT EXPIRATION.



   If the work authorized by a sign permit has not been completed within
six months after the date of initiation of construction, the permit shall
become null and void, and there shall be no refund of any fee by this section.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



§ 151.025  SIGN APPEALS PROCESS.



   (A)   Appeal procedure; application for appeal. Any person shall
have the right to appeal to the Sign Appeals Committee from a decision of the
code official refusing to grant a modification to the provisions of this code
covering the manner of construction or materials to be used in the erection,
alteration or repair of a sign or sign structure. An application for appeal
shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules
legally adopted there under has been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions
of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent form of construction can be
used.



   (B)   Sign appeals committee.



      (1)   Membership of Committee- The Sign Appeals Committee
shall consist of five members including the Mayor, a Village Trustee and
three residents of the village.



      (2)   Chairman- The Committee shall annually select one of its
members to serve as chairman.



      (3)   Disqualification of member- A member shall not hear an
appeal in which the member has any personal, professional, or financial
interest.



      (4)   Secretary- The Village Administrator shall designate a
qualified clerk to serve as secretary to the Committee. The secretary shall
file a detailed record of all proceedings in the office of the Village
Administrator.



      (5)   Procedure- The Committee shall adopt and make available
to the public, through the secretary, procedures under which a hearing will
be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules
of evidence but shall mandate that only relevant information be received.



   (C)   Jurisdiction and authority.



      (1)   The Sign Appeals Committee shall review all applications
and amendments to this chapter and report said findings and recommendations
to the Village Board in the prescribed manner.



      (2)   The Sign Appeals Committee shall receive from the code
official their recommendations, as related to the effectiveness of this
chapter, and report any conclusions and recommendations to the Village Board
on an as-needed basis.



      (3)   Committee decision - The Committee shall make
recommendations to the Village Board upon the concurrence of three or more
members of the Committee decision of the committee. The Village Board may
grant or deny the application.



      (4)   Resolution - The decision of the Village Board shall be
by ordinance. Certified copies shall be furnished to the applicant and to the
code official.



      (5)   Administration- The code official shall take immediate
action in accord with the decision of the Village Board.



      (6)   Court review- Any person, whether or not a previous part
of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a
write of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be
made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the
decision in the office of the chief administrative officer.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



SIGNS PERMITTED BY ZONING DISTRICT



§ 151.040  RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT (ER, R1, R2 R3 AND R4).



   The following signs are permitted signs that can be placed on property
that is zoned ER, R1, R2, R3 and R4. This section does not include signage
regulations for churches, school or other quasi-public institutions, which
can be found under §§ 151.060 et seq. Permitted signs within the ER, R1,
R2, R3 and R4 zoning districts are as follows:



   (A)   Exempted signs.



   (B)   Permitted permanent identification signs.



      (1)   Freestanding sign. Regulations of a freestanding sign
restrict the location and the illumination of the sign. For the purpose of
this chapter, a freestanding sign shall include all signs that are supported
by either a masonry base or two six-by-six or four-by-four wood supports not
exceeding a height of two feet.



         (a)   Location: All freestanding signs shall be located
on private property in appropriate easements no closer than five feet from
any property line or public right-of-way, and not obstruct line of sight from
an adjacent roadway. Each freestanding sign must be surrounded with a
landscaped bed of living plant material in accordance with the landscape
ordinance as amended from time to time. The Traffic Advisory Committee must
approve locations of all freestanding signs.



         (b)   Number: Each residential subdivision is permitted
a maximum number of two freestanding signs per entrance into the development.



         (c)   Illumination: Internal illumination of residential
freestanding signs is prohibited. All sign illumination must comply with §
151.003.



         (d)   Materials: All freestanding signs must be of
masonry or wood construction.



         (e)   Items of information: Items of information on a
freestanding sign shall be limited to the name of the residential
subdivision, reference to the Village of Frankfort, and/or subdivision logo.



         (f)   Height: The maximum height of a freestanding sign
is six feet in height to the highest part of the sign or post. The height of
the freestanding sign may be increased 10% to allow for ornamental features.



         (g)   Area: The maximum area of a freestanding sign is
50 square feet per sign face.



      (2)   Pole-mounted shingle sign. Regulations of a pole-mounted
shingle sign restrict the location, area and the illumination of the sign.



         (a)   Location: Pole-mounted shingle signs shall be
located on private property in appropriate casements no closer than five feet
from any property line or public right-of-way, and not obstruct lines of
sight. The Traffic Advisory Committee must approve locations of all
pole-mounted shingle signs.



         (b)   Number: One pole-mounted shingle sign shall be
permitted per public right-of-way frontage.



         (c)   Illumination: Internal illumination of a
pole-mounted shingle sign is prohibited. All sign illumination must comply
with § 151.003.



         (d)   Items of information: Items of information on a
pole-mounted sign shall be limited to the name of the residential
subdivision, reference to the Village of Frankfort, and/or subdivision logo.



         (e)   Height: The maximum height allowed for a
pole-mounted shingle sign is six feet to the highest part of the sign or post.



         (f)   Area: The maximum allowable area of a pole-mounted
shingle sign is four square feet.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



§ 151.041  COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICT (B1, B2, B3, AND B4).



   The following signs are permitted signs that can be placed on property
that is zoned B1, B2, B3, and B4. This section does not include signage
regulations for fueling station, movie theaters or automotive dealer, which
can be found under §§ 151.060 et seq. A uniform sign plan is required for
all planned unit developments (PUD), and all multi-building or multi-tenant
occupied commercial developments prior to the erection of any permanent sign.
All owners, tenants, subtenant and purchasers of individual units within the
development shall comply with the approved uniform sign plan. For
requirements of a uniform sign plan, see § 151.003. Permitted signs within
the B I , B2, B3 and B4 zoning districts are as follows:



   (A)   Exempted signs.



   (B)   Permanent identification signs.



      (1)   Freestanding sign. Regulations of a freestanding sign
are determined by the classification of the road on which the freestanding
sign is located as defined in Exhibit A, as amended from time to time, as
well as the square footage of the associated building(s). (A copy of Exhibit
A is on file at the Clerk’s office.) For the purpose of this chapter, a
freestanding sign shall include all signs that are supported by either a
masonry base or two  six-by-six or four-by-four wood supports not exceeding
a height of two  feet.



         (a)   Number: One freestanding sign is permitted per
public right-of-way frontage.



         (b)   Location: No freestanding sign shall project into,
over or otherwise encroach upon a public right-of-way. All freestanding signs
must maintain a setback of 25 feet from the property line. Each freestanding
sign must be surrounded with a landscaped bed of living plant material in
accordance with the landscape ordinance as amended from time to time. Only
one freestanding sign may be located on a commercial property per public
right-of-way frontage.



         (c)   Illumination: Freestanding signs may be internally
illuminated or illuminated via spot lighting or similar external forms.
Internally illuminated signs shall have an opaque background with only
letters and logo illuminated. All sign illumination must comply with §
151.101. Internally illuminated box signs are prohibited.



         (d)   Materials: All materials of any freestanding sign
shall be compatible and harmonious with the materials of the building
identified by the sign.



         (e)   Colors: All colors of any freestanding sign shall
be compatible and harmonious with the color of the building identified by the
sign. Furthermore, text on a freestanding sign is limited to three  colors,
unless otherwise regulated by the approved uniform sign plan.



         (f)   Items of information: The items of information on
a freestanding sign shall include the name of the business(es) or business
center, address, telephone number, and/or business logo.



         (g)   Height: The maximum height of the sign for single
tenant and multi-tenant buildings within the B1, B2, B3, and B4 districts is
identified by the following tables (Tables A and B). The height of the
freestanding sign may be increased 10% to allow for ornamental features.




Table A - Maximum Sign Height for Single Tenant Commercial Uses




 


Road Classification

 
Maximum Sign Height


Regional Arterial
 

7 feet



Community Arterial
 

6 feet



Major Collector
 

5 feet



Neighborhood Collector/Local Street
 

4 feet




 




Table B - Maximum Sign Height for Multi-Tenant Commercial Uses




 


Total Building Size (sq. ft.)

 

Regional Arterial

 

Community Arterial

 

Major Collector

 

Neighborhood Collector/Local Street



0 to 9,999
 

7 feet

 

6 feet

 

5 feet

 

4 feet



10,000 to 24,999
 

7 feet

 

6 feet

 

5 feet

 

4 feet



25,000 to 49,999
 

8 feet

 

7 feet

 

6 feet

 

5 feet



50,000 to 99,999
 

9 feet

 

8 feet

 

7 feet

 

6 feet



100,000 to 174,999
 

11 feet

 

9 feet

 

7 feet

 

6 feet



175,000 and up
 

13 feet

 

11 feet

 

9 feet

 

7 feet




 



         (h)   Area: The maximum area for a freestanding sign for
both single tenant and multi-tenant commercial uses is determined by the
total square footage of the building(s). The area of the sign is defined in
Table C.




Table C - Maximum Area For A Freestanding Sign




 


Total Building Size (sq. ft.)

 
Area of Sign Face


0 to 9,999
 

15 square feet



10,000 to 24,999
 

20 square feet



25,000 to 49,999
 

30 square feet



50,000 to 99,999
 

40 square feet



100,000 to 174,999
 

50 square feet



175,000 and up
 

75 square feet




 



         (i)   Text size: The minimum height of the text is
determined by the classification of the road on which the sign is located.
Text height will be measured using the lower case height (or shortest
character height) of the font chosen for each tenant. Only one tenant shall
be allowed upon the same horizontal plane of the sign face. In the case of a
multi-tenant commercial use, the height of the text for the name of the
center may be smaller than the tenant information. The minimum height of text
for a freestanding sign is defined in Table D.




Table D - Minimum Height of Text for a Freestanding Sign




 


Road Classification

 

Minimum Text
Height

 

Minimum Text Height for Name of Development



Regional Arterial
 

12 inches

 

9 inches



Community Arterial
 

10 inches

 

7 1/2 inches



Major Collector
 

8 inches

 

6 inches



Neighborhood Collector
 

7 inches

 

6 inches




 



      (2)   Wall sign. Regulations of a wall sign are determined by
the linear frontage of the building on which the sign is erected.



         (a)   Number: For a single tenant business one wall sign
shall be permitted per frontage on public right-of-way or frontage on a main
point of ingress/egress into the commercial development. For a multi-tenant
business one wall sign shall be permitted per store frontage. Those
multi-tenant businesses with frontage on a public right-of-way or with
frontage on a main point of ingress/egress into the commercial development
shall be permitted one wall sign per road frontage. For the purposes of this
chapter a business is defined as having its own secured entrance. Businesses
located within another business, without having a distinct secured entrance,
are not considered a separate business and are not eligible for a wall sign.
A business erecting a flag containing a corporate identification or business
logo, shall include the square footage of the flag, which shall not measure
greater than three feet by five feet, in the total square footage of the
allowable wall sign as defined in this chapter.



         (b)   Location: No wall sign shall project into, over or
otherwise encroach upon a public right-of-way. No wall signs shall cover,
wholly or partially, any wall opening, nor project beyond the ends, top or
bottom of the wall to which it is affixed. No sign shall project more than
one foot from the wall on which it is displayed. For multi-tenant buildings,
all wall signs must be aligned on one common centerline. Only one wall sign
shall be located on a building per storefront or road frontage.



         (c)   Illumination: Wall signage shall consist of
internally illuminated face lit channel letters, reverse channel lit letters,
spot lighting or similar external forms of illumination. Internally
illuminated signs shall have an opaque background with only letters and logo
illuminated. All wall sign illumination must be in compliance with §
151.003. Signs within the B4 district are not to be internally illuminated.



         (d)   Color: No more than three colors shall be used for
all wall signage pertaining to a business, except for multi-tenant business,
which must comply with the approved uniform sign plan. If a wall sign is
mounted on a raceway, the color of the raceway shall match the color of the
exterior of the building.



         (e)   Items of information: The items of information for
a wall sign shall be limited to the business name, logo, and/or nature of
business.



         (f)   Height: The maximum height of a wall sign is seven
feet.



         (g)   Area: For a single tenant business the maximum
area for wall signage may not exceed one square foot per linear foot of the
principal structure's frontage. For a multi-tenant business the wall sign may
not exceed one square foot per linear foot of each store frontage. For the
purposes of this chapter, area of wall signs shall include text and logos.
The maximum area of a wall sign is 200 square feet; the minimum area is 20
square feet.



      3.   Soffit signs. Regulations of a soffit sign restrict the
location, area and the illumination of the sign.



         (a)   Location: Soffit signs are to be placed
perpendicular to the public right-of-way or main point of ingress/egress
fronting the building on which the soffit sign is to be located. The soffit
sign shall be suspended from a roof overhang, covered walkway, or covered
porch. No part of the suspended soffit sign shall extend beyond the edge of
the overhang. A minimum clearance of eight feet shall be maintained between
the bottom of the sign and the nearest grade or sidewalk. A soffit sign shall
be located adjacent to the business it identifies.



         (b)   Number: One soffit sign is permitted per store
frontage.



         (c)   Illumination: Internal illumination of soffit
signs is prohibited.



         (d)   Materials: Sandblasted wood is encouraged for all
soffit signs. Alternative materials are acceptable, however must be
compatible and harmonious with the colors and materials of the building
identified by the sign.



         (e)   Items of information: Items of information on the
soffit sign shall be limited to the name of the individual business or
building complex.



         (f)   Area: The maximum area of a soffit signs is four
square feet per sign face.



      (4)   Permanent window signs. Regulations of a window sign are
determined by a percentage of the total window frontage.



         (a)   Location: Permanent window signs are limited to
first floor windows only.



         (b)   Number: For a single tenant business one window
sign shall be permitted per frontage on public right-of-way or frontage on a
main point of ingress/egress into the development. Text may not encompass
more than one window. For multi-tenant business one window sign shall be
permitted per store frontage. Those multi-tenant businesses with frontage on
a public right-of-way or with frontage on a main point of ingress/egress into
the development shall be allowed one window sign per road frontage. Text may
not encompass more than one window per business. For the purposes of this
chapter a business is defined as having its own secured entrance. Businesses
located within another business, without having a distinct secured entrance,
are not considered a separate business and are not eligible for a window sign.



         (c)   Illumination: Illumination of window signs is
prohibited.



         (d)   Materials: A window sign must be painted directly
upon or permanently fastened to the window surface itself and shall not be
composed of any neon, or other bare-bulb illumination.



         (e)   Items of information: The items of information of
a window sign shall be shall be limited to the name, address, telephone
number, and business hours. Slogans are not permitted.



         (f)   Area: The maximum allowable area of a window sign
is 25% of the total frontage window area.



         (g)   Color: No more than three colors shall be used for
all window signage pertaining to a business, except for multi-tenant
business, which must comply with the approved uniform sign plan.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



§ 151.042  INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICT (I1 AND I2).



   The following signs are permitted signs that can be placed on property
that is zoned I1 or I2. A uniform sign plan is required for all planned unit
developments (PUD), and all multi-building or multi-tenant occupied
industrial developments prior to the erection of any permanent sign. All
owners, tenants, subtenant and purchasers of individual units within the
development shall comply with the approved uniform sign plan. For
requirements of a uniform sign plan, see § 151.003. Permitted signs within
the I1 and I2 zoning districts are as follows.



   (A)   Exempted signs.



   (B)   Permitted permanent identification signs.



      (1)   Freestanding signs. Regulations of a freestanding sign
restrict the location area, and illumination of the signs. For the purpose of
this chapter, a freestanding sign shall include all signs that are supported
by either a masonry base or two six-by-six or four-by-four wood supports not
exceeding a height of two feet.



         (a)   Number: One freestanding sign is permitted per
public right-of-way frontage.



         (b)   Location: No freestanding sign shall project into,
over or otherwise encroach upon a public right-of-way. All freestanding signs
must maintain a setback of 25 feet from the property line.



   Each freestanding sign must be surrounded with a landscaped bed of
living plant material in accordance with the landscape ordinance as amended
from time to time. Only one freestanding sign may be located on an industrial
property per public right-of-way frontage.



         (c)   Illumination: Freestanding signs may be internally
illuminated or illuminated via spot lighting or similar external forms.
Internally illuminated signs shall have an opaque background with only
letters and logo illuminated. All sign illumination must comply with §
151.003. Internally lit box signs are prohibited.



         (d)   Materials: All materials of any freestanding sign
shall be compatible and harmonious with the materials of the building
identified by the sign.



         (e)   Color: All colors of any freestanding sign shall
be compatible and harmonious with the color of the building identified by the
sign. Furthermore, text on a freestanding sign is limited to three colors,
unless otherwise regulated by the approved uniform sign plan.



         (f)   Items of information: The items of information on
a freestanding sign shall include the name of the business(es) or business
center, address, telephone number, and or business logo.



         (g)   Height: The maximum height of a freestanding sign
within the I1 and I2 districts is seven feet. The height of the freestanding
sign may be increased 10% to allow for ornamental features.



         (h)   Area: The maximum allowable area of a freestanding
sign within the I1 and I2 districts is 50 square feet.



         (i)   Text size: The minimum height of the text is 12
inches. Text height will be measured using the lower case height (or shortest
character height) of the font chosen.



      (2)   Wall signs. Regulations of a wall sign are determined by
the linear frontage of the building on which the sign is erected.



         (a)   Number: For a single tenant industrial business
one wall sign shall be permitted per frontage on public right-of-way or
frontage on a main point of ingress/egress into the commercial development.
For a multi-tenant industrial business one wall sign shall be permitted per
store frontage. Those multi-tenant businesses with frontage on a public
right-of-way or with frontage on a main point of ingress/egress into the
industrial development shall be permitted one wall sign per road frontage.
For the purposes of this chapter an industrial business is defined as having
its own secured entrance. Businesses located within another business, without
having a distinct secured entrance, are not considered a separate business
and are not eligible for a wall sign. A business erecting a flag containing a
corporate identification or business logo, shall include the square footage
of the flag, which shall not measure greater than three feet by five feet, in
the total square footage of the allowable wall sign as defined in this
chapter.



         (b)   Location: No wall sign shall project into, over or
otherwise encroach upon a public right-of-way. No wall signs shall cover,
wholly or partially, any wall opening, nor project beyond the ends, top or
bottom of the wall to which it is affixed. No sign shall project more than
one foot from the wall on which it is displayed. For multi-tenant buildings,
all wall signs must be aligned on one common centerline. Only one wall sign
shall be located on a building per storefront or road frontage.



         (c)   Illumination: Wall signage shall consist of
internally illuminated lit channel letters, reverse channel lit letters, spot
lighting or similar external forms of illumination. Internally illuminated
signs shall have an opaque background with only letters and logo illuminated.
All wall sign illumination must be in compliance with § 151.003.



         (d)   Color: No more than three colors shall be used for
all wall signage pertaining to a business, except for multi-tenant
businesses, which must comply with the approved uniform sign plan. If a wall
sign is mounted on a raceway, the color of the raceway shall match the color
of the exterior of the building.



         (e)   Items of information: The items of information for
a wall sign shall be limited to the business name, logo and/or nature of
business. Slogans are not permitted.



         (f)   Area: The maximum area for a wall sign in an
Industrial zoning district is 50 square feet.



      (3)   Permanent window signs. Regulations of a window sign are
determined by the percentage of the total window frontage.



         (a)   Number: For a single tenant industrial business
one window sign shall be permitted per frontage on public right-of-way or
frontage on a main point of ingress/egress into the development. Text may not
encompass more than one window. For multi-tenant industrial businesses one
window sign shall be permitted per store frontage. Those multi-tenant
industrial businesses with frontage on a public right-of-way or with frontage
on a main point of ingress/egress into the development shall be allowed one
window sign per road frontage. Text may not encompass more than one window
per business. For the purposes of this chapter an industrial business is
defined as having its own secured entrance. Businesses located within another
business, without having a distinct secured entrance, are not considered a
separate business and are not eligible for a window sign.



         (b)   Location: Permanent window signs are limited to
first floor windows only.



         (c)   Illumination: Illumination of window signs is not
permitted.



         (d)   Color: No more than three colors shall be used for
all window signage pertaining to an industrial business, except for
multi-tenant business, which must comply with the approved uniform sign plan.



         (e)   Materials: A window sign must be painted directly
upon or permanently fastened to the window surface itself and shall not be
composed of any neon, or other bare-bulb illumination.



         (f)   Items of information: The items of information for
a window sign shall include only the name, address, telephone number, and
business hours. Slogans are not permitted.



         (g)   Area: The maximum allowable area of an industrial
window sign is 25% of the total frontage window area.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



§ 151.043  OFFICE RESEARCH ZONING DISTRICT (OR).



   The following signs are permitted signs that can be placed on property
that is zoned OR. A uniform sign plan is required for all planned unit
developments (PUD), and all multi-building or multi-tenant occupied office
research developments prior to the erection of any permanent sign. All
owners, tenants, subtenant and purchasers of individual units within the
development shall comply with the approved uniform sign plan. For
requirements of a uniform sign plan see § 151.003. Permitted signs within
the OR zoning district is as follows:



   (A)   Exempt signs.



   (B)   Permitted permanent identification signs.



      (1)   Freestanding signs. Regulations of a freestanding sign
restrict the location, area and illumination of the sign. For the purpose of
this chapter, a freestanding sign shall include all signs that are supported
by either a masonry base or two six-by-six or four-by-four wood supports not
exceeding a height of two feet.



         (a)   Number: One freestanding sign is permitted per
public right-of-way frontage.



         (b)   Location: No freestanding sign shall project into,
over or otherwise encroach upon a public right-of-way. All freestanding signs
must maintain a setback of 25 feet from the property line. Each freestanding
sign must be surrounded with a landscaped bed of living plant material in
accordance with the landscape ordinance as amended from time to time. Only
one freestanding sign may be located per public right-of-way frontage.



         (c)   Illumination: All freestanding signs may be
internally illuminated or illuminated via spot lighting or similar external
forms. All internally illuminated signs shall have an opaque background with
only letters and logo illuminated. All sign illumination must comply with §
151.03. Internally illuminated box signs are prohibited.



         (d)   Materials: All materials of any freestanding sign
shall be compatible and harmonious with the materials of the building
identified by the sign.



         (e)   Color: All colors of any freestanding sign shall
be compatible and harmonious with the color of the building identified by the
sign. Furthermore, text on a freestanding sign is limited to three colors,
unless otherwise regulated by the approved uniform sign plan.



         (f)   Items of information: The items of information on
a freestanding sign shall include only the name of the office research
development.



         (g)   Height: The maximum height of a freestanding sign
is seven feet. The height of the freestanding sign may be increased 10% to
allow for ornamental features.



         (h)   Area: The maximum allowable area of a freestanding
sign is 100 square feet.



         (i)   Text size: The minimum height of the text is 12
inches. Text height will be measured using the lower case height (or shortest
character height) of the font chosen for each tenant.



      (2)   Wall signs. Regulations of a wall sign are determined by
the linear frontage of the building on which the sign is erected.



         (a)   Number: One wall sign is permitted per building,
regardless of the number of businesses located in the building, per frontage
on public right-of-way or main point of ingress or egress into the
development. A business erecting a flag containing a corporate identification
or business logo, shall include the square footage of the flag, which shall
not measure greater than three feet by five feet, in the total square footage
of the allowable wall sign as defined in this chapter.



         (b)   Location: No wall sign shall project into, over or
otherwise encroach upon a public right-of-way. No wall signs shall cover,
wholly or partially, any wall opening, nor project beyond the ends, top or
bottom of the wall to which it is affixed. No sign shall project more than
one foot from the wall on which it is displayed. Only one wall sign shall be
located on a building per building frontage.



         (c)   Illumination: Wall signage shall consist of
internally illuminated lit channel letters, reverse channel lit letters, spot
lighting or similar external forms of illumination. Internally illuminated
signs shall have an opaque background with only letters and logo illuminated.
All wall sign illumination must be in compliance with § 151.003.



         (d)   Color: No more than three colors shall be used for
all wall signage pertaining to a business, except for multi-tenant business,
which must comply with the approved uniform sign plan. If a wall sign is
mounted on a raceway, the color of the raceway shall match the color of the
exterior of the building.



         (e)   Items of information: The items of information for
a wall sign shall be limited to the building name, logo, or a combination of
name and logo. Slogans are not permitted.



         (f)   Height: The maximum height of a wall sign is seven
feet.



         (g)   Area: The area for wall signage may not exceed one
square foot per linear foot of the principal structure's frontage, which
includes both text and logos. The maximum area of a wall sign is 250 square
feet with a minimum area of 20 square feet.



      (3)   Permanent window signs. Regulations of a window sign are
determined by the percentage of the total window frontage.



         (a)   Number: For single tenant office research business
one window sign shall be permitted per frontage on public right-of-way or
frontage on a main point of ingress egress into the development. Text may not
encompass more than one window. For multi-tenant office research businesses
one window sign shall be permitted per store frontage. Those multi-tenant
office research businesses with frontage on a public right-of-way or with
frontage on a main point of ingress/egress into the development shall be
allowed one window sign per frontage. Text may not encompass more than one
window per business. For the purposes of this chapter a business is defined
as having its own secured entrance. Businesses located within another
business, without having a distinct secured entrance, are not considered a
separate business and are not eligible for a window sign



         (b)   Location: Permanent window signs are limited to
first floor windows only.



         (c)   Illumination: Illumination of window signs is not
permitted.



         (d)   Color: No more than three colors shall be used for
all window signage pertaining to a business, except for multi-tenant
business, which must comply with the approved uniform sign plan.



         (e)   Materials: A window sign must be painted directly
upon or permanently fastened to the window surface itself and shall not be
composed of any neon, or other bare-bulb illumination.



         (f)   Items of information: The items of information for
a window sign shall include only the name, address, telephone number, and
business hours. Slogans are not permitted.



         (g)   Area: The maximum allowable area of a window sign
is 25% of the total frontage window area.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



§ 151.044  DOWNTOWN HISTORIC DISTRICT (HI).



   The sign regulations for the Historical district are designed to ensure
compatibility with the historic heritage of the area. The boundaries of this
district are depicted upon the map in Chapter 154, Appendix A. The village
maintains an 1890's theme, which includes the preservation, restoration, and
overall improvement of the historical area. All signs within this zoning
district must comply with this theme. A uniform sign plan is required for all
planned unit developments (PUD), and all multi-building or multi-tenant
occupied commercial developments prior to the erection of any permanent sign.
All owners, tenants, subtenant and purchasers of individual units within the
development shall comply with the approved uniform sign plan. For
requirements of a uniform sign plan, see § 151.004.  The following signs
are permanent identification signs that can be placed on property that is
zoned HI. Businesses within the HI district are permitted up to three
permanent identification signs.



   (A)   Exempted signs.



   (B)   Permitted permanent identification signs.



      (1)   Wall signs. Regulations of a wall sign restrict the
location, area and the illumination of the sign.



         (a)   Number: For a single tenant business one wall sign
shall be permitted per frontage on public right-of-way, main point of
ingress/egress into the commercial development, and/or frontage along the Old
Plank Road Trail. For multi-tenant buildings one wall sign shall be permitted
per store frontage facing a public right-of-way,  main point of
ingress/egress into the commercial development and/or frontage along the Old
Plank Road Trail. For the purposes of this chapter a business is defined as
having its own secured entrance. Businesses located within another business,
without having a distinct secured entrance, are not considered a separate
business and are not eligible for a wall sign. A business erecting a flag
containing a corporate identification or business logo, shall include the
square footage of the flag, which shall not measure greater than three feet
by five feet, in the total square footage of the allowable wall sign as
defined in this chapter.



         (b)   Location: No wall sign shall project into, over or
otherwise encroach upon a public right-of-way. No wall signs shall cover,
wholly or partially, any wall opening, nor project beyond the ends, top or
bottom of the wall to which it is affixed. No sign shall project more than
one foot from the wall on which it is displayed. For multi-tenant buildings,
all wall signs must be aligned on one common centerline. Only one wall sign
shall be located on a building per storefront or road frontage.



         (c)   Illumination: Wall signs may be illuminated via
spot lighting or similar external forms. All sign illumination must comply
with § 151.003.



         (d)   Materials: Sandblasted wood is encouraged for all
wall signs. Alternative materials are acceptable, however must be compatible
and harmonious with the colors and materials of the building identified by
the sign.



         (e)   Items of information: The items of information for
a wall sign shall be limited to the business name, logo, or a combination of
name and logo. Slogans are not permitted.



         (f)   Area: The maximum area of a wall sign is l5 square
feet.



      (2)   Pole-mounted shingle signs. Regulations of a
pole-mounted shingle sign restrict the location, area and the illumination of
the sign.



         (a)   Location: Pole-mounted shingle signs must be
located on private property.



         (b)   Illumination: Internal illumination of
pole-mounted shingle signs is prohibited.



         (c)   Materials: Sandblasted wood is encouraged for all
pole-mounted shingle signs. Alternative materials are acceptable, however
must be compatible and harmonious with the colors and materials of the
building identified by the sign.



         (d)   Items of information: The items of information for
a pole-mounted shingle sign shall be limited to the business name, logo, or a
combination of name and logo. Slogans are not permitted.



         (e)   Height: The maximum height of a pole-mounted
shingle sign is eight feet to the highest point of the sign or post.



         (f)   Area: The maximum area of a pole-mounted shingle
sign is four square feet per sign face.



      (3)   Projecting signs. Regulations of a projecting sign
restrict the location, area and the illumination of the sign.



         (a)   Location: A projecting sign may not extend more
than five feet from the face of the building. Projecting signs on "zero lot
line" buildings may encroach on the public right-of-way provided the sign
does not violate the five-foot maximum allowable projection. A clearance of
eight feet is required between the lowest point of the sign and the sidewalk
surface. Projecting signs must be securely fastened to the wall from which
they project. Chain or cable supports from a roof-mounted truss are
prohibited.



         (b)   Number:  For a single tenant building one
projecting sign is permitted per frontage on a public right-of-way, main
point of ingress/egress into the commercial development and/or frontage along
the Old Plank Road Trail.  For multi-tenant buildings one projecting sign
shall be permitted per store frontage facing a public right-of-way, main
point of ingress/egress into the commercial development and/or frontage along
the Old Plank Road Trail. For the purposes of this chapter a business is
defined as having its own secured entrance. Businesses located within another
business, without having a distinct secured entrance, are not considered a
separate business and are not eligible for a projecting sign.



         (c)   Illumination: Internal illumination of projecting
signs is prohibited.



         (d)   Materials: Sandblasted wood is encouraged for all
projecting signs. Alternative materials are acceptable, however must be
compatible and harmonious with the colors and materials of the building
identified by the sign.



         (e)   Items of information: Items of information for
projecting signs shall include only the name of the business, logo, or a
combination of name and logo. Slogans are not permitted.



         (f)   Area: The maximum area of a projecting sign is 15
square feet.



      (4)   Soffit signs. Regulations of a soffit sign restrict the
location, area and the illumination of the sign.



         (a)   Location: Soffit signs are to be placed
perpendicular to the public right-of-way or main point of ingress/egress
fronting the building on which the soffit sign is to be located. The soffit
sign shall be suspended from a roof overhang, covered walkway, or covered
porch. No part of the suspended soffit sign shall extend beyond the edge of
the overhang. A minimum clearance of eight feet shall be maintained between
the bottom of the sign and the nearest grade or sidewalk. A soffit sign shall
be located adjacent to the business it identifies.



         (b)   Number: One soffit sign is permitted per store
frontage; and shall be adjacent to the business it identifies.



         (c)   Illumination: Internal illumination of soffit
signs is prohibited.



         (d)   Materials: Sandblasted wood is encouraged for all
soffit signs. Alternative materials are acceptable, however must be
compatible and harmonious with the colors and materials of the building
identified by the sign.



         (e)   Items of information: Items of information on the
soffit sign shall be limited to the name of the individual business or
building complex.



         (f)   Area: The maximum area of a soffit signs is four
square feet per sign face.



      (5)   Permanent window signs. Regulations of a window sign are
determined by a percentage of the total window frontage.



         (a)   Number: For a single tenant business one window
sign shall be permitted per frontage on public right-of-way or frontage on a
main point of ingress/egress into the development. Text may not encompass
more than one window. For multi-tenant businesses one window sign shall be
permitted per store frontage. Those multi-tenant businesses with frontage on
a public right-of-way or with frontage on a main point of ingress/egress into
the development shall be allowed one window sign per road frontage. Text may
not encompass more than one window per business. For the purposes of this
section a business is defined as having its own secured entrance. Businesses
located within another business, without having a distinct secured entrance,
are not considered a separate business and are not eligible for a window sign



         (b)   Location: Permanent window signs are limited to
first floor windows.



         (c)   Illumination: Illumination of window signs is
prohibited.



         (d)   Materials: Window signs must be painted directly
upon or permanently fastened to the window surface itself and shall not be
composed of any neon, or other bare-bulb illumination.



         (e)   Items of information: The items of information of
a window sign shall be limited to only the name, address, telephone number,
and or business hours. Slogans are not permitted.



         (f)   Area: The maximum allowable area of a window sign
is 25% of the total frontage window area.



         (g)   Freestanding signs: Freestanding signs are
prohibited in the HI district.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05; Am. Ord. 2691, passed 1-24-11)




SIGN STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC SIGN TYPES




§ 151.060  FUEL STATIONS SIGNS.



   The following signs are permitted signs that can be placed on property
occupied by a fuel station. Pump labels and safety warnings, required by law
are exempt from these regulations. Pricing information labels or when applied
to the pumps shall also be exempt from these regulations.



   (A)   Exempted signs.



   (B)   Permitted permanent identification signs.



      (1)   Freestanding signs. Regulations of a freestanding sign
restrict the location, area and the illumination of the sign. For the purpose
of this chapter, a freestanding sign shall include all signs that are
supported by either a masonry base or two six-by-six or four-by-four wood
supports not exceeding a height of two feet.



         (a)   Number: One freestanding sign is permitted per
public right-of-way frontage.



         (b)   Location: No freestanding sign shall project into,
over or otherwise encroach upon a public right-of-way. All freestanding signs
must maintain a setback of 25 feet from the property line. Each freestanding
sign must be surrounded with a landscaped bed of living plant material in
accordance with the landscape ordinance as amended from time to time. Only
one freestanding sign may be located for a fuel station per public
right-of-way frontage.



         (c)   Illumination: Freestanding signs may be internally
illuminated or illuminated via spot lighting or similar external forms.
Internally illuminated signs shall have an opaque background with only
letters and logo illuminated. All sign illumination must comply with §
151.003. Internally illuminated box signs are prohibited.



         (d)   Materials: All materials of any freestanding sign
shall be compatible and harmonious with materials of the building identified
by the sign.



         (e)   Color: All colors of any freestanding sign shall
be compatible and harmonious with the color of the building identified by the
sign. Furthermore, text on a freestanding sign is limited to three colors,
unless otherwise regulated by the approved uniform sign plan.



         (f)   Items of information: The items of information for
a freestanding sign shall include only the name, address, telephone number,
business logo, and grade and price information for not more than three
gasoline grades.



         (g)   Height: The maximum height of a freestanding sign
is six feet. The height of the monument sign may be increased 10% to allow
for ornamental features.



         (h)   Area: The maximum area of a freestanding sign is
30 square feet, exclusive of the pricing information.



         (i)   Text size: The minimum height of the text,
exclusive of the pricing information, is 12 inches. Text height will be
measured using the lower case height (or shortest character height) of the
font chosen for each tenant. The text for the pricing information is the only
portion of the sign that may contain changeable copy. The height of text for
the pricing information is as follows:



 

Text
 
Minimum Text Height


Grade
 

5.5 inches



Dollars and cents
 

8.5 inches



Tenth cents
 

5.5 inches




 



      (2)   Wall signs. Regulations of a wall sign are determined by
the linear frontage of the building on which the sign is erected.



         (a)   Location: No wall sign shall project into, over or
otherwise encroach upon a public right-of-way. No wall signs shall cover,
wholly or partially, any wall opening, nor project beyond the ends, top or
bottom of the wall to which it is affixed. No sign shall project more than
one foot from the wall on which it is displayed. Only one wall sign shall be
located on a building, fueling canopy or accessory building per road frontage.



         (b)   Number: One wall sign is permitted per business or
roadway frontage provided that the frontage is adjacent to a public
right-of-way or adjacent to a main point of ingress or egress into a
development. Signage on a canopy or awning will be considered a wall sign.
For the purposes of this chapter a business is defined as having its own
secured entrance. Businesses located within another business, without having
a distinct secured entrance, are not considered a separate business and are
not eligible for a wall sign.



         (c)   Illumination: Wall signage shall consist of
internally illuminated lit channel letters, spot lighting or similar external
forms of illumination. No canopy or awning shall be backlit. Internally
illuminated signs shall have an opaque background with only letters and logo
illuminated. All sign illumination must be in compliance with § 151.003.



         (d)   Color: No more than three colors shall be used for
all wall signage pertaining to each business. If a sign is mounted on a
raceway, the color of the raceway shall match the color of the exterior of
the building.



         (e)   Items of information: The items of information on
a wall sign shall be limited to the business name, logo, or a combination of
name and logo. Slogans are prohibited.



         (f)   Height: The maximum height of a wall sign cannot
exceed seven feet.



         (g)   Area: The maximum area for wall signage is not to
exceed one square foot for every linear foot of the principal structure's
frontage (exclusive of the frontage of the fueling canopy or any ancillary
structure such as a car wash). The maximum area of a wall sign is 200 square
feet and the minimum is 20 square feet, both of which include, text and
logos. For the purpose of this chapter, the total allowable square footage
will include the sign areas on accessory buildings (i.e., car wash, fueling
station) and the fueling canopy, which shall include the background, logo and
or text, unless the color of the canopy is nondescript and non-indicative of
the corporate logo, or is of a neutral color (i.e.,  gray, brown, tan,
black).



      (3)   Permanent window signs. Regulations of a window sign are
determined by a percentage of the total window frontage.



         (a)   Number: One window sign is permitted per roadway
frontage provided that the frontage is adjacent to a public right-of-way or
adjacent to a main point of ingress/egress into the development. Text may not
encompass more than one window.



         (b)   Illumination: Illumination of window signs is
prohibited.



         (c)   Materials: A window sign must be painted directly
upon or permanently fastened to the window surface itself and shall not be
composed of any neon, or other bare-bulb illumination.



         (d)   Color: No more than three colors shall be used for
all window signage.



         (e)   Items of information: The items of information for
a window sign shall include only the name, address, telephone number, or
business hours. Slogans are prohibited.



         (f)   Area: The maximum allowable area of a window sign
is 25% of the total frontage window area.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



§ 151.061  AUTOMOTIVE DEALER SIGNS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, automotive dealers include new car,
used car, motorcycle, and motor homes dealerships. Permitted signs for
automotive dealers are as follows:



   (A)   Exempted signs.



   (B)   Permitted permanent identification signs.



      (1)   Freestanding signs. Regulations of a freestanding sign
are determined by the classification of the road on which the freestanding
sign is located as defined in Exhibit A, as amended from time to time. For
the purpose of this chapter, a freestanding sign shall include all signs that
are supported by either a masonry base or two six-by-six or four-by-four wood
supports not exceeding a height of two feet.



         (a)   Number: One freestanding sign is permitted per
public right-of-way frontage.



         (b)   Location: No freestanding sign shall project into,
over or otherwise encroach upon a public right-of-way. All freestanding signs
must maintain a setback of 25 feet from the property line. Each freestanding
sign must be surrounded with a landscaped bed of living plant material in
accordance with the landscape ordinance as amended from time to time. Only
one freestanding sign may be located per public right-of-way frontage.



         (c)   Color: All colors of any freestanding sign shall
be compatible and harmonious with the color of the building identified by the
sign. Furthermore, text on a freestanding sign is limited to three colors.



         (d)   Illumination: Freestanding signs may be internally
illuminated or illuminated via spot lighting or similar external forms.
Internally illuminated signs shall have an opaque background with only
letters and logo illuminated. Internally illuminated signs shall have an
opaque background with only letters and logo illuminated. All sign
illumination must comply with § 151.003. Internally illuminated box signs
are prohibited.



         (e)   Materials: All materials and colors of any
freestanding sign shall be compatible and harmonious with the color and
materials of the building identified by the sign.



         (f)   Items of information: The items of information on
a freestanding sign shall include the name of the business(es) or business
center, address, telephone number, and or business logo.



         (g)   Height: The maximum height of the sign for an
automotive dealer is determined by the following table (Table A). The height
of the freestanding sign may be increased 10% to allow for ornamental
features.




Table A - Maximum Sign Height for Automotive Dealer Freestanding Signs




 

Road Classification
 
Maximum Sign Height


Regional Arterial
 

7 feet   



Community Arterial
 

6 feet   



Major Collector
 

5 feet



Neighborhood Collector/Local Street
 

4 feet




 



         (h)   Area: The maximum area for a freestanding sign for
an automotive dealer is determined by the total acreage of the automotive
dealer. The area of the sign is identified in Table B.




Table B - Maximum Sign Area for Automotive Dealers Freestanding Sign




 


Site Acreage

 

Maximum Sign Area



0 - 1.5
 

15 square feet



1.5-2.5
 

20 square feet



3.5 - 4.99
 

30 square feet



5.0 - 9.99
 

40 square feet



10 - 19.99
 

50 square feet



20+
 

75 square feet




 



         (h)   Text size: The minimum height of the text is
determined by the classification of the road on which the sign is located.
Text height will be measured using the lower case height (or shortest
character height) of the font chosen. The minimum height of text for the sign
is defined in Table C.




Table C - Minimum Text Height for Automotive Dealers Freestanding Signs




 


Road Classification

 

Minimum Text Height



Regional Arterial
 

12 inches



Community Arterial
 

10 inches



Major Collector
 

8 inches



Neighborhood Collector
 

7 inches




 



      (2)   Wall signs. Regulations of a wall sign restrict the
location, area and the illumination of the sign.



         (a)   Location: No wall sign shall project into, over or
otherwise encroach upon a public right-of-way. No wall sign shall cover,
wholly or partially, any wall opening, nor project beyond the ends, top or
bottom of the wall to which it is affixed. No sign shall project more than
one foot from the wall on which it is displayed. All wall signs must be
aligned on one common centerline. Only one wall sign shall be located on a
building per road frontage.



         (b)   Number: A maximum of three wall signs are
permitted per dealership. For the purpose of this chapter, an automotive
dealer may erect a flag containing corporate identification or business logo,
which cannot measure greater than three feet by five feet. Any flag
containing corporate identification or business logo will be included in the
total square footage of the allowable wall sign.



         (c)   Illumination: Wall signage shall consist of
internally illuminated lit channel letters, reverse channel lit letters, spot
lighting or similar external forms of illumination. Internally illuminated
signs shall have an opaque background with only letters and logo illuminated.
All wall sign illumination must be in compliance with § 151.003.



         (d)   Color: No more than three colors shall be used for
all wall signage pertaining to each business. If a wall sign is mounted on a
raceway, the color of the raceway shall match the color of the exterior of
the building.



         (e)   Items of information: The items of information on
a freestanding sign shall include the name of the business(es) or business
center, address, telephone number, and or business logo.



         (f)   Area: The maximum area of any individual wall sign
is 50 square feet.



      (3)   Permanent window signs. Regulations of a window sign are
determined by a percentage of the total window frontage.



         (a)   Number: One window sign shall be permitted per
frontage on public right-of-way and or frontage on a main point of ingress
egress into the development. Text may not encompass more than one window.



         (b)   Illumination: Internal illumination of window
signs is prohibited.



         (c)   Materials: A window sign must be painted directly
upon or permanently fastened to the window surface itself and shall not be
composed of any neon, or other bare-bulb illumination.



         (d)   Color: No more than three colors shall be used for
all window signage pertaining to a business.



         (e)   Items of information: The items of information of
a window sign shall be limited to the business name, address, telephone
number, and or business hours.



         (f)   Area: The maximum allowable area of a window sign
is 25% of the total frontage window area.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



§ 151.062  THEATER SIGNS.



   The following signs are permitted and can be placed on property
occupied by a theater.



   (A)   Exempted signs.



   (B)   Permitted permanent identification signs.



      (1)   Freestanding sign. Regulations of a freestanding sign
are determined by the classification of the road on which the freestanding
sign is located as defined in Exhibit A, as amended from time to time, as
well as the square footage of the associated building. For the purpose of
this chapter, a freestanding sign shall include all signs that are supported
by either a masonry base or two six-by-six or four-by-four wood supports not
exceeding a height of two feet.



         (a)   Number: One freestanding sign is permitted per
public right-of-way frontage.



         (b)   Location: No freestanding sign shall project into,
over or otherwise encroach upon a public right-of-way. All freestanding signs
must maintain a setback of 25 feet from the property line. Each freestanding
sign must be surrounded with a landscaped bed of living plant material in
accordance with the landscape ordinance as amended from time to time. Only
one freestanding sign may be located per public right-of-way frontage.



         (c)   Illumination: Freestanding signs may be internally
illuminated or illuminated via spot lighting or similar external forms.
Internally illuminated signs shall have an opaque background with



only letters and logo illuminated. All sign illumination must comply with §
151.003. Internally illuminated box signs are prohibited.



         (d)   Materials: All materials of any freestanding sign
shall be compatible and harmonious with the materials of the building
identified by the sign.



         (e)   Color: All colors of any freestanding sign shall
be compatible and harmonious with the color of the building identified by the
sign. Furthermore, text on a freestanding sign is limited to three colors.



         (f)   Items of information: The items of information for
a freestanding sign shall include only the name, address, telephone number,
and or business logo.



         (g)   Height: The maximum height of a freestanding sign
for a theater is determined by the classification of the road on which the
development is located. The height of the freestanding sign may be increased
10% to allow for ornamental features. The height of the sign for a theater is
defined in the following table (Table A).




Table A — Maximum Height of Theater Signs




 


Road Classification

 

Sign Height



Regional Arterial
 

7 feet



Community Arterial
 

6 feet



Major Collector
 

5 feet



Neighborhood Collector
 

4 feet




 



         (h)   Area: The maximum area for a freestanding sign of
a theater is defined in Table B.




Table B - Maximum Area For Theater Signs




 


Total Building Size

 

Area of Sign Face



0 to 9,999
 

15 square feet



10,000 to 24,999
 

20 square feet



25,000 to 49,999
 

30 square feet



50,000 to 99,999
 

40 square feet



100,000 to 174,999
 

50 square feet



175,000 and up
 

75 square feet




 



         (i)   Text size: The minimum height of the text is
determined by the classification of the road on which the sign is located.
Text height will be measured using the lower case height (or shortest
character height) of the font chosen. Table C defines the minimum text height
for theater signs.




Table C - Minimum Text Height for Theater Signs




 


Road Classification

 

Minimum Text Height



Regional Arterial
 

12 inches



Community Arterial
 

10 inches



Major Collector
 

8 inches



Neighborhood Collector
 

7 inches




 



      (2)   Wall signs. Regulations of a wall sign are determined by
the linear frontage of the building on which the sign is erected.



         (a)   Location: No wall sign shall project into, over or
otherwise encroach upon a public right-of-way. No wall signs shall cover,
wholly or partially, any wall opening, nor project beyond the ends, top or
bottom of the wall to which it is affixed. No sign shall project more than
one foot from the wall on which it is displayed. Only one wall sign shall be
permitted to be located per building frontage.



         (b)   Number: One wall sign is permitted per roadway
frontage provided that the frontage is adjacent to a public right-of-way or
adjacent to a main point of ingress or egress into a development. For the
purpose of this chapter, a theater may erect a flag containing corporate
identification or business logo, which cannot measure greater than three feet
by five feet. Any flag containing corporate identification will be included
in the total square footage of the allowable wall sign.



         (c)   Illumination: Wall signage shall consist of
internally illuminated lit channel letters, reverse channel lit letters, spot
lighting or similar external forms of illumination. Internally illuminated
signs shall have an opaque background with only letters and logo illuminated.
All wall sign illumination must comply with § 151.003.



         (d)   Color: No more than three colors shall be used for
all wall signage pertaining to each business. If a wall sign is mounted on a
raceway, the color of the raceway shall match the color of the exterior of
the building.



         (e)   Items of information: The items of information for
a wall sign shall be limited to the business name, logo, or a combination of
name and logo.



         (f)   Height: The maximum height of a wall sign is seven
feet.



         (g)   Area: The area for wall signage may not to exceed
one square foot for every linear foot of the principal structure's frontage
which includes both text and logos. The maximum area of a wall sign is 200
square feet, the minimum area is 20 square feet.



      (3)   Accessory signs to theaters. Permanent accessory signs
to theaters are defined as theater posters that display current forthcoming
movies or performances and show times.



         (a)   Location: Accessory signs to theaters shall be
affixed flat to the wall along the front of the building.



         (b)   Number: One accessory sign is permitted for each
stage or movie screen.



         (c)   Illumination: Accessory signs to theaters may be
illuminated via spot lighting or similar external forms. All sign
illumination must comply with § 151.003.



         (d)   Materials: An accessory sign to theaters must be
enclosed in a locked and vandal proof case, which does not project more than
three inches from the wall on which it is displayed.



         (e)   Items of information: Items of information for an
accessory sign to theaters shall be limited to display posters for current or
forthcoming movies or performances and show times. The show times may be
changeable copy.



         (f)   Area: The maximum area of an accessory sign to
theaters is 15 square feet.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



§ 151.063  CHURCH, SCHOOL, PARK DISTRICT, AND OTHER PUBLIC/QUASI-PUBLIC
INSTITUTIONS.



   The following signs are permitted and can be placed on property
occupied by a church, school, park district and other public/quasi-public
institutions.



   (A)   Exempted signs.



   (B)   Permitted permanent identification signs.



      (1)   Freestanding sign. Regulations of a freestanding sign
restrict the location, area and the illumination of the sign. For the purpose
of this chapter, a freestanding sign shall include all signs that are
supported by either a masonry base or two six-by-six or four-by-four wood
supports not exceeding a height of two feet.



         (a)   Number: One freestanding sign is permitted per
public right-of-way frontage.



         (b)   Location: No freestanding sign shall project into,
over, or otherwise encroach upon a public right-of-way. All freestanding
signs must maintain a setback of 25 feet from the property line. Each
freestanding sign must be surrounded with a landscape bed of living plant
material in accordance with the landscape ordinance as amended from time to
time. Only one freestanding sign may be located on a road frontage.



         (c)   Illumination: All signs must be externally
illuminated. All sign illumination must comply with § 151.003.



         (d)   Materials: All materials of any freestanding sign
shall be compatible and harmonious with the materials of the building
identified by sign.



         (e)   Color: All colors of any freestanding sign shall
be compatible and harmonious with the color of the building identified by the
sign. Text on a freestanding sign is limited to three colors.



         (f)   Items of information: The items of information on
a freestanding sign shall include only the name, address, telephone, number,
hours of business or service and a logo for the development.



         (g)   Height: The maximum height of a freestanding sign
is six feet in height to the highest part of the sign or post. The height of
the freestanding sign may be increased 10% to allow for ornamental features.



         (h)   Area: The maximum area of a freestanding sign is
24 square feet per sign face.



      (2)   Wall signs. Regulations of a wall sign area is
determined by the linear frontage of the building on which the sign is
erected.



         (a)   Location: No wall sign shall project into, over or
otherwise encroach upon a public right-of-way. No wall sign shall cover,
wholly or partially, any wall opening, nor project beyond the ends, top or
bottom of the wall to which it is affixed. No sign shall project more than
one foot from the wall on which it is displayed.



         (b)   Number: One wall sign is permitted per building.



         (c)   Illumination: Wall signage shall consist of
internally illuminated channel letters, reverse channel lit letters, spot
lighting or similar external forms of illumination. Internally illuminated
signs shall have an opaque background with only letters and logo illuminated.
All wall sign illumination must be in compliance with § 151.003.



         (d)   Color: No more than three colors shall be used for
all wall signage pertaining to each institution. If a wall sign is mounted on
a raceway, the color of the raceway shall match the color of the exterior of
the building.



         (e)   Items of information: The items of information for
a wall sign shall be limited to the name of the institution, logo, or a
combination of name and logo.



         (f)   Area: The area for wall signage is to not exceed
40 square feet.



         (g)   Height: The maximum height of a wall sign cannot
exceed seven feet.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



§ 151.064  DIRECTORY/DIRECTIONAL SIGNS.



   The following are signs that can be placed on property that is zoned B1
, B2, B3, B4, I1, I2, and OR districts.



   (A)   Exempt signs.



   (B)   Permitted directional signs.



      (1)   Directional signs. Regulations of a directional signs
restrict the area and the illumination of the signs. Upon submittal of a sign
permit for directional signs, a site plan indicating the location of the
proposed directional signs must be submitted and approved by the code
official.



         (a)   Location: Directional signs shall be located at
access points or interior to the property or development, such as the parking
area.



         (b)   Illumination: Internal illumination of directional
signs is not permitted.



         (c)   Materials: All materials of any directional signs
shall be compatible and harmonious with the materials of the building
identified by the sign.



         (d)   Color: All colors of any directional sign shall be
compatible and harmonious with the color of the building identified by the
sign. Furthermore, text on a directional sign is limited to three colors,
unless otherwise regulated by the approved uniform sign plan.



         (e)   Items of information: The items of information on
a directional sign can only display "exit," "enter," "drive-up/thru," along
with any symbol or text used for directing vehicular or pedestrian traffic.



         (f)   Height: The maximum height of a directional signs
is four feet.



         (g)   Sign area: The maximum area for the directional
signs is five  square feet.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



TEMPORARY SIGNS PERMITTED BY ZONING DISTRICT



§ 151.075  SPECIAL EVENT SIGNS.



   The following signs are special event signs that can be placed on
property within the B1, B2, B3, B4, I1, and I2 zoning districts. This section
does not include temporary signs as outlined in § 151.076.



   (A)   Special event signs permits.



      (1)   Special event signs. A permit must be obtained for all
special event signs except as noted elsewhere in this section. Permits shall
be limited in duration to 15 days, except as noted elsewhere in this section.
A maximum of one special event sign shall be allowed per permit. All special
event signs must be removed by the permit holder within 24 hours after the
expiration of the permit. No more than six special event sign permits shall
be issued per applicant in any calendar year. The permit fee is $15 and must
be paid with each new application or renewal thereof.



      (2)   Each application for a special event sign must be
submitted to the code official, who will review the application for
compliance with the village Code. The Mayor shall grant final approval or
disapproval.



      (3)    Each special event sign shall be issued a special event
sign permit, which is required to be displayed in the window of the
associated business for the duration of the permit. Once the permit has
expired, both the sign permit and the special event sign must be removed.



   (B)   Exempted signs.



   (C)   Permitted special event signs.



      (1)   Portable signs.



         (a)   Location: All portable signs must comply with the
setback of the freestanding sign and the wall sign setbacks as outlined for
the zoning district in which the sign will be located. No portable sign shall
be located on public right-of-way.



         (b)   Number: One portable sign will be allowed per
permit.



         (c)   Illumination: Illumination of portable signs is
prohibited.



         (d)   Height: The maximum permitted height of a portable
sign is four feet to the highest part of the sign or post.



         (e)   Area: The maximum permitted area of a portable
sign is 16 square feet per sign face.



      (2)   Banners.



         (a)   Location: All banners must be securely affixed to
the wall of the associated building.



         (b)   Number: One banner will be allowed per permit.



         (c)   Illumination: Illumination of banners is
prohibited.



         (d)    Height: The maximum permitted height of a banner
is four feet to the highest part of the sign or post.



         (e)   Area: The maximum permitted area of a banner is 24
square feet per sign face.



      (3)   Inflatable signs.



         (a)   Location: Inflatable sign permits shall be issued
to anchor tenants and auto dealerships only.



         (b)   Number: One inflatable sign, as defined by §
151.005, shall be allowed per permit.



         (c)   Illumination: Illumination of inflatable signs is
prohibited.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



§ 151.076  RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS (ER, HR, R1, R2, R3 AND R4).



   The following signs are temporary signs that can be placed on property
within the ER,  HR, R1, R2, R3 and R4 zoning districts. All temporary signs
must comply with all regulations set forth in § 151.075.



   (A)   Exempted signs.



   (B)   Permitted temporary signs.



      (1)   Freestanding real estate sign. The following sign
regulations shall apply to real estate signs advertising property for rent,
lease or trade located on the property. A permit is not required for real
estate signs within a residential district.



         (a)   Location: Real estate signs shall be located on
private property no



closer than five feet from any property line or public right-of-way.



         (b)   Number: One real estate sign shall be permitted
per property.



         (c)   Illumination: Illumination of real estate signs is
prohibited.



         (d)   Height: The maximum height of a real estate sign
is four and one-half feet to the highest part of the sign or post.



         (e)   Area: The maximum area of a real estate sign is
four square feet per sign face.



      (2)   Development signs.



         (a)   Location: Development signs shall be located on
private property no closer than five feet from any property line or public
right-of-way and must be located in a way as to not interfere with the line
of site of vehicles or pedestrians traffic. Should an applicant request to
locate a development off- site, an application can be made which special
consideration will be given and if deemed appropriate approved by the code
official.



         (b)   Number: One development sign per public
right-of-way frontage.



         (c)   Illumination: Illumination of development signs is
prohibited.



         (d)   Items of information: The items of information on
a development sign may include advertising lots within the development on
which the sign is located, along with the name, address, telephone number,
and logo of the development.



         (e)   Height: The maximum permitted height allowed for a
development sign is eight feet to the highest part of the sign or post.



         (f)   Area: The maximum permitted area of a development
sign is 50 square feet.



         (g)   Time frame: A development sign permit is only
valid for two  years from the time the sign is erected.



      (3)   Garage sale signs. The following sign regulations shall
apply to garage sale signage. Only those signs issued by the village may be
displayed.



         (a)   Number: Upon issuance of the sale permit the
village will furnish each applicant with three garage sale signs.



         (b)   Location: One sale sign, issued by the village,
shall be displayed at the front lot line on the premises on which the sale is
conducted. Garage sale signs are prohibited to be located on village property
at the intersections of U.S. Route 45 (LaGrange Road) and Route 30 (Lincoln
Highway), U.S. Route 45 and White Street, or White Street and Nebraska
Street. No signs shall be placed in the village flowerbeds. No other signs
may be displayed within the corporate limits of the village.



         (c)   Time frame: Garage sale signs shall not be
displayed more than one day prior to the commencement of the sale and must be
removed no later than one day following the conclusion of the permitted sale.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



§ 151.077  COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND OFFICE RESEARCH DISTRICTS (B1, B2,
B3, B4, I1, I2 AND OR).



   The following signs are temporary signs that can be placed on property
within the B1, B2, B3, B4, I1, I2 and OR zoning districts. All temporary
signs must comply with all regulations set forth in § 151.075.



   (A)   Exempt signs.



   (B)   Permitted temporary signs.



      (1)   Contractor Sign.



         (a)   Location: Contractor signs shall be located on
private property no closer than 25 feet from any property line or public
right-of-way and must be located in a way as to not interfere with the line
of site of vehicles or pedestrians traffic.



         (b)   Number: One contractor sign shall be permitted per
public right-of-way frontage.



         (c)   Illumination: Illumination of contractor signs is
prohibited.



         (d)   Items of information: The items of information on
the contractor sign may only include information identifying the architects,
engineers, contractors, and other individuals or firms involved with the
construction, but not including the advertisement of any product announcing
the character of the building enterprise, or the purpose for which the
building is intended.



         (e)   Height: The maximum permitted height allowed for a
contractor sign is eight feet to the highest part of the sign or post for
property located in the I1, I2 and OR districts and a maximum height of six
feet to the highest part of the sign for property located within the B1, B2,
B3 and B4 districts.



         (f)   Area: The maximum permitted area of a contractor
sign is 32 square feet.



         (g)   Time frame: A contractor/construction sign permit
is only valid for a period not longer than one week following the use and
occupancy of the structure.



      (2)   Development signs.



         (a)   Location: Development signs shall be located on
private property no closer than five feet from any property line or public
right-of-way and must be located in a way as to not interfere with the line
of site of vehicles or pedestrians traffic. Should an applicant request to
locate a development off site, an application can be made which special
consideration will be given and if deemed appropriate approved by the code
official.



         (b)   Number: One development sign shall be per public
right-of-way frontage.



         (c)   Illumination: Illumination of development signs is
prohibited.



         (d)   Items of information: The items of information on
a development sign may include advertising lots within the development on
which the sign is located, along with the name, address, telephone number,
and logo of the development.



         (e)   Height: The maximum permitted height allowed for a
development sign is eight feet to the highest part of the sign or post.



         (f)   Area: The maximum permitted area of a development
sign is 50 square feet.



         (g)   Time frame: A development sign permit is only
valid for two  years from the time the sign is erected.



      (3)   Temporary window signs. A permit is not required for
temporary window signs within the B1, B2, B3, B4, I1 , I2 and OR zoning
districts.



         (a)   Location: Temporary window signs shall be located
on windows, which are adjacent from public right-of-way or adjacent to a main
point of ingress/egress into a development.



         (b)   Illumination: Illumination of temporary windows
signs is prohibited.



         (c)   Area: The combined area of temporary window signs
and permanent window signs shall not exceed 75% of the total frontage window
area.



      (4)   Window real estate signs. The following sign regulations
shall apply to real estate signs advertising property for rent, lease or
trade located on the window of the associated building. A permit is not
required for window real estate signs within the B1, B2, B3, B4, I1, I2 and
OR zoning districts.



         (a)   Location: Real estate signs may be displayed in
the store window.



         (b)   Area: The maximum area of a real estate sign is
six square feet.



         (c)   Number: One real estate sign is permitted per
business.



         (d)   Illumination: Illumination of window real estates
signs is prohibited.



      (5)   Freestanding real estate signs. The following sign
regulations shall apply to real estate signs advertising property for rent,
lease or trade located on the property.



         (a)   Location: Freestanding real estate signs shall be
located on private property no closer than 25 feet from any property line or
public right-of-way.



         (b)   Number: One freestanding real estate sign shall be
permitted per property.



         (c)   Illumination: Illumination of freestanding real
estate signs is prohibited.



         (d)   Materials: All freestanding real estate signs
shall be mounted on a wooden or metal post.



         (e)   Height: The maximum height of a freestanding real
estate sign is six feet to the highest part of the sign or post.



         (f)   Area: The maximum area of a freestanding real
estate sign is 12 square feet per sign face.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



§ 151.078  DOWNTOWN HISTORIC DISTRICT (HI).



   The following signs are temporary signs that can be placed on property
within the HI district. All temporary signs must comply with all regulations
set forth in § 151.075, with respect to timeline, permit process and fees.
Temporary signs are as follows:



   (A)   Exempt signs.



   (B)   Permitted temporary signs.



      (1)   Temporary window signs.



         (a)   A permit is not required for temporary window
signs within the Historic district.



         (b)   Area: Not to exceed 25% of the total frontage
window area.



         (c)   Illumination: Illumination of temporary window
signs is not permitted.



      (2)   Real estate signs.



         (a)   A permit is not required for a real estate sign
within the Historic district.



         (b)   Location: Real estate signs must be located in the
store window only.



         (c)   Number: One real estate sign shall be permitted
per property.



         (d)   Illumination of real estate signs is prohibited.



         (e)   Area: The maximum area of a real estate sign is
six square feet per sign face.



      (3)   A-frame signs.



         (a)   A permit is not required for A-frame signs within
the Historic District.



         (b)   Location: A-frame signs are permitted to be placed
upon private property and public sidewalks within the Historic District
provided a minimum five feet of unobstructed walkway is maintained per the
Illinois American Disability Act.  When located upon public sidewalks
A-frame signs shall not be placed more than six feet from the primary
entrance of the business nor shall they be erected or maintained in a manner
that prevents free ingress or egress from any door, window or fire escape.



A-frame signs shall maintain a minimum six-foot setback from the curb and
shall not obstruct line of sight from an adjacent roadway.



         (c)   Number: For a single tenant building one A-frame
sign shall be permitted per frontage on a public right-of-way, main point of
ingress/egress into the commercial development and / or frontage along the
Old Plank Road Trail. For multi-tenant buildings one A-frame sign shall be
permitted per business with first floor store frontage on a public
right-of-way, main point of ingress/egress into the commercial development
and/or along the Old Plank Road Trail. For the purpose of this chapter a
shared first floor entrance shall not constitute store frontage.



         (d)   Height: The maximum height of an A-frame sign is
50 inches including the sign base.



         (e)   Area: The maximum area of an A-frame sign is six
square feet per sign face.



         (f)   Illumination: Illumination of A-frame signs is
prohibited.



         (g)   Duration: A-frame signs shall only be displayed
during operating hours of the business. All A-frame signs must be removed and
stored indoors when the business is closed.



         (h)   Materials: The use of wood is encouraged for all
A-frame signs. Alternative materials including decorative steel, iron and
aluminum are acceptable, however must be compatible and harmonious with the
colors and materials of the building identified by the sign. Plastic signs
are prohibited.  Changeable copy areas shall be limited to chalkboards only.
Dry erase boards and individual removable lettering is prohibited.



         (i)   Prohibited design elements: Animation, movement
and miscellaneous attachments including but not limited to flags, ribbons,
balloons, streamers, pennants, etc. are prohibited from use on A-frame signs.
Landscaping at the base of the sign is encouraged and is not considered a
prohibited design element.  Permanent logos shall be limited to that of the
subject business only.



         (j)   Maintenance: A-frame signs must be maintained in a
like new condition and all changeable copy areas wiped clean prior to change
in advertisement.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05; Am. Ord. 2691, passed 1-24-11)



§ 151.079  CIVIC ORGANIZATIONS.



   These regulations shall apply to all temporary signs for civic
organizations, which are restricted to double faced A-frame signs (sandwich
boards). Unlike temporary signs, which are restricted to private property,
temporary signs for civic organizations may be located on public
right-of-way. A permit must be obtained prior to placement of any sign.



   (A)   Exempted signs.



   (B)   Permitted temporary signs.



      (1)   A-frame signs.



         (a)   Location: All double faced A-frame signs may be
placed on public property at the following locations:



            (1)   Nebraska and LaGrange (Route 45).



            (2)   Old Frankfort Way and LaGrange (Route 45).



            (3)   East outlot entrance of Frankfort Crossings
on Route 30.



            (4)   Pfeiffer Road and Lincoln Highway (Route 30).



            (5)   Laraway Road and Center Road.



            (6)   Colorado Avenue and LaGrange (Route 45).



         (b)   Number: A maximum of four A-frame signs may be
placed at preference of choice of the six locations listed above.



         (c)   Illumination: Illumination of an A-frame sign is
prohibited.



         (d)   Height: The maximum permitted height of an A-frame
sign is four feet to the highest part of the sign or post.



         (e)   Area: The maximum permitted area of an A-frame
sign is 16 square feet per sign face.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



§ 151.080  POLITICAL SIGNS (ALL DISTRICTS).



   (A)   Permitted temporary signs.



      (1)   Political signs. These regulations shall apply to all
types of political signage, including those advertising a specific candidate
for political office or those advocating a particular preference with regard
to a position on a referendum. Political signs are temporary signs that can
be placed on property within all zoning districts. No permit shall be
required for the placement of a political sign on private property with the
property owners’ consent.



         (a)   Location: Political signs shall only be permitted
on private property, in all zoning districts with the property owners’
consent. Political signs shall be expressly prohibited at the following
locations:



            (1)   Within any public right-of-way that is
included in the corporate limits.



            (2)   On any trees.



            (3)   On any principal or accessory building.



            (4)   On any utility poles.



            (5)   On any traffic poles or sign structures.



            (6)   In any manner or at any location determined
by the village to create a visual hazard for both vehicular and pedestrian
traffic.



         (b)   Number: No more than one sign per candidate,
political party, or "issue" per public right of way.



         (c)   Illumination: Illumination of political signs is
prohibited.



         (d)   Types: The types of permitted political signs
shall include only yard signs, which can be placed only in a front yard no
closer than five feet to a public sidewalk. Corner lots shall have two front
yards for purposes of this chapter.



         (e)   Materials: All political signs shall be mounted on
a wooden or metal post.



         (f)   Height: The maximum height of a political sign
shall not exceed four feet from the ground to the top of the sign or post.



         (g)   Area: The maximum sign area for a political sign
shall be four square feet.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05; Am. Ord. 2691, passed 1-24-11)



SIGNAGE ENFORCEMENT



§ 151.100  ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.



   The primary enforcement official for the village shall be the Code
Enforcement Officer or other duly appointed agents.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



§ 151.101  MAINTENANCE; REMOVAL.



   The standards set forth in the Building Code (2000 International
Building Code) Article 2903.1 and 2903.2; and the village property
Maintenance Code shall be used and are hereby incorporated into this section
by reference.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



§ 151.102  LEGAL NON-CONFORMING STATUS OF EXISTING SIGNS.



   All existing signs under the jurisdiction of this chapter rendered
non-conforming by adoption of this chapter shall be permitted to remain in
use, subject to the following provisions:



   (A)   Any sign not in conformance with the allowable area (square
feet) or allowable height (lineal feet) provisions of this chapter by an
amount less than 20% in excess of the allowable area or allowable height,
shall be permitted to remain as a legal non-conforming use throughout the
useful life of the sign.



   (B)   Any sign not in conformance with the allowable area or
allowable height provisions of this chapter by an amount more than or equal
to 20% in excess of the allowable area or allowable height, or is
non-conforming with any other provision of this chapter, must be brought into
conformance by modification, replacement, or removal of the non-conforming
sign when:



      (1)   More than 50% of the non-conforming sign must be
replaced due to physical deterioration or damage, or



      (2)   The business to which the sign pertains is relocated or
has ceased operation for a period of six months.



      (3)   The business to which the sign pertains is sold,
provided, the compliance is stayed for 24 months from the date of sale.



   (C)   Any sign which comes under the jurisdiction of the village and
which is nonconforming with respect to the requirements contained herein must
be brought into full compliance with all applicable village requirements
within 60 months.



(Ord. 2243, passed 11-21-05)



CHAPTER 152:  FLOOD REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   152.001   Purpose



   152.002   Definitions



   152.003   How to use this chapter



   152.004   Base flood elevation



Occupation and Use of Flood Fringe Areas



   152.015   Development to be regulated



   152.016   Development permit



   152.017   Preventing increased damages



   152.018   Compensatory storage



   152.019   Construction of a building under a LOMR Based on Fill



Occupation and Use of Identified Floodways



   152.025   Uses and structures permitted in floodways to be regulated



   152.026   Development permit



   152.027   Duties of Administrative Department in regard to permits



   152.028   Preventing increased damages; list of appropriate uses



Engineering and Mitigation Criteria for Appropriate Uses



   152.035   Appropriate uses shall meet engineering and mitigation
criteria



   152.036   Preservation of flood conveyance so as not to increase
flood stages upstream



   152.037   Compensatory storage; preservation of floodway storage so
as not to increase downstream flooding



   152.038   Preservation of floodway velocities so as not to increase
stream erosion or flood heights



   152.041   On-stream structures built for the purpose of backing up
water



   152.042   Floodproofing of existing habitable residential and
commercial structures



   152.043   Excavation in the floodway



   152.044   Channel modification



   152.045   Seeding and stabilization plan



   152.046   Reserved



   152.047   Public flood control projects



   152.048   General criteria for analysis of flood elevations



   152.049   Conditional Letter of Map Revision



   152.050   Professional engineer’s supervision



   152.051   Buffer strips



   152.052   When construction may proceed; restrictions



   152.053   Development activities in delegated communities requiring
state review



   152.054   Other permits



   152.055   Permits for dams



   152.056   Activities that do not require a registered professional
engineer’s review



Occupation and Use of Special Flood Hazard Areas Where Floodways are not
Identified



   152.065   Development in SFHA or regulated floodplain



   152.066   Development permit



   152.067   Elevation of development site to be compared to base flood
elevation



   152.068   Duties of Administrative Department in regard to permits



   152.069   Preventing increased damages



   152.070   Development standards for riverine SFHA



   152.071   Permits for dams



   152.072   Activities permitted without review



   152.073   Flood-carrying capacity to be maintained



   152.074   Compensatory storage



Permitting Requirements Applicable to All Floodplain Areas



   152.080   Additional permit requirements for all floodplain areas



   152.081   Public health standards



   152.082   Carrying capacity and notification



   152.083   Protecting buildings



   152.084   Site grading, fill, and buildings adjacent to SFHA



   152.085   Elevating buildings



   152.086   Floodproofing of proposed and existing buildings



   152.087   Non-conforming structures



   152.088   Construction of new bridges or culvert crossings and
roadway approaches



   152.089   Reconstruction or modification of existing bridges,
culverts, and approach roads



   152.090   Detention facilities within and adjacent to the floodplain



   152.091   Letter of map changes



Other Development Requirements



   152.100   Flood hazards to affect land management



   152.101   Development projects to be reviewed for compliance with
this chapter



   152.102   Proposals to include flood elevation data



   152.103   Natural features to be preserved and utilized whenever
possible



   152.104   Planned unit developments



Variances



   152.115   Variances in regulatory floodway prohibited; outside
floodway excepted



   152.116   Conditions for variance



   152.117   Applicant to be notified of variance’s effect on
probation



   152.118   Variances may be granted for historic preservation



Administration; Enforcement



   152.125   Duties of the enforcement officials



   152.126   Disclaimer of liability



   152.127   Abrogation and greater restrictions



 



   152.998   Violations



   152.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.001  PURPOSE.



   (A)   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted
to the village by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 1-2-1, 11-12-12, 11-30-8, and
11-31-2. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain the village’s
eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program; to minimize potential
losses due to periodic flooding including loss of life, loss of property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare; and to preserve and enhance the quality of
surface waters, conserve economic and natural values and provide for the wise
utilization of water and related land resources.



   (B)   This chapter is adopted in order to accomplish the following
specific purposes:



      (1)   To meet the requirements of ILCS Ch. 615, Act 5, §
18(g), An Act in Relation to the Regulation of the Rivers, Lakes and Streams
of the State of Illinois, approved June 10, 1911, as amended;



      (2)   To comply with the rules and regulations of the National
Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 C.F.R. 59-78, revised as of October 1,
2000, as well as final NFIP rules published after that date;



      (3)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to
buildings from flood damage;



      (4)   To protect human life and health from the hazards of
flooding;



      (5)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control
projects, repairs to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood
rescue and relief operations;



      (6)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available
for property in the village by fulfilling the requirements of the National
Flood Insurance Program;



      (7)   To comply with the rules and regulations of the National
Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended;



      (8)   To protect, conserve, and promote the orderly
development of land and water resources;



      (9)   To preserve the natural hydro logic and hydraulic
functions of watercourses and floodplains and to protect water quality and
aquatic habitats;



      (10)   To preserve the natural characteristics of stream
corridors in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water
quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide
recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community
and economic development;



      (11)   To assure that new development does not increase the
flood or drainage hazards to others, or creating unstable conditions
susceptible to erosion.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)



§ 152.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A non-habitable structure which is on the same
parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of
which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.



   ACOE. ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS. A federal agency providing military and
public works services to the United States, including but not limited to the
planning, designing, building, and operating of locks, dams, flood control,
flood protection, waterway dredging, environmental regulation and ecosystem
restoration.



   ACT. An Act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and
streams of the state, ILCS Ch. 615, Act 5, §§ 5 et seq.



   APPLICANT. Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an
application.



   APPROPRIATE USE. Only uses of the regulatory floodway that are
permissible and will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that
will be allowed are as specified in § 152.028.



   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year
frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any
location is as defined in § 152.004.



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The highest water surface elevation that
can be expected during the base flood in relation to mean sea level. The BASE
FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) is also known as the 100-YEAR FREQUENCY FLOOD
ELEVATION. The flood elevation having a 1% probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.



   BASEMENT. Any area of a building having its floor below ground level on
all sides.



   BUILDING. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed
by walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured home, mobile home or a prefabricated building. This term also
includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site
for more than 180 days.



   CHANNEL. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash, or natural or man-made drainage way, which has a definite bed
and banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either
perennially or intermittently.



   CHANNEL MODIFICATION. Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of it bed or banks. CHANNEL MODIFICATION includes
damming, rip-rapping or other armoring, widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of bottom or woody vegetation.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION does not include the clearing of dead or dying
vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. CHANNELIZATION. A severe form
of channel modification typically involving relocation of the existing
channel ( e.g., straightening).



   COMPENSATORY STORAGE. An artificially excavated, hydraulically
equivalent volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of
natural flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed
within the floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage
can increase off-site floodwater elevations and flows.



   CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A REGULATORY FLOOD WAY MAP CHANGE.
Preconstruction approval by IDNR-OWR and FEMA of a proposed change to the
floodway map. This preconstruction approval, pursuant to this part, gives
assurances to the property owner that once an appropriate use is constructed
according to permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously
agreed, upon review and acceptance of as-built plans.



   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (CLOMA). A letter from FEMA stating
that a proposed structure that is not to be elevated by fill (natural grade)
would not be inundated by the base flood if built as proposed.



   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT BASED ON FILL (CLOMR-F). A letter
from FEMA stating that a parcel of land or proposed structure that will be
elevated by fill would not be inundated by the base flood if fill is placed
on the parcel as proposed or the structure is built as proposed.



   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A letter from FEMA which
indicates that they will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate
zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective Flood Hazard
Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map, once the project is built as
proposed and as-built plans are submitted and approved.



   CONTROL STRUCTURE. A structure designed to control the rate of flow
that passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream
water surface elevation.



   CRITICAL FACILITY. Any facility which is critical to the health and
welfare of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to
the disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of
vital services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community,
or can put special populations at risk. Examples of CRITICAL FACILITIES where
flood protection should be required include: emergency services facilities
(such as fire and police stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and
senior care facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites
(telephone switching stations or electrical transformers), and hazardous
material storage facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic
substances). Examples of CRITICAL FACILITIES where flood protection is
recommended include: sewage treatment plants, water treatment plants, and
pumping stations.



   DAM. All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with
their abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of
storing or diverting water or creating a pool. Underground water storage
tanks are not included. DAMS may include weirs, restrictive culverts or
impoundment structures.



   DELEGATED COMMUNITY. A community delegated state permitting authority
in the floodway.



   DESIGN STANDARDS. The Village of Frankfort Design Standards, Revised
June 2007 or as amended from time to time, which shall be utilized in
conjunction with other applicable ordinances and guidelines including, but
not limited to, the floodplain ordinance, Water Resource Management Plan and
zoning ordinance.



   DEVELOPMENT.



      (1)   Any man-made change to real estate, including, but not
limited to:



         (a)   Construction, reconstruction, repair, addition to
or replacement of a building or structure.



         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site,
preparing a site for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a
site for more than 180 days.



         (c)   Drilling, mining, installing utilities,
construction of roads, bridges, or similar projects.



         (d)   Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a
site.



         (e)   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction.



         (f)   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences,
dams, or culverts; channel modification; filling, dredging, grading,
excavating, paving, or other non-agricultural alterations of the ground
surface; storage of equipment or materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste.



         (g)   Any other activity of man that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive
vegetation removal.



      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include maintenance of existing
buildings and facilities such as re-roofing or re-surfacing of roads when
there is no increase in elevation, or gardening, plowing, cultivation, and
similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, or
construction of levees.



   ELEVATION CERTIFICATE. A form used by FEMA to certify building
elevations, confirm compliance with the village floodplain management
ordinance, determine proper insurance premium rates, and to support a request
for a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) or a Letter of Map Revisions based on
fill (LOMR-F).



   EROSION. The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water
or wave action.



   EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS. Organizations which are exempt from this chapter
per the ILCS including state, federal or local units of government.



   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK. A manufactured housing park, as
defined by the village zoning ordinance, for which the construction of
facilities to service the manufactured homes to be affixed or buildings to be
constructed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is complete before the effective date of the village’s
initial floodplain management regulations.



   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK. The preparation of
additional sites, as approved by the village and pursuant the then existing
zoning code, by the construction of facilities to service the property upon
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).



   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 CFR
59-79. The independent federal agency that, in addition to carrying out other
activities, administers the NFIP.



   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves,
or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.



   FLOOD FREQUENCY. A period of years, based on a statistical analysis,
during which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or
exceeded.



   FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.



   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). A map prepared by the FEMA that
depicts generalized areas within the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) within
a community. These maps have since been replaced by Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRM) based on a detailed Flood Insurance Study (FIS).



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). A map prepared by FEMA that depicts
the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) within a community. This map includes
insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodway.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations, adopted and published by FEMA.



   FLOODPLAIN. That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground
surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. FLOODPLAINS may also include detached Special Flood Hazard Areas,
ponding areas, etc. The FLOODPLAIN is also known as the SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD
AREA (SFHA). The FLOODPLAINS are those lands within the jurisdiction of the
village that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood. The SFHAs of the village, those parts of unincorporated Will
and Cook Counties that lie within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
village, or those parts of unincorporated Will and Cook Counties that may be
annexed into the village, are generally identified as such on the Countywide
Flood Insurance Rate Map of Will and Cook Counties, Illinois prepared by FEMA
for Will County on panel numbers 17197C0195G, 17197C0212G, 17197C0213G,
17197C0214G, 17197C0218G, 17197C0310G, 17197C0326G, 17197C0327G, 17197C0330G,
17197C0331G, and 17197C0335G dated February 15, 2019; and for Cook County on
panel numbers 17031 C0781 J and 17031 C0782J dated August 19, 2008, and as
amended from time to time.



   FLOODPROOF. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage
to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.



   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form used to certify that a building has
been designed and constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the
flood protection elevation.



   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the base flood or
100-year frequency flood plus two feet of freeboard at any given location in
the SFHA. Outside of the floodplain limits, the water table or 100-year
design water surface elevation of any adjacent stormwater facility, whichever
is higher, plus two feet of freeboard.



   FLOODPROOF. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures of property which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.



   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by FEMA that is used to
certify that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally
dry floodproofed to the FPE.



   FLOODWAY. The portion of the channel and floodplain needed to store and
convey the critical duration 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more
than one-tenth foot increase in flood stage due to the loss of flood
conveyance or storage, and no more than a 10% increase in velocities.



   FREEBOARD. An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation
to provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, unknown
localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects such as those
caused by ice or debris jams.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Registrar;



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district
preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic
district;



      (3)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic
places by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency;



      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places that has been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.



   HYDRAULICALLY EQUIVALENT COMPENSATORY STORAGE. Compensatory storage
either adjacent to the floodplain fill or not located adjacent to the
development but can be shown by hydrologic and hydraulic analysis to be
equivalent to compensatory storage located adjacent to the development.



   HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS. Engineering analysis which
determines expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land
characteristics and rainfall events.



   HYDROLOGICALLY DISTURBED. An area where the land surface has been
cleared, grubbed, compacted, or otherwise modified that changes runoff,
volumes, rates or direction.



   IDNR-OWR. Illinois Department of Natural Resources - Office of Water
Resources.



   INTERMITTENT STREAM. A stream whose bed intersects the groundwater
table for only a portion of the year on the average or any stream which flows
continuously for at least one month out of the year but not the entire year.



   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). Official determination by FEMA that a
specific structure or parcel of land would not be inundated by the base
flood; amends the effective FHBM or FIRM.



   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A letter from FEMA that officially
revises the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations, flood
insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective
FHBM or FIRM.



   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building lowest floor provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The
term manufactured homes also includes park trailers, travel trailers and
other similar vehicles placed on site for more than 180 consecutive days.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.



   MITIGATION. Includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative
effects which floodplain development activities might have on the public
health, safety and welfare. Examples of MITIGATION include compensatory
storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration.
MITIGATION may also include those activities taken to reduce a structure’s
susceptibility to flooding.



   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). A federal program whose
requirements are codified in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations.



   NATURAL. When used in reference to channels means those channels formed
by the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by man.
A natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not
constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or
cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the
area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross-section of the
stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some
natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is
re-established. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural
conditions by man through regrading and revegetation.



   NAVD 88. National American Vertical Datum of 1988, which supersedes the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD).



   NET WATERSHED BENEFIT. A finding that, when compared to the existing
condition, the developed project will do one of the following: substantially
reduce (more than 10%) downstream peak discharges; reduce downstream flood
stages (more than one-tenth of a foot'); or reduce downstream damages to
structures occurring in the pre-development condition. The demonstration of
one of these conditions must be through detailed hydro logic and hydraulic
analysis of watersheds on a regional scale.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures and subsequent improvements for which the
start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the
floodplain ordinance.



   NEW MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK. A manufactured housing park, as defined
by the village zoning ordinance, for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the property on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the village’s initial
floodplain management regulations.



   NGVD. National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929. Reference surface set
by the National Geodetic Survey deduced from a continental adjustment of all
existing adjustments in 1929.



   NON-RIVERINE. Areas not associated with a stream or river such as
isolated depressional storage areas, ponds and lakes.



   NPDES II. Mandated by Congress under the Clean Water Act, the NPDES
Stormwater Program is a comprehensive two-phased national program for
addressing the non-agricultural sources of stormwater discharges which
adversely affect the quality of our nation’s waters. The program uses the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permitting mechanism
to require the implementation of controls designed to prevent harmful
pollutants from being washed by stormwater runoff into local water bodies.



   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM). The point on the bank or shore up to
which the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to
leave a distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of
terrestrial vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily
recognized characteristics.



   PERENNIAL STREAMS. Riverine watercourses whose thalweg generally
intersects the groundwater table elevation sand flows throughout the year.



   PUBLIC BODIES OF WATER. All open public streams and lakes capable of
being navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and
purposes, and all lakes, rivers, and streams which in their natural condition
were capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with
or discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the
borders of the State of Illinois, together with all bayous, sloughs,
backwaters, and submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of
water directly accessible thereto.



   PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT. A flood control project which will be
operated and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to
existing buildings and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic
study of the existing and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in
this definition shall preclude the design, engineering, construction or
financing, in whole or in part, of a flood control project by persons or
parties who are not public agencies.



   PUBLICLY NAVIGABLE WATERS. All streams and lakes capable of being
navigated by watercraft.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER. As defined by the village
zoning ordinance.



   REGIONAL PERMIT. Regional permits are offered for pre-approved projects
which are considered minor projects that are permissible for IDNR-OWR Part
3708 rules for Northeastern Illinois regulatory floodways. A complete listing
of the terms and conditions for specific project types can be obtained from
the IDNR-OWR website.



   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR. A land surveyor registered in the state of
Illinois, under the Illinois Land Surveyors Act (ILCS Ch. 225, Act 330, §§
1 et seq.).



   REGISTERED or LICENSED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. An engineer registered in
the State of Illinois, under the Illinois Professional Engineering Act (ILCS
Ch. 225, Act 325, §§ 1 et seq.).



   REGULATORY FLOODWAY or DESIGNATED FLOODWAY. Those portions of the
floodplain depicted on maps as floodway and recognized by the IDNR-OWR for
regulatory purposes. The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that portion
of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated by OWR,
which is needed to store and convey the existing and anticipated future
100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a one-tenth foot
increase in stage due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more
than a 10% increase in velocities. The regulatory floodway for Hickory Creek,
Hickory Creek Tributaries 1, 2, 3, and A, Jackson Creek, Jackson Creek
Tributary 2, and Forked Creek, within the village, those parts of
unincorporated Will and Cook Counties that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the village, or for those parts of unincorporated Will County
that may be annexed into the village are designated on the Countywide Flood
Insurance Rate Map of Will and Cook Counties, Illinois prepared by FEMA-for
Will County on panel numbers 17197C0195G, 17197C0212G, 17197C0213G,
17197C0214G, 17197C0218G, 17197C0310G, 17197C0326G, 17197C0327G, 17197C0330G,
17197C0331G, and 17197C0335G dated February 15, 2019; and for Cook County on
panel numbers 17031 C0781 J and 17031 C0782J dated August 19, 2008, and as
amended from time to time. To locate the regulatory floodway boundary on any
site, the regulatory floodway boundary should be scaled off the regulatory
flood way map and located on a site plan, using reference marks common to
both maps. Where interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of
the regulatory floodway boundary, the IDNR-OWR should be contacted for the
interpretation. When two floodway maps exist for a waterway, the more
restrictive floodway limit shall prevail.



   REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN. The floodplain as depicted on maps recognized by
FEMA as defining the limits of the SFHA.



   REPAIR, REMODELING, or MAINTENANCE. Development activities which do not
result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any
changes to the dimensions of a structure.



   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.



   RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY. A retention facility stores stormwater
runoff without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage
of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a
flood or storm.



   RIVERINE SFHA. Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek,
intermittent stream, ditch, on stream lake system or any other identified
channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes,
ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank
flooding.



   RUNOFF. The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land
surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.



   SEDIMENTATION. The processes that deposit soils, debris, and other
materials either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or
watercourses.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). Any base flood area subject to
flooding from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, or any other
identified channel, having flood or flood related erosion hazards, or ponding
and shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map as Zone
A, AO, Al-30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V1-V30, VE, V, M, or E.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on
a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.



   STATEWIDE PERMITS. Statewide permits are offered for pre-approved
projects that are considered minor projects which are permissible per the
IDNR-OWR Part 3700 rules. A complete listing of the statewide permits and
permit requirements can be obtained from the IDNR-OWR website.



   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A sediment and erosion
control plan plus all the construction activities to prevent stormwater
contamination and comply with the requirements of the Clean Water Act.



   STRUCTURE. The results of a man-made change to the land constructed on
or below the ground, including the construction, reconstruction or placement
of a building or any addition to a building, roads, signs, billboards, etc.;
installing a manufactured home on a site; preparing a site for a manufactured
home or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cumulative percentage of damage during the life of the building
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. The term includes
repetitive loss buildings.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.



      (1)   Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
improvement of a structure taking place during the life of the building, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value or increases the
floor area by more than 20% of the structure either:



         (a)   Before the improvement or repair is started, or



         (b)   If the structure has been damaged, and is being
restored, before the damage occurred.



      (2)   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure.



      (3)   This term includes structures which have incurred
repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual work done.



      (4)   The term does not, however, include either:



         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to
comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or



         (b)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic
Places, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a historic structure.



   THALWEG. A line along the lowest point in a channel.



   TRANSITION SECTION. Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows
from a narrow cross-section to a wide cross-section or vice versa.



   USABLE SPACE. Space used for dwelling, storage, utilities, or other
beneficial purposes, including without limitation basements.



   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance is presumed to be in
violation until such times as that documentation is provided.



   WATERSHED. All land area drained by, or contributing water to, the same
stream, lake, stormwater facility, or draining to a point.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)



§ 152.003  HOW TO USE THIS CHAPTER.



   (A)   The Village Administrator, with consultation of the Village
Engineer (hereinafter referred to as “Administrative Department”), shall
be responsible for fulfilling all of the duties listed in § 152.125.



   (B)   To fulfill those duties, the Administrative Department first
should use the criteria listed in § 152.004 to determine whether the
development site is located within a floodplain. Once it has been determined
that a site is located within a floodplain, the Administrative Department
must determine whether the development site is within a flood fringe, a
regulatory floodway, or within a SFHA or floodplain on which no floodway has
been identified.



      (1)   If the site is within a flood fringe, the Administrative
Department shall require that the minimum requirements of §§ 152.015
through 152.018 be met.



      (2)   If the site is within a floodway, the Administrative
Department shall require that the minimum requirements of §§ 152.025
through 152.028 be met.



      (3)   If the site is located within a SFHA or floodplain for
which no detailed study has been completed and approved, the Administrative
Department shall require that the minimum requirements of §§ 152.065
through 152.074 be met.



   (C)   In addition, the general requirements of §§ 152.080 through
152.087 shall be met for all developments meeting the requirements of §§
152.015 through 152.018, 152.025 through 152.056, and 152.065 through
152.074. The Administrative Department shall assure that all subdivision
proposals shall meet the requirements of §§ 152.100 through 152.104.



   (D)   If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the
Administrative Department shall review the requirements of §§ 152.115
through 152.118 to make sure they are met. In addition, the Administrative
Department shall complete all notification requirements.



   (E)   In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as
required in this chapter, the Administrative Department may take any and all
actions as outlined in §§ 152.998 and 152.999.



(Ord. 3187,  passed 1-22-19)



§ 152.004  BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.



   (A)   This chapter’s protection standard is based on the
Countywide Flood Insurance Study for Will and Cook Counties dated February
15, 2019 and August 19, 2008 respectively, prepared by FEMA, and as amended
from time to time. If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood
elevation is not available for a particular site, then the protection
standard shall be according to the best existing data available in the
Illinois State Water Survey’s Floodplain Information Repository. When a
party disagrees with the best available data, he or she may finance the
detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with better data
and submit it to IDNR-OWR and FEMA.



   (B)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the
SFHA’s of Hickory Creek, Hickory Creek Tributaries 1, 2, 3, A, Union
Drainage Ditch, Jackson Creek, Jackson Creek Tributary 2, Jackson Branch, and
Forked Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the
Countywide Flood Insurance Study of Will and Cook Counties prepared by FEMA
dated February 15, 2019, and August 19, 2008 respectively. These areas are
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps for Will County on panel numbers
17197C0195G, 17197C0212G, 17197C0213G, 17197C0214G, 17197C0218G, 17197C0310G,
17197C0326G, 17197C0327G, 17197C0330G, 17197C0331G, and 17197C0335G dated
February 15, 2019; and for Cook County on panel numbers 17031 C0781 J and
17031 C0782J dated August 19, 2008, and such amendments to such study and
maps as may be prepared from time to time.



   (C)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the
SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Will County that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be annexed into the
village shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the
Countywide Flood Insurance Study of Will and Cook County, Illinois prepared
by FEMA dated February 15, 2019 and August 19, 2008. These areas are shown on
the Flood Insurance Rate Maps for Will County on panel numbers 17197C0195G,
17197C0212G, 17197C0213G, 17197C0214G, 17197C0218G, 17197C0310G, 17197C0326G,
17197C0327G, 17197C0330G, 17197C0331G, and 17197C0335G dated February 15,
2019; and for Cook County on panel numbers 17031 C0781 J and 1 7031 C0782J
dated August 19, 2008, and such amendments or revisions to such study and
maps as may be prepared from time to time.



   (D)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each
SFHA delineated as an “AH Zone” or “AO Zone” shall be that elevation
( or depth) delineated on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map for Will
County on panel numbers 17197C0195G, 17197C0212G, 17197C0213G, 17197C0214G,
17197C0218G, 17197C0310G, 17197C0326G, 17197C0327G, 17197C0330G, 17197C0331G,
and 17197C0335G dated February 15, 2019; and for Cook County on panel numbers
17031 C0781 and 0782 dated August 19, 2008, and such amendments or revisions
to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time.



   (E)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each
of the remaining SFHAs delineated as an “A Zone” on the Countywide Flood
Insurance Rate Map for Will County on panel numbers 17197C0195G, 17197C0212G,
17197C0213G, 17197C0214G, I7197C0218G, 17197C0310G, 17I97C0326G, 17197C0327G,
17197C0330G, 17197C0331G, and 17197C0335G dated February 15, 2019; and for
Cook County on panel numbers 17031C0781J and 1 7031 C0782J dated August 19,
2008, and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be
prepared from time to time, shall be according to the best existing data
available in the Illinois State Water Survey Floodplain Information
Repository.



      (1)   When no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation
exists, the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine
SFHA shall be determined from a backwater model, such as HEC-RAS, HEC-2,
WSP-2, or a dynamic model such as HIP.



      (2)   The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be
obtained from a hydrologic model, such as HEC-HMS, HEC-1, TR-20, Pond Pack,
or HIP, or by techniques presented in various publications prepared by the
United States Geological Survey for estimating peak flood discharges.



      (3)   For an unmapped extended SFHA (with a drainage area less
than one square mile) which has been identified by the Administrative
Department, the base flood elevation shall be determined by the applicant
utilizing a method approved in this section.



   (F)   In all occasions, regardless of existing flood zone, a
detailed site specific flood study is required for the proposed condition
when any fill is proposed within the floodplain.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)



OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS



§ 152.015  DEVELOPMENT TO BE REGULATED.



   (A)   Only limited development in and/or filling of the flood fringe
will be permitted if protection is provided against the base flood or
100-year frequency flood by proper elevation, and compensatory storage and
other provisions of this chapter are met. No use will be permitted which
adversely affects the capacity of drainage facilities or systems. No new
structures or buildings with basements are permitted within the SFHA as
determined by elevation from an FIS or detailed flood study. All buildable
residential and nonresidential lots must be outside the SFHA for new
development to minimize flood risk associated with base flood and higher
magnitude floods. Subdivisions and Planned unit developments are required to
obtain a Letter of Map Revision from FEMA in accordance with § 152.088.
Permitted developments located within the flood fringe shall meet the
requirements of this section, along with the requirements of §§ 152.080
through 152.087.



   (B)   If the BFE at the site of the proposed development is affected
by backwater from a downstream receiving stream with a larger drainage area,
the proposed development shall be shown to meet the requirements of this
chapter with the receiving stream at both the normal water and BFEs.



   (C)   If the applicant is informed by IDNR-OWR, local governments,
or a private owner that a downstream or upstream restrictive bridge or
culvert is scheduled to be removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional
flood control project is scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or
modified within the next five years, the proposed development shall be
analyzed and shown to meet the requirements of this chapter for both the
existing conditions and the expected flood profile conditions when the
bridge, culvert or flood control project is built, removed or modified as
applicable.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)



§ 152.016  DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not
exempted by state law shall commence any development in the SFHA without
first obtaining a development permit from the Administrative Department.



   (B)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Administrative Department.



      (1)   The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the
site, drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description
for the property and sealed by an Illinois licensed engineer, architect or
land surveyor; existing grade elevations in Mean Sea Level, 1988 adj. datum
or NAVD and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the
location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings.



      (2)   For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement), walk-out and look-out elevations and locations,
and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted plans and the
development will be subject to the requirements of §§ 152.080 through
152.087.



   (C)   Upon receipt of a development permit application, the
Administrative Department shall compare the elevation of the site to the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.



      (1)   Any development located on land that can be shown to
have been higher than the base flood elevation as of the sites first Flood
Insurance Rate Map identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not
subject to the requirements of this chapter.



      (2)   The Administrative Department shall maintain
documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and
certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the
site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification.



   (D)   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed
areas shall be submitted. This plan shall include a description of the
sequence of grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control
measures to be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also
include a description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and
the identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction
maintenance. All erosion and sediment control requirements of the Village of
Frankfort Design Standards Section 2 and NPDES II shall also apply.



   (E)   The Administrative Department shall be responsible for
obtaining from the applicant, copies of all other local, state and federal
permits, approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be required for
this type of activity. The Administrative Department shall not issue a permit
unless all other local, state and federal permits have been obtained.



   (F)   Adequate protection is required for fill slopes exposed to
floodwaters with expected velocities during the occurrence of the base flood
of 5 fps or less by covering them with vegetation undergrowth (grass, vines,
etc.).



   (G)   Adequate protection is required for fill slopes exposed to
floodwaters with expected velocities during the occurrence of the base flood
greater than 5 fps by covering them with stone or rock slope protection or
other material acceptable to the village.



   (H)   A floodplain development permit or approval shall become
invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180
days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned
for a period of 180 days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of
not more than 180 days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable
cause shall be demonstrated.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.017  PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES.



   (A)   No development in the flood fringe shall create a threat to
public health and safety.



   (B)   If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood
or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient
data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for the purpose of
removing the site from the floodplain.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.018  COMPENSATORY STORAGE.



   (A)   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use,
the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill below the
base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and
balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from below
the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Detention volume and
associated berming within the SFHA shall be considered as fill if it occupies
volume that was previously occupied by the base flood.



   (B)   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to one and
one-half times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.



   (C)   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall
be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.



   (D)   All floodplain storage lost below the existing ten-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All
floodplain storage lost above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation.



   (E)   All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse and shall be located adjacent to the development.



   (F)   The fill material shall be homogeneous and isotropic and
compacted to at least 95% (Standard Proctor).



   (G)   Finished grade shall be 4:1 maximum and 1% minimum. Retaining
walls, excluding control structures, are not permitted below the BFE.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)



§ 152.019  CONSTRUCTION OF A BUILDING UNDER A LOMR BASED ON FILL.



   A person who has obtained a Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill that
removes a site in the floodplain due to the use of fill to elevate the site
above the BFE, may apply for a permit from the village to construct the
lowest floor of a building below the BFE in the floodplain. The
Administrative Department shall not issue such a permit unless the applicant
has complied with all the criteria set forth in this section and maintain the
documentation verifying such compliance.



   (A)   Compensatory storage shall be provided per § 152.018.



   (B)   The elevation of the lowest opening in the basement wall
(i.e., window wells, access ways) shall be at or above the Flood Protection
Elevation (FPE).



   (C)   The lowest adjacent grade to the foundation shall be at or
above the FPE, for a minimum distance of ten feet beyond the outside face of
the structure. However, if site conditions are such that this requirement
cannot be met, the Administrative Department may waive the ten-foot minimum
setback if an Illinois licensed P.E. certifies that an alternative method to
protect the building from damage due to hydrostatic pressures has been met.
The certifications shall be in the form of a detailed soils and structural
design analysis, which shall be submitted to the Administrative Department
for review. The Administrative Department may require such additional
documentation as necessary to prove that the proposed shorter setback
distance will keep the structure reasonably safe. In no case shall the
setback distance be less than four feet.



   (D)   The grade around the perimeter of the structure, measured at a
distance of 20 feet from the structure, shall be above the BFE. However, if
site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be obtained, the
Administrative Department may waive the 20-foot minimum setback distance if
an Illinois licensed P.E. certifies that an alternative method to protect the
building from damages due to hydrostatic pressures have been met. A detailed
soils analysis and structural design proving that a shorter setback distance
will keep the structure reasonably safe from flooding, shall be submitted to
the village for review. In no case shall the setback distance be less than
four feet.



   (E)   The ground around the building shall be compacted fill that
meets all requirements of this section and is at least five feet thick under
the basement floor slab. Nothing in this division (E) shall be interpreted to
require the removal or replacement of fill that was placed as part of a
LOMR-F, if such fill consists of material, including soils of similar
classification and degree permeability, such as those classified as CH, CL,
SC or ML according to ASTM standard D-2487, Classification of Soils for
Engineering Purposes.



   (F)   The fill material must be homogeneous and isotropic; that is,
the soil must be all of one material, and the engineering priorities must be
in the same direction.



   (G)   All fill material and compaction shall be designed, certified
and inspected by an Illinois licensed P.E., as warranted by the site
conditions.



   (H)   The basement floor shall be at an elevation that is no more
than five below the BFE.



   (I)   There shall be a granular drainage layer beneath the floor
slab, and minimum of one quarter horsepower sump pump with a backup power
supply shall be provided to remove seepage flow. The pump shall be rated at
four times the estimated seepage rate and shall discharge above the BFE and
away from the building in order to prevent flooding of the basement or uplift
of the floor under the effect of the seepage pressure.



   (J)   The drainage system shall be equipped with a positive means of
preventing backflow.



   (K)   All foundation elements shall be designed to withstand
hydrostatic pressure in accordance with accepted engineering practices.



   (L)   If the applicant is unable to meet all of the requirements set
forth in the preceding divisions of this section, the Administrative
Department may allow the construction of a basement below the BFE only if the
applicant demonstrates that the proposed fill and structure meet the
guidelines and requirements set forth in FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01 and
are reasonably safe from flooding. In order to demonstrate that the proposed
structure is reasonably safe from flooding, the applicant shall submit a
detailed engineering analysis of the proposed fill and foundation wall. The
engineered basement study shall be completed in accordance with the latest
edition of FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01, with the analysis of the fill being
prepared by an Illinois licensed P.E.



   (M)   In order to provide the required compensatory storage on site,
in no case shall the depth of excavation in the front and side yards of the
lot exceed 18 inches, as measured from the previously existing natural grade.
The rear yard shall be permitted to have a greater depth of excavation, if
necessary. All such excavation shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse or storm sewer system. The use of mechanical means
to drain the compensatory storage area will not be permitted.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



OCCUPATION AND USE OF IDENTIFIED FLOODWAY



§ 152.025  USES AND STRUCTURES PERMITTED IN FLOODWAYS TO BE REGULATED.



   This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site
modification or building modification within a regulatory floodway. The
regulatory floodway for Hickory Creek, Hickory Creek Tributaries 1, 2, 3, A;
Jackson Creek, Jackson Creek Tributary 2; and Forked Creek shall be as
delineated on the regulatory floodway maps designated by IDNR-OWR according
and referenced in § 152.002. Only those uses and structures will be
permitted which meet the criteria in this subchapter. All floodway
modifications shall be the minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the
project. Any encroachment, fill, new construction, substantial improvement
and other development within the regulatory floodway is prohibited unless it
has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge. The development shall also meet the requirements of
§§ 152.080 through 152.087.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty see § 152.999



§ 152.026  DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted
by state law shall commence any development in a floodway without first
obtaining a development permit from the Administrative Department.



   (B)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Administrative Department. The application shall include the
following information:



      (1)   Name and address of applicant;



      (2)   Site location (including legal description) of the
property, drawn to scale, on the regulatory floodway map, indicating whether
it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;



      (3)   Name of stream or body of water affected;



      (4)   Description of proposed activity;



      (5)   Statement of purpose of proposed activity;



      (6)   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of
activity;



      (7)   Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject
property if different from the applicant;



      (8)   Signature of applicant or the applicant’s agent;



      (9)   If the applicant is a corporation, the president or
other authorized officer shall sign the application form;



      (10)   If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall
sign the application form; and



      (11)   If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer
shall sign the name of the trustee by him or her as trust officer. A
disclosure affidavit shall be filed with the application, identifying each
beneficiary of the trust by name and address and defining the respective
interests therein.



      (12)   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which
include as a minimum:



         (a)   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity,
name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the
site, graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow;



         (b)   A plan view of the project and engineering study
reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions
of the structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (1988 adjustment)
datum or NAVD, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood
control easements, location of any channels and any existing or future access
roads, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the
proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of water),
regulatory floodway limit, floodplain limit (as determined by both the scaled
limit on the FIRM and the calculated or FIS profile elevation),
specifications and dimensions of any proposed channel modifications, location
and orientation of cross-sections, north arrow, and a graphic or numerical
scale;



         (c)   Cross-section views of the project and engineering
study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal
dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed
elevations, normal water elevation, ten-year frequency flood elevation,
100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphic or numerical scales
(horizontal and vertical);



         (d)   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for
disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of
grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to
be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction
maintenance; all erosion and sediment control requirements of the Village of
Frankfort Design Standards Section 2 and NPDES II shall also apply.



         (e)   A copy of the regulatory floodway map, marked to
reflect any proposed change in the regulatory floodway location.



         (f)   A copy of the Flood Insurance Study profile with
project limits identified.



      (13)   Any and all other local, state and federal permits or
approval letters that may be required for this type of development.



      (14)   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be
submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of §
152.028.



      (15)   If the regulatory floodway delineation, base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project,
the application will not be considered complete until FEMA and IDNR-OWR have
indicated conditional approval of the regulatory floodway map change. No
structures may be built until a Letter of Map Revision has been approved by
FEMA.



      (16)   The application for a structure shall be accompanied by
drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and
existing ground elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any
proposed excavation or filling, and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by
a registered professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land
surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including) basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of §§ 152.080 through
152.087.



      (17)   If the proposed project involves a channel
modification, the applicant shall submit the following information:



         (a)   A discussion of the purpose of and need for the
proposed work;



         (b)   A discussion of the feasibility of using
alternative locations or methods to accomplish the purpose of the proposed
work;



         (c)   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the
impacts the project would have on the physical and biological conditions of
the body of water affected;



         (d)   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the
impacts each feasible alternative identified in § 152.088(B) would have on
the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected;



         (e)   An analysis of the impacts of the proposed
project, considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological
conditions of the body of water affected.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.027  DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENT IN REGARDS TO PERMITS.



   The Administrative Department shall be responsible for obtaining from
the applicant copies of all other local, state, and federal permits and
approvals that may be required for the type of activity described in §
152.026.



   (A)   The Administrative Department shall not issue the development
permit unless all required federal and state permits have been obtained.



   (B)   A registered professional engineer, under the employ or
contract of the village shall review and approve applications reviewed under
this subchapter.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)



§ 152.028  PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES; LIST OF APPROPRIATE USES.



   (A)   The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are
appropriate uses, which will not cause a rise in the BFE, and which will not
create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or
velocity or be a threat to public health and safety and welfare or impair the
natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or
permanently impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction
impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in
this chapter. All buildable residential and nonresidential lots must be
outside the SFHA and floodway for new development to minimize flood risk
associated with base flood and higher-magnitude floods. Subdivisions and
planned unit developments are required to obtain a Letter of Map Revision
from FEMA in accordance with § 152.091.



   (B)   Only those appropriate uses listed in 17 Ill. Adm. Code,
Chapter I, IDNR Part 3708 (Floodway Construction in Northeastern Illinois)
will be allowed. Appropriate uses do not include the construction or
placement of any new structures, fill, buildings, building additions,
buildings on stilts, excavation or channel modifications done to accommodate
otherwise nonappropriate uses in the floodway, fencing (including landscaping
or planting designed to act as a fence) and storage of materials except as
specifically defined below as an appropriate use. The approved appropriate
uses are as follows:



      (1)   Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public
works or private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding,
erosion, or water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife;



      (2)   Structures or facilities relating to the functionally
water dependent uses of, or requiring access to, the water or shoreline, such
as existing pumping and treatment facilities, and facilities and improvements
related to recreational boating, commercial shipping and other functionally
water dependent uses (except for additions to habitable structures on the
site);



      (3)   Storm sewer and treated sanitary treatment plant
outfalls;



      (4)   Underground and overhead utilities;



      (5)   Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail
systems including any related fencing (at least 50% open when viewed from any
one direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including
open air pavilions and toilet facilities (four stall maximum) that will not
block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage;



      (6)   Sheds, boat houses or other non-habitable accessory
structures without toilet facilities to existing buildings that will not
block flood flows, nor reduce floodway storage. Storage of hazardous material
is further prohibited in these structures;



      (7)   Bridges, culverts, roadways, driveways, sidewalks,
railways, runways and taxiway required for crossing the floodway or for
access to other appropriate uses in the floodway and any modification thereto;



      (8)   Parking lots and any modifications thereto and aircraft
parking aprons built at or below ground elevation provided that:



         (a)   The depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency
flood event will not exceed one foot, or



         (b)   The parking lot is accessory to short-term outdoor
recreational facilities and the owner agrees to restrict access during
periods of inundation and agrees to accept liability for all damage caused by
vehicular access during flooding events;



      (9)   Regulatory floodway regrading, without fill, to create a
positive non-erosive slope toward a watercourse;



      (10)   Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing
lawful structures including the construction of water tight window wells,
elevating structures, or construction of floodwalls around residential,
commercial or industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the
floodwall or berm shall be no more than ten feet away from the exterior wall
of the existing structure, and, which are not considered substantial
improvements to the structure;



      (11)   Aircraft parking aprons built at or below ground
elevation where the depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event
will not exceed one foot;



      (12)   Modifications to existing buildings above the BFE that
do not increase the building’s footprint, and which will not block flood
flows. These modifications include fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios and
second story addition. No enclosed floor areas may be built on stilts. If the
building is improved to 50% or more of the market value before the
modification occurred (i.e., a substantial improvement), the building will be
protected from flooding to the flood protection elevation.



      (13)   The replacement, reconstruction or repair of a damaged
building, provided that the outside dimensions of the building are not
increased and, provided that, if the building is damaged to 50% or more of
the building’s market value before it was damaged, the building will be
protected from flooding to or above the 100-year frequency flood elevation.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



ENGINEERING AND MITIGATION CRITERIA FOR APPROPRIATE USES



§ 152.035  APPROPRIATE USES SHALL MEET ENGINEERING AND MITIGATION CRITERIA.



   Within the regulatory floodway as identified on the regulatory floodway
maps designated by IDNR-OWR, the construction of an appropriate use, will be
considered permissible provided that the proposed project meets the following
engineering and mitigation criteria and is so stated in writing with
supporting plans, calculations and data by a registered professional engineer
and provided that any structure meets the protection requirements of §§
152.080 through 152.087.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)



§ 152.036  PRESERVATION OF FLOOD CONVEYANCE SO AS NOT TO INCREASE FLOOD
STAGES UPSTREAM.



   (A)   For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings,
on-stream structures or dams, all effective regulatory floodway conveyance
lost due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and
including the 100-year frequency flood.



   (B)   In calculating effective regulatory floodway conveyance, the
following factors shall be taken into consideration:



      (1)   Regu1atory floodway conveyance.



         K = [1.4863 A RH2/3] / n



         Where:



            n =   Manning’s roughness factor.



            A =   The effective area of the cross-section.



            RH =   The hydraulic radius (ratio of the wetted
area to the wetted perimeter).



(Note: See Open Channel Hydraulics, Ven Te Chow, 1959, McGraw-Hill Book
Company, New York)



      (2)   The same Manning’s “n” value shall be used for
both existing and proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement
with a federal, state, or local unit of government can assure the proposed
conditions will be maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative
to a non-vegetative land cover or vice versa.



      (3)   Transition sections shall be provided and used in
calculations of effective regulatory conveyance. The following expansion and
contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant’s engineer can prove
to IDNR-OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt
transitions may be used with the same efficiency:



         (a)   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a
wider section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate
of one foot horizontal for every four feet (4:1 expansion) of the flooded
stream’s length.



         (b)   When water is flowing from a wide section to a
narrow section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a
rate of one foot horizontal for every one foot (1: 1 contraction) of the
flooded stream’s length.



         (c)   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical
direction, a minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet (10:
1 vertical transition) of stream length shall be used.



         (d)   Transition sections shall be provided between
cross-sections with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the
regulatory floodway delineation on adjacent properties. Transition sections
must be used to determine the effective conveyance areas on adjacent
properties. Cross-sections shall extend at least 100 feet upstream and
downstream of the project limits.



         (e)   All cross-sections used in the calculations shall
be located perpendicular to flood flows.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)



§ 152.037  COMPENSATORY STORAGE; PRESERVATION OF FLOODWAY STORAGE SO AS NOT
TO INCREASE DOWNSTREAM FLOODING.



   (A)   Hydraulically equivalent compensatory storage shall be
provided for any regulatory floodway storage lost due to the proposed work
from the volume of fill or structures placed and the impact of any related
flood control projects.



   (B)   Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to
at least one and one-half times the volume of floodplain storage lost.



   (C)   Artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in head
loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced.



   (D)   The compensatory regulatory floodway storage shall be placed
between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood
elevation. All regulatory floodway storage lost below the existing ten-year
flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood
elevation. All regulatory floodway storage lost above the existing ten-year
flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed ten-year flood
elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse and preferably located adjacent to the development.



   (E)   If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location
of the proposed construction, the applicant’s engineer shall demonstrate to
IDNR-OWR through a determination of flood discharges and water surface
elevations that the compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent.



   (F)   Finally, there shall be no reduction in floodway surface area
as a result of a floodway modification, unless such modification is necessary
to reduce flooding at existing structure.



   (G)   The fill material shall be homogeneous and isotropic and
compacted to at least 95% (Standard Proctor).



   (H)   Finished grade shall be 4: 1 maximum and 1% minimum. Retaining
walls, excluding control structures, are not permitted below the BFE.



   (I)   Adequate protection is required for fill slopes exposed to
floodwaters with expected velocities during the occurrence of the base flood
of 5 fps or less by covering them with vegetation undergrowth (grass, vines,
etc.).



   (J)   Adequate protection is required for fill slopes exposed to
floodwaters with expected velocities during the occurrence of the base flood
greater than 5 fps by covering them with stone or rock slope protection or
other material acceptable to the village.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.038  PRESERVATION OF FLOODWAY VELOCITIES SO AS NOT TO INCREASE STREAM
EROSION OR FLOOD HEIGHTS.



   (A)   For all appropriate uses, except bridges or culverts or on
stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the
average channel or regulatory floodway velocities or stage for all flood
events up to and including the 100-year frequency event.



   (B)   However in the case of bridges or culverts or on stream
structures built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during
normal or flood flows, velocities may be increased at the structure site if
scour, erosion and sedimentation will be avoided by the use of rip-rap or
other design measures.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)



§ 152.041  ON-STREAM STRUCTURES BUILT FOR THE PURPOSE OF BACKING UP WATER.



   (A)   Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 foot
when compared to the existing conditions, for all flood events up to and
including the 100-year frequency event shall be contained within recorded
easements or the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the
channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees
or flood walls or within recorded flood easements. A permit or letter
indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from IDNR-OWR for any
structure built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during
normal or flood flow. All dams and impoundment structures as defined in §
152.002 shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Ill. Adm. Code, Chapter
I, IDNR Part 3702 (Construction and Maintenance of Dams).



   (B)   If the proposed activity involves a modification of the
channel or floodway to accommodate an impoundment, it shall be demonstrated
that:



      (1)   The impoundment is determined to be in the public
interest by providing flood control, public recreation, or regional
stormwater detention;



      (2)   The impoundment will not prevent the migration of
indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of
their life cycle, such as for spawning;



      (3)   The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded
water quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include
gradual bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures, and a
pre-sedimentation basin;



      (4)   A non-point source control plan has been implemented in
the upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as
minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other
pollutants. If there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed,
the municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate
with upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control;



      (5)   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of
§§ 152.025 through 152.056.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.042  FLOODPROOFING OF EXISTING HABITABLE, RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL
STRUCTURES.



   (A)   If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of
the existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing
construction shall be placed no further than ten feet from the outside of the
building.



   (B)   Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be
required for floodproofing activities.



(Ord.3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.043  EXCAVATION IN THE FLOODWAY.



   (A)   When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and
culvert openings, including the modifications to and replacement of existing
bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance for other
appropriate uses, transition sections shall be provided for the excavation.



   (B)   The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used
unless an applicant’s engineer can prove to IDNR-OWR through engineering
calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the
same efficiency:



      (1)   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of
one foot horizontal for every four feet (4:1 expansion) of the flooded
stream’s length;



      (2)   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow
section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of
one foot horizontal for every one foot (1: 1 contraction) of the flooded
stream’s length;



      (3)   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical
direction, a minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet (10:
1 vertical transition) of stream length shall be used;



      (4)   Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland
upstream and downstream of the transition sections.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.044  CHANNEL MODIFICATION.



   If the proposed activity involves a channel modification, it shall be
demonstrated that:



   (A)   There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which
would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of
the body of water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank
stabilization, floodproofing of existing structures, removal of structures
from the floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or the
establishment of a stream side buffer strip or green belt. Channel
modification is acceptable if the purpose is to restore natural conditions
and improve water quality and fish and wildlife habitat;



   (B)   Water quality, habitat, and other natural functions would be
significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat area
may be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an
equivalent degree of natural resource values;



   (C)   The activity has been planned and designed and will be
constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural
conditions of the body of water affected, consistent with the following
criteria:



      (1)   The physical characteristics of the modified channel
shall match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length,
cross-section, slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been
previously modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should
be incorporated into channel modification design, where practical;



      (2)   Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at
both the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they
will prevent erosion;



      (3)   One-sided construction of a channel shall be used when
feasible. Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to
one side of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and
stabilization effects of the vegetation;



      (4)   Clearing of vegetation shall be limited to that which is
essential for construction of the channel;



      (5)   Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no
steeper than 4:1 horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable. Natural
vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank
stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of
alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred
materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, gabions, or construction
rubble should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives;



      (6)   All disturbed areas associated with the modification
shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion
of construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required
to stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the vegetative
cover;



      (7)   If the existing channel contains considerable bottom
diversity such as deep pools, riffles, and other similar features, such
features shall be provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and
flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established,
where appropriate;



      (8)   A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream
end of the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream
water quality;



      (9)   New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and
all items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to
diversion of water into the new channel;



      (10)   There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the
channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless
necessitated by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is
justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project;



      (11)   Unless the modification is for a public flood control
project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage
outside the floodway as a result of the modification; and



      (12)   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of
§§ 152.025 through 152.056.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.045  SEEDING AND STABILIZATION PLAN.



   For all activities located in a floodway, a seeding and stabilization
plan shall be submitted by the applicant.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.046  RESERVED.



§ 152.047  PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECTS.



   For public flood control projects, the permitting requirements of this
section will be considered met if the applicant can demonstrate to IDNR-OWR
through hydraulic and hydrologic calculations that the proposed project will
not singularly or cumulatively result in increased flood heights outside the
project right-of-way or easements for all flood events up to and including
the 100-year frequency event.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)



§ 152.048  GENERAL CRITERIA FOR ANALYSIS OF FLOOD ELEVATIONS.



   (A)   The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the regulatory
floodway study, referenced in § 152.004, must be used for analysis of the
base conditions. If the study data appears to be in error or conditions have
changed, IDNR-OWR shall be contacted for approval and concurrence on the
appropriate base conditions data to use.



   (B)   If the 100-year regulatory floodway elevation at the site of
the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream
receiving stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall
be shown to meet:



      (1)   The requirements of this section for the 100-year
frequency flood elevations of the regulatory floodway conditions; and



      (2)   Conditions with the receiving stream at normal water
elevations.



   (C)   If the applicant learns from IDNR-OWR, local governments, or a
private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to
be removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional flood control project is
scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five
years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the
requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the
expected flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control
project is built.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.049  CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION.



   (A)   If the appropriate use would result in a change in the
regulatory floodway location or the 100-year frequency flood elevation, the
applicant shall submit to IDNR-OWR and to FEMA all the information,
calculations and documents necessary to be issued a conditional regulatory
floodway map revision and receive from IDNR-OWR a conditional approval of the
regulatory floodway change before a permit is issued. A public notice
inviting public comment on the proposed change in BFE or location of the
regulatory floodway will be issued by IDNR-OWR or its designee before a CLOMR
is issued.



   (B)   However, the final regulatory floodway map will not be changed
by IDNR-OWR until as built plans or record drawings are submitted and
accepted by FEMA and IDNR-OWR.



   (C)   In the case of non-government projects, the municipality in
incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall concur with
the proposed conditional regulatory floodway map revision before IDNR-OWR
approval can be given.



   (D)   No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place
until a conditional approval is issued.



   (E)   No further development activities shall take place until a
final Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) is issued by FEMA and IDNR-OWR.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.050  PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER’S SUPERVISION.



   All engineering analyses shall be performed by or under the supervision
of a registered professional engineer.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.051  BUFFER STRIPS.



   For all activities in the floodway involving construction within 25
feet as defined by the Village of Frankfort Design Standards of the channel,
the following criteria shall be met:



   (A)   A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at
least 25 feet of the ordinary high water mark of the channel.



   (B)   Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the
construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be
established upon completion of construction.



   (C)   The use of native riparian vegetation is preferred in the
buffer strip. Access through this buffer strip shall be provided, when
necessary, for stream maintenance purposes.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.052  WHEN CONSTRUCTION MAY PROCEED; RESTRICTIONS.



   After receipt of conditional approval of the regulatory floodway change
and issuance of a permit and a Conditional Letter of Map Revision,
construction as necessary to change the regulatory floodway designation may
proceed but no buildings or structures or other construction that is not an
appropriate use may be placed in that area until the regulatory floodway map
is changed and a final Letter of Map Revision is received. The regulatory
floodway map will be revised upon acceptance and concurrence by IDNR-OWR and
FEMA of the “as built” plans.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-2019)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.053  DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES IN DELEGATED COMMUNITIES REQUIRING STATE
REVIEW.



   For those projects listed below located in a regulatory floodway, the
following criteria shall be submitted to IDNR-OWR for their review and
concurrence and/or permit prior to the issuance of a permit by a community or
county delegated state permitting authority in the floodway:



   (A)   An engineer’s analysis of the flood profile due to a
proposed bridge pursuant to § 152.088.



   (B)   An engineer’s determination that an existing bridge or
culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating
the proposed flood profile, pursuant to § 152.489.



   (C)   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
storage pursuant to §§ 152.036, 152.037, and 152.043.



   (D)   The construction of any IDNR/OWR projects, dams (as defined in
§ 152.002) and all other state, federal or local units of government
projects, including projects of the municipality or county.



   (E)   An engineer’s determination that a proposed bridge affected
by backwater from a downstream receiving stream may be built with a smaller
opening.



   (F)   Projects which revise or establish the floodway and/or flood
profiles.



   (G)   Projects in public bodies of water.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.054  OTHER PERMITS.



   (A)   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a
development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued
unless the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a
permit is not required from IDNR-OWR, issued pursuant to ILCS Chapter 615,
Act 5, §§ 5 et seq.



   (B)   No correspondence from IDNR-OWR shall be required if the
project meets the requirements of Regional Permit 3.



   (C)   No permit from IDNR-OWR shall be required if the IDNR-OWR has
delegated this responsibility to the village.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.055  PERMITS FOR DAMS.



   (A)   Any work involving the construction, modification or removal
of a dam as defined in § 152.002 per 17 Ill. Adm. Code, Chapter I, IDNR Part
3702 (Rules for Construction of Dams) shall obtain an IDNR dam safety permit
prior to the start of construction of a dam.



   (B)   If the Code Enforcement Official finds a dam that does not
have an IDNR-OWR permit, the Code Enforcement Official shall immediately
notify the IDNR-OWR Bartlett Office.



   (C)   If the Code Enforcement Official finds a dam which is believed
to be in unsafe condition, the Code Enforcement Official shall immediately
notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR-OWR Bartlett Office and the Illinois
Emergency Management Agency (IEMA).



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.056  ACTIVITIES THAT DO NOT REQUIRE A REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL
ENGINEER’S REVIEW.



   The following activities may be permitted without a registered
professional engineer’s review. Such activities shall still meet the other
requirements of this chapter, including the mitigation requirements.



   Regional Permit 3, which authorizes, for example, underground and
overhead utilities, storm and sanitary sewer outfalls, sidewalks, patios,
athletic fields, playground equipment and streambank protection activities;
may be permitted without a licensed P.E.’s review. Such activities shall
still meet the other requirements of this chapter, including the mitigation
requirements.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)



OCCUPATION AND USE OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT IDENTIFIED



§ 152.065  DEVELOPMENT IN SFHA OR REGULATED FLOODPLAIN.



   (A)   In SFHA or floodplains, where no floodway have been identified
and no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevations have been
established by FEMA, and draining more than a square mile, development must
meet the requirements of the IDNR-OWR, and no development shall be permitted
unless the cumulative effect of the proposals, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly impede
or increase the flow and passage of the floodwaters nor significantly
increase the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.



   (B)   The applicant shall obtain approval from the IDNR-OWR for all
development any portion of which is located partially or completely within
the regulatory floodplain (without a delineated regulatory floodway) with a
tributary drainage area of one square mile or more.



   (C)   The development shall not singularly or cumulatively result in
an obstruction of flood flows or potential flood damages outside the site due
to an increase in flood heights, velocities, or loss of floodplain area
storage.



   (D)   No new structures or buildings with basements are permitted
within the SFHA as determined by elevation from an FIS or detailed flood
study. All buildable residential and nonresidential lots must be outside the
SFHA for new development to minimize flood risk associated with base flood
and higher-magnitude floods. Subdivisions and planned unit developments are
required to obtain a Letter of Map Revision from FEMA in accordance with §
152.091.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.066  DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.



   (A)   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, not
exempted by state law, shall commence any development in a SFHA or floodplain
without first obtaining a development permit from the Administrative
Department. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Administrative Department. The application shall be
accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing:



      (1)   Property line dimensions;



      (2)   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade
resulting from excavation or filling, sealed by a licensed engineer or
surveyor;



      (3)   The location and dimensions of all buildings and
additions to buildings; and



      (4)   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement)
and walk-out and look-out elevations and locations, of all proposed buildings
subject to the requirements of §§ 152.080 through 152.087.



   (B)   The application for a development permit shall also include
the following information:



      (1)   A detailed description of the proposed activity, its
purpose, and intended use;



      (2)   Site location (including legal description) of the
property, drawn to scale, on the regulatory floodway maps, indicating whether
it is proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;



      (3)   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of
activity;



      (4)   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which
include as a minimum:



         (a)   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity,
name of the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the
site, graphic or numerical scale, and north arrow;



         (b)   A plan view of the project and engineering study
reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions
of the structure or work, elevations in mean sea level (1988 adjustment)
datum or NA VD, adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood
control easements, distance between proposed activity and navigation channel
(when the proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of
water), floodplain limit, location and orientation of cross-sections, north
arrow, and a graphical or numerical scale;



         (c)   Cross-section views of the project and engineering
study reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal
dimensions of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed
elevations, normal water elevation, ten-year frequency flood elevation,
100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphical or numerical scales
(horizontal and vertical); and



         (d)   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for
disturbed areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of
grading activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to
be implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction
maintenance. All erosion and sediment control requirements of the Village of
Frankfort Design Standards Section 2 and NPDES II shall also apply.



      (5)   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be
submitted showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of § 152.069.



      (6)   Any and all other local, state and federal permits or
approvals that may be required for this type of development.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.067  ELEVATION OF DEVELOPMENT SITE TO BE COMPARED TO BASE FLOOD
ELEVATION.



   (A)   Based on the best available existing data according to
federal, state or other sources, the Administrative Department shall compare
the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation. Should no elevation information exist for the site, the
developer’s engineer shall calculate the elevation according to § 152.004.
Any development located on land that can be shown to have been higher than
the base flood elevation as of the sites first Flood Insurance Rate Map
identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the
requirements of this chapter. The Administrative Department shall maintain
documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and
certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the
site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification. The Administrative
Department shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies of
all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals or waivers that may be
required for this type of activity. The Administrative Department shall not
issue the development permit unless all required federal, state, and local
permits have been obtained.



   (B)   All National Flood Insurance Program Map determinations done
by the village shall be assessed a fee in a sum to be determined from time to
time by the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.068  DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENT IN REGARD TO PERMITS.



   The Administrative Department shall be responsible for obtaining from
the applicant copies of all other local, state, and federal permits,
approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type
of activity. The Administrative Department shall not issue the development
permit unless all required local, state and federal permits have been
obtained.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)



§ 152.069  PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES.



   No development in the SFHA, where a floodway has not been determined
shall create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or
velocity or threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural
hydro logic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or impair
existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be
minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this chapter. No
new structures or buildings with basements are permitted within the SFHA as
determined by elevation from an FIS or detailed flood study. All buildable
residential and nonresidential lots must be outside the SFHA for new
development to minimize flood risk associated with base flood and higher
magnitude floods. Subdivisions and planned unit developments are required to
obtain a Letter of Map Revision from FEMA in accordance with § 152.091.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-2019)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.070  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR RIVERINE SFHA.



   Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not been determined,
the following standards shall apply:



   (A)   The developer shall have a registered professional engineer
state in writing and show through supporting plans, calculations, and data
that the project meets the engineering requirements of §§ 152.036 through
152.047 for the entire floodplain as calculated under the provisions of §
152.004. As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering study
performed to determine a floodway and demonstrate that the proposed
development will maintain the existing conditions conveyance, will not
increase flood velocities, will not increase flood profiles and will
compensate for any lost floodplain storage and then submit engineering
studies to IDNR-OWR for acceptance as a regulatory floodway. Upon acceptance
of their floodway by the department, the developer shall then demonstrate
that the project meets the requirements of §§ 152.080 through 152.087 for
the regulatory floodway. The floodway shall be defined according to the
definition in § 152.002.



   (B)   A development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant
first obtains a permit from IDNR-OWR or written documentation that a permit
is not required from IDNR-OWR.



   (C)   No permit from IDNR-OWR shall be required if the IDNR-OWR has
delegated permit responsibility to the Village per 17 Ill. Adm. Code, Chapter
I, IDNR Part 3708 (Floodway Construction in Northeastern Illinois) for
regulatory floodway, per IDNR-OWR’s statewide permit entitled
“Construction in Floodplains with No Designated Floodway in Northeastern
Illinois.”



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.071  PERMITS FOR DAMS.



   (A)   Any work involving the construction, modification or removal
of a dam or an on-stream structure to impound water as defined in § 152.002
per 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702 (Rules for Construction of Dams) shall obtain
an IDNR-OWR permit or letter indicating a permit is not required prior to the
start of construction of a dam.



   (B)   If the Administrative Department finds a dam that does not
have an IDNR-OWR permit, the Administrative Department shall immediately
notify the Dam Safety Section of IDNR-OWR Bartlett Office.



   (C)   If the Administrative Department finds a dam which is believed
to be in unsafe condition, the Administrative Department shall immediately
notify the owner of the dam and the Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster
Agency (ESDA), and the IDNR-OWR Bartlett Office and the Illinois Emergency
Management Agency (IEMA).



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.072  ACTIVITIES PERMITTED WITHOUT REVIEW.



   The following activities may be permitted without a registered
professional engineer’s review or calculation of a base flood elevation and
regulatory floodway. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements
of this chapter:



   (A)   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 2;



   (B)   Barge fleeting facilities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 3;



   (C)   Aerial utility crossings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 4;



   (D)   Minor boat docks meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit No. 5; gravel;



   (E)   Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 6; activities (not involving fill or positive
change in grade) are covered by this permit;



   (F)   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 7;



   (G)   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 8;



   (H)   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 9;



   (I)   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 10;



   (J)   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 11;



   (K)   802.3.11 Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge
widenings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 12;



   (L)   Temporary construction activities meeting conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 13;



   (M)   Special uses of public waters meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 14; and



   (N)   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.073  FLOOD-CARRYING CAPACITY TO BE MAINTAINED.



   The flood-carrying capacity within any altered or relocated watercourse
shall be maintained.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.074  COMPENSATORY STORAGE.



   (A)   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use,
the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or
structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be
compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of
excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation. Detention volume and associated berming within the SFHA shall be
considered as fill if it occupies volume that was previously occupied by the
base flood.



   (B)   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to one and
one-half times the volume of storage lost  due to the fill or structure. In
the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite
or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.



   (C)   All floodplain storage lost below the existing ten-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All
floodplain storage lost above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All such excavations
shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse and shall
be located adjacent to the development.



   (D)   The fill material shall be homogeneous and isotropic and
compacted to at least 95% (Standard Proctor).



   (E)   Finished grade shall be 4:1 maximum and 1% minimum. Retaining
walls, excluding control structures, are not permitted below the BFE.



   (F)   Adequate protection is required for fill slopes exposed to
floodwaters with expected velocities during the occurrence of the base flood
of 5 fps or less by covering them with vegetation undergrowth (grass, vines,
etc.).



   (G)   Adequate protection is required for fill slopes exposed to
floodwaters with expected velocities during the occurrence of the base flood
greater than 5 fps by covering them with stone or rock slope protection or
other material acceptable to the village.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS



§ 152.080  ADDITIONAL PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS.



   (A)   In addition to the requirements found in this chapter, all
properties shall comply with the Will County Stormwater Management Ordinance
(latest version).



   (B)   In addition to the requirements found in §§ 152.015 through
152.018, 152.025 through 152.056, 152.065 through 152.074 for development in
flood fringes, regulatory floodways, and SFHA or floodplains where no
floodways have been identified (Zones A, AO, AH, AE, Al-A30, A99, VO, V1-30,
VE, V, M or E), the following requirements shall be met.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.081  PUBLIC HEALTH STANDARDS.



   (A)   No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers,
flammable liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below
the FPE.



   (B)   New and replacement water supply systems, wells, and sanitary
sewer lines may be permitted providing all manholes or other above ground
openings located below the FPE are watertight.



   (C)   New on-site waste disposal systems, such as septic systems,
are allowed in the regulatory floodplain only if they meet all of the
following conditions:



      (1)   The invert of any wastewater distribution lines shall be
a minimum of two feet above the water surface elevation of the base flow of
any perennial stream;



      (2)   The lateral distance from a ditch, creek, or other
riverine source to the wastewater distribution lines shall be a minimum of 75
feet;



      (3)   The elevation of any areas which are to receive
wastewater distribution shall be above the ordinary high-water mark;



      (4)   The soil of the receiving field shall be of a type
suitable for septic fields;



      (5)   The tank shall be placed out of the floodplain with the
invert of the outlet above the BFE.



      (6)   A permit for the disposal system is approved by the
appropriate jurisdictional authority, namely the County Public Health
Department, IEPA or other.



   (D)   New, substantially improved or replacement wastewater
treatment plants shall have watertight openings for those openings located
below the FPE. Such facilities should be located to avoid impairment to the
facility or contamination of floodwaters during the base flood.



   (E)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and
electric shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.



   (F)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall
be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.



   (G)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed
so not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.082  CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION.



   For all projects involving channel modification, fill or stream
maintenance (including levees), the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse shall be maintained. In addition, the village shall notify
adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Office in writing 30 days
prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the
watercourse.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)



§ 152.083  PROTECTING BUILDINGS.



   (A)   (1)   All existing buildings located within and immediately
adjacent to a 100-year floodplain also known as a SFHA, shall be protected
from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. No new structures or
buildings with basements are permitted within the SFHA as determined by
elevation from an FIS or detailed flood study. All buildable residential and
nonresidential lots must be outside the SFHA for new development to minimize
flood risk associated with base flood and higher-magnitude floods.
Subdivisions and planned unit developments are required to obtain a Letter of
Map Revision from FEMA in accordance with § 152.091.



      (2)   However, existing buildings located within a regulatory
floodway shall also meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards
included in §§ 152.025 through 152.056.



   (B)   This building protection criteria applies to the following
situations:



      (1)   Construction or placement of a new building;



      (2)   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made
to an existing building that increase the floor area by more than 20% or
equal or exceed the market value by 50%. Alteration shall be figured
cumulatively during the life of the building. If substantially improved, the
existing structure and the addition must meet the flood protection standards
of this section;



      (3)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site. This building protection requirements
does not apply to returning a mobile home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage; and



      (4)   Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180
days. This building protection requirement may be met by one of the following
methods set forth in §§ 152.084 through 152.086.



      (5)   Repetitive loss to an existing building.



      (6)   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These
repairs shall be figured cumulatively during the life of the building. If
substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.084  SITE GRADING, FILL, AND BUILDINGS ADJACENT TO SFHA.



   A new residential or non-residential building with a basement may not
be constructed on permanent land fill. New residential or non-residential
buildings within the SFHA, within shaded Zone X and adjacent to SFHA shall be
constructed in accordance with the following:



   (A)   The lowest floor, (including basement), and openings for
walk-out and look-out foundations, shall be at or above the flood protection
elevation. An attached garage for a structure shall be at least one foot
above the BFE.



   (B)   Attendant utility and sanitary facilities for non-residential
structures, shall be designed so that below the FPE, the structures are
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.



   (C)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
deep before compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the
foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection
elevation. The top of the fill shall be at or above the flood protection
elevation. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour. The fill
shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated debris or refuse
materials. The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.085  ELEVATING BUILDINGS.



   An existing residential or non-residential building, substantial
improvement, and associated additions within the SFHA meeting all other
criteria of this chapter may be designed, modified, anchored, or elevated to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure in
accordance with the following:



   (A)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space,
stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters and not subject to damage by buoyancy or hydrostatic pressures of
the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall shall be no more than one foot above grade and consists of a minimum of
two openings. The openings must have a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every one square foot of enclosed are subject to flooding
below the base flood elevation.



   (B)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and
aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize
exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and
floating debris.



   (C)   All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be
constructed of materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor
(including basement, crawlspaces, and walk-out basements) and all electrical,
heating, ventilating, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, utility meters,
and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located at or above the
flood protection elevation and to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding. Water and sewer pipes,
electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps, and other waterproofed
service facilities may be located below the flood protection elevation.



   (D)   No area below the flood protection elevation shall be used for
storage of items or materials.



   (E)   Manufactured homes and travel trailers to be installed on a
site for more than 180 days, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation to
or above the flood protection elevation and securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system; and, shall be anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance
with the Rules and Regulations from the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act
issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code 870. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.



   (F)   Recreational vehicles shall be located outside of all
regulatory floodplain and floodway.



   (G)   The building may be constructed with a crawlspace located
below the flood protection elevation provided that the above conditions are
met as well as the following conditions:



      (1)   The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood
protection elevation must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent
exterior grade.



      (2)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the
interior grade of the crawl to the top of the foundations wall must not
exceed four feet at any point.



      (3)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event.



      (4)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated
above the flood protection elevation.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.086  FLOODPROOFING OF PROPOSED AND EXISTING BUILDINGS.



   (A)   New buildings adjacent to the SFHA and within shaded Zone X
shall be elevated to the FPE. Dry floodproofing for new buildings is not
permitted in lieu of compliance with the FPE requirements.



   (B)   Accessory structures, such as tool sheds, which are not
substantial improvements on an existing single-family lot, may be constructed
with the lowest floor below the FPE in accordance with all of the following
criteria.



      (1)   The building shall not be used for human habitation, nor
have water or sanitary sewer service.



      (2)   All areas below the FPE shall be constructed with
waterproof material. Structures located in a regulatory floodway shall meet
§§ 152.025 through 152.056.



      (3)   The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation and
movement.



      (4)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to the FPE.



      (5)   The building shall be no greater than 600 square feet in
floor size. The building shall meet permanent opening criteria as established
by the Will County Stormwater Ordinance.



      (6)   The building shall be used only for the storage of
vehicles or tools and may not contain basements or other rooms, workshops,
greenhouses, storage of hazardous materials, or similar uses.



      (7)   If located in a designated floodway, the structure shall
be constructed and placed on a building site so as not to block flood flows
nor reduce floodway storage and shall also meet the appropriate use criteria
of § 152.028(B)(6) and all other applicable requirements of this chapter.



   (C)   Any modification to an existing structure with dry
floodproofing shall provide the following:



      (1)   A registered professional engineer or structural
engineer shall certify that the building has been structurally dry
floodproofed below the FPE; the elevation to which the structure was
floodproofed, and the structure and attendant utility facilities are
watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the BFE. Fully enclosed
areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage in an area other than a basement and are subject
to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood
forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be
provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.



      (2)   The building design shall take into account flood
velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the
effects of buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice.



      (3)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity.



      (4)   Levees, berms, flood walls and similar works are not
considered floodproofing for the purpose of this section.



   (D)   Construction of new or substantially improved critical
facilities shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain.
Construction of new critical facilities shall be permissible within the
floodplain if no feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities
constructed within the SFHA shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated or structurally dry floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency
elevation or three feet above the level of the 100-year flood frequency
elevation, whichever is greater. Floodproofing and sealing measures must be
taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by or released
into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of the BFE
shall be provided to all critical facilities.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.087  NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES.



   Existing buildings located within a designated floodway shall also meet
the more restrictive appropriate use standards. Non-conforming structures
located in a regulatory floodway may remain in use, but may not be enlarged,
replaced or structurally altered. A non-conforming structure damaged by
flood, fire, wind or other natural or man-made disaster may be restored
unless the damage equals or exceeds 50% of its market value before it was
damaged, in which case it shall conform to this chapter.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.088  CONSTRUCTION OF NEW BRIDGES OR CULVERT CROSSINGS AND ROADWAY
APPROACHES.



   (A)   The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of
upstream flood stages greater than one- tenth of a foot when compared to the
existing conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year
frequency event; or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained
within the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the
channel banks) such as within the design protection grade of existing levees
or flood walls or within recorded flood easements. If the proposed
construction will increase upstream flood stages greater than one-tenth of a
foot, the developer must contact IDNR-OWR Dam Safety Section for a dam safety
permit or waiver.



   (B)   The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be
calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations
for tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in § 152.004. Bridges
and culverts must be analyzed using any commonly accepted FEMA approved
hydraulic models.



   (C)   Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per § 152.037.



   (D)   Velocity increases must be mitigated per § 152.038.



   (E)   If any work is proposed in, near or over a public body of
water, a permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be
obtained from IDNR-OWR.



   (F)   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge
showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be
submitted to IDNR-OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by §
152.028.



   (G)   All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be
designed per § 152.043.



   (H)   For modification or replacement of existing structures, the
existing structure must first be evaluated in accordance with IDNR-OWR Rules
to determine if the existing structure is a source of flood damage. If the
structure is a source of flood damage, the applicant’s engineer shall
submit justification to allow the damage to continue and evaluate the
feasibility of relieving the structure’s impact. Modifications or
replacement structures shall not increase flood stages compared to the
existing condition for all flood events up to and including the base flood
event. The evaluation must be submitted to IDNR-OWR, for review and
concurrence before a permit is issued. The village shall be copied on all
related correspondence.



   (I)   Construction vehicles shall cross streams by the means of
existing bridges or culverts. Where an existing crossing is not available, a
temporary crossing that has been issued a permit or waiver by IDNR-OWR shall
be constructed in which:



      (1)   The approach roads will be one-half foot or less above
the existing grade.



      (2)   The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without
backing up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any
drainage tile or outfall.



      (3)   The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at
least two feet below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel
shall be non-erosive material, such as rip-rap or gravel.



      (4)   The access road and temporary crossings will be removed
within one year after installation, unless an extension of time is granted by
the village.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.089  RECONSTRUCTION OR MODIFICATION OF EXISTING BRIDGES, CULVERTS,
AND APPROACH ROADS.



   (A)   The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or
modification shall be constructed with no more than one-tenth of a foot
increase in backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood
frequencies up to and including the 100-year event, if the existing structure
is not a source of flood damage.



   (B)   If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a
source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain,
the applicant’s engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the
structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the
effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties.



   (C)   The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing
is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in
accordance with the 17 Ill. Adm. Code, Chapter I, IDNR Part 3708 (Floodway
Construction in Northeastern Illinois) and submitted to the Division IDNR-OWR
for review and concurrence before a permit is issued.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.090  DETENTION FACILITIES WITHIN AND ADJACENT TO THE FLOODPLAIN.



   (A)   Detention facilities located within the regulatory floodplain
are strongly discouraged but may be considered under the following
considerations:



      (1)   Be located above the calculated ten-year flood elevation
(including the normal water level and lower restrictor). On stream or on-line
detention facilities will only be permitted when the precedence has been
established for the upstream portion of the SFHA and a net watershed benefit
is demonstrated by detailed hydrologic and hydraulic analysis. Any structure
constructed across the channel to impound water to meet detention
requirements shall be prohibited on any perennial stream unless part of a
public flood control project with a net watershed benefit. Those streams
appearing as blue on a USGS Quadrangle Map shall be assumed perennial unless
better data is obtained. All cross stream structures for the purpose of
impounding water to provide detention in all cases on perennial and
intermittent streams must demonstrate that they will not cause short term or
long term stream channel instability.



      (2)   Store the required amount of site runoff to meet the
release rate requirement under all stream flow and backwater conditions in
the receiving stream up to the ten-year flood elevation; and



      (3)   Comply with the Village of Frankfort Design Standards
Section 4.03 E-10 updated July 2007 or as amended from time to time.



   (B)   Detention facilities located adjacent to-the regulatory
floodplain shall:



      (1)   Be located above the calculated ten-year flood elevation
(including the normal water level and lower restrictor).



      (2)   Store the required amount of site runoff to meet the
release rate requirement under all stream flow and backwater conditions in
the receiving stream up to the ten-year flood elevation; and



      (3)   Comply with the Village of Frankfort Design Standards
Section 4.03 E-10 updated July 2007 or as amended from time to time.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.091  LETTER OF MAP CHANGES.



   (A)   All buildable residential and nonresidential lots must be
outside the SFHA for new development.



   (B)   Subdivisions and planned unit developments are required to
obtain a Letter of Map Revision prior to the village issuing building permits
for lots identified as lying inside an SFHA based on FEMA’s current
effective FIRM.



   (C)   All final plats of subdivision and final plats of PUD shall
list all lots lying inside the SFHA based on FEMA’s current effective FIRM
and as being permit restricted until the LOMR is approved and copy provided
to the village.



   (D)   Under certain conditions, when engineered earthen fill is
placed within an SFHA to raise the surface of the ground to or above the BFE,
a request may be submitted to FEMA to revise the FIRM to indicate that the
filled land is outside of the SFHA.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS



§ 152.100  FLOOD HAZARDS TO AFFECT LAND MANAGEMENT.



   The Board of Trustees shall take into account flood hazards, to the
extent that they are know in all official actions related to land management,
use and development.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)



§ 152.101  DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS TO BE REVIEWED FOR COMPLIANCE WITH THIS
CHAPTER.



   New development, buildings including homes, subdivisions, manufactured
home parks, annexation agreements, and planned unit developments (PUDs)
within the SFHA shall be reviewed to assure that the proposed developments
are consistent with §§ 152.015 through 152.087 and the need to minimize
flood damage. Plats or plans for new subdivisions, mobile home parks and
planned unit developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a
registered professional engineer that the plat or plans account for changes
in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (ILCS Ch.
765, Act 205, § 2).



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.102  PROPOSALS TO INCLUDE FLOOD ELEVATION DATA.



   Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer
parks, planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home
parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations. Where this
information is not available from existing adopted study, the applicant’s
engineer shall be responsible for calculating the base flood or 100-year
floodway delineation per the definition in § 152.002 and submitting it to
the State Water Survey and IDNR-OWR for review and approval as best available
regulatory data. At a minimum, the following material shall be submitted for
engineering review for all projects including or in close proximity to
regulatory floodplain:



   (A)   FIRM with scaled project limits.



   (B)   FIS profile with project limits.



   (C)   The grading plan, topographic workmap or a floodplain exhibit
and the preliminary and final plats shall include all of the following:



      (1)   Regulatory floodplain shall be delineated from the
current FEMA FIRM, FBFM or LOMR.



      (2)   Regulatory Floodway as delineated on the current
effective regulatory maps scaled using references common to both the map and
the plan.



      (3)   Existing BFE by elevation (determined by FIS profile,
flows and data; elevation or depth from AH or AO zones; or detailed site
specific flood study).



      (4)   Proposed BFE by elevation (determined by detailed flood
study).



      (5)   All plats shall list all lots lying inside the SFHA
based on FEMA’s current effective FIRM and as being permit restricted until
the LOMR is approved and copy provided to the village.



      (6)   Village benchmark used and correlation equation to FEMA
datum (NAVD 1988).



      (7)   All existing and/or proposed buildings and structures
with lowest floor (including basements) and openings (walk-out and look-out)
locations and elevations indicated within the project limits and within 100
feet offsite.



      (8)   Existing and proposed contours and spot elevations.



      (9)   Existing and proposed drainage and utility easements.



      (10)   Erosion and sedimentation control plan/stormwater
pollution prevention plan.



   (D)   The plan set shall also include:



      (1)   Cross section locations.



      (2)   Ten-year and 100-year existing and proposed flood
elevations.



   (E)   The detailed site specific flood study shall include, but not
be limited to:



      (1)   Hydrologic analysis (input and output) using TR-20 or
Pond Pack as developed by Haestad Methods, Inc. If an existing regulatory
model uses the ACOE computer model, HEC-1, that model can be used.



      (2)   Drainage area exhibit utilizing best available contour
information (with location of time of concentration path, soil types and
runoff coefficients).



      (3)   Existing and proposed hydraulic analysis (input and
output) using HEC-2, HECRAS, or WSP-2.



      (4)   Existing and proposed model cross sections.



      (5)   Existing and proposed detailed cross sections.



      (6)   Tabular summary of 100-year flood elevations and
discharges for existing and proposed conditions.



   (F)   Where compensatory storage is permitted, the calculation shall
include:



      (1)   Cross-sections with existing and proposed ten-year and
100-year elevations labeled.



      (2)   Areas of cut and fill above and below the ten-year
elevation.



      (3)   Tabular calculation of total fill, required compensatory
storage and provided compensatory storage.



   (G)   Design computations shall be made by the Design Engineer for
all phases of the project when such computations are required to facilitate
review by the Village Engineer. Said computations shall be neat and legible
and in a form considered acceptable by the Village Engineer. Said
computations shall include, but not necessarily be limited to those listed in
this section of the chapter.



   (H)   Performance security as required by the village.



   (I)   Maintenance and monitoring plan as required by the village.



   (J)   Copy of correspondence and permits relating to floodplain
areas and/or required by federal or state law, including, but not limited to
those issued by FEMA, IDNR-OWR and ACOE (Section 404).



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)  Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.103  NATURAL FEATURES TO BE PRESERVED AND UTILIZED WHENEVER POSSIBLE.



   Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible, the flood plains shall be included within parks,
outlots or other public grounds.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)



§ 152.104  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.



   The Board of Trustees shall not approve any planned unit development
(PUD) or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such
agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)



VARIANCES



§ 152.115  VARIANCES IN REGULATORY FLOOD WAY PROHIBITED; OUTSIDE FLOODWAY
EXCEPTED.



   No variances shall be granted to any development located in a
regulatory floodway as defined in § 152.002. However, when a development
proposal is located outside of the regulatory floodway, and whenever the
standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific development
proposal, the applicant may apply to the village for a variance. The
Administrative Department shall review the applicant’s request for a
variance and shall submit its recommendation to the Board of Trustees.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)



§ 152.116  CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCE.



   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that all
of the following conditions are met:



   (A)   The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;



   (B)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;



   (C)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;



   (D)   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety,
beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation
of a nuisance;



   (E)   There will be no additional public expense for flood
protection, lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief
operation, policing, or repairs to stream beds and banks, road, utilities, or
other public facilities;



   (F)   The provisions of §§ 152.017 and 152.069 shall still be met;



   (G)   The activity is not in a regulatory floodway;



   (H)   The applicant’s circumstances are unique and do not
represent a general problem;



   (I)   The granting of the variance will not alter the essential
character of the area involved including existing stream uses; and



   (J)   All other required state and federal permits or waivers have
been obtained.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)



§ 152.117  APPLICANT TO BE NOTIFIED OF VARIANCE’S EFFECT ON PROBATION.



   The Administrative Department shall notify an applicant in writing that
a variance from the requirements of §§ 152.080 through 152.087 that would
lessen the degree of protection to a building will:



   (A)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage;



   (B)   Increase the risks to life and property; and



   (C)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of this
risks and that he will acknowledge in writing that he assumes the risk and
liability.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)



§ 152.118  VARIANCES MAY BE GRANTED FOR HISTORIC PRESERVATION.



   Variances requested in connection with restoration of a site or
building listed on the National Register of Historical Places or documented
as worthy of preservation by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency may be
granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of §§ 152.116
and 152.117, subject to the conditions that:



   (A)   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure; and



   (B)    The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure
being removed as a certified historic structure.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)



ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT



§ 152.125  DUTIES OF THE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS.



   The Administrative Department shall be responsible for the general
administration and enforcement of this chapter which shall include the
following:



   (A)   Determining the floodplain designation. Check all new
development sites to determine whether they are in a Special Flood Hazard
Area (SFHA). If they are in a SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway,
flood fringe or in a floodplain on which a detailed study has not been
conducted which drains more than one square mile. Check whether the
development is potentially within an extended SFHA (with a drainage area less
than on square mile), indicating that the development would have adverse
impacts regarding storage, conveyance, or inundation which would be the basis
for the applicant being required to delineate the floodplain and floodway and
be subject to the remaining sections of this chapter.



   (B)   Professional engineer review. If the development site is
within a floodway or in a floodplain on which a detailed study has not been
conducted which drains more than one square mile then the permit shall be
referred to a registered professional engineer (P.E.) under the employ or
contract of the village for review to ensure that the development meets the
requirements of §§ 152.025 through 152.056. In the case of an appropriate
use, the P.E. shall state in writing that the development meets the
requirements of §§ 152.025 through 152.056.



   (C)   Dam safety requirements. Dams are classified as to their size
and their hazard/damage potential in the event of failure. Permits for dams
may be required from IDNR/OWR. Contact IDNR/OWR to determine if a permit is
required. If a permit is required, a permit application must be made to
IDNR/OWR prior to the construction or major modification of jurisdictional
dams.



   (D)   Other permit requirements. Ensure that any and all required
federal, state and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit.



   (E)   Plan review and permit issuance. Ensure that all development
activities within the SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the village meet the
requirements of this chapter and issue a floodplain development permit in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other regulations of this
community when the development meets the conditions of this chapter.



   (F)   Inspection review. Inspect all development projects before,
during and after construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and
to ensure they comply with the provisions of this chapter.



   (G)   Elevation and floodproofing certificates. Maintain in the
permit files an elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement, walk-out and lookout foundations) of a residential
or non-residential building or the elevation to which a nonresidential
building has been floodproofed, using a floodproofing certificate, for all
buildings subject to §§ 152.080 through 152.087 for public inspection and
provide copies of same.



   (H)   Records for public inspection. Maintain for public inspection
and furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and regulatory floodway maps,
copies of federal or state permit documents, variance documentation,
Conditional Letter of Map Revision, Letter of Map Revision, Letter of Map
Amendment and “as built elevation and floodproofing or elevation and
floodproofing certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this
chapter.



   (I)   State permits. Ensure that construction authorization has been
granted by the IDNR-OWR, for all development projects subject to §§ 152.025
through 152.074, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to the
village. Upon acceptance of this chapter by IDNR-OWR and FEMA, responsibility
is hereby delegated to the village as per 17 Ill. Adm. Code, Chapter I, IDNR
Part 3 708 for construction in the regulatory floodway and floodplain when
floodways have not been defined in §§ 152.025 through 152.074. However, the
following review approvals are not delegated to the village and shall require
review or permits from IDNR-OWR:



      (1)   Organizations which are exempt from this chapter as per
the Illinois Compiled Statutes;



      (2)   IDNR-OWR projects, dams or impoundment structures as
defined in § 152.002 and all other state, federal or local unit of
government projects, including projects of the village and Will County,
except for those projects meeting the requirements of § 152.056;



      (3)   Approval of the hydraulic calculation for bridges and
culverts; An engineer’s determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, per § 152.089;



      (4)   An engineer’s analysis of the flood profile due to §
152.088;



      (5)   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically
equivalent compensatory storage as indicated in §§ 152.036, 152.037,
152.043;



      (6)   Permit for construction and other activities in public
bodies of water pursuant to 17 Ill. Admin. Code 3708;



      (7)   Any changes in the base flood elevation or floodway
locations; and



      (8)   An engineer’s determination that a proposed bridge
affected by backwater from a downstream receiving stream may be built with a
smaller opening.



   (J)   Cooperation with other agencies. Cooperate with state and
federal floodplain management agencies to improve base flood or 100-year
frequency flood and floodway data and to improve the administration of this
chapter. Submit data to the IDNR-OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions of a
regulatory map within six months whenever a modification of the floodplain
may change the BFE or result in a change to the floodplain map. Submit
reports as required for the National Flood Insurance Program. Notify FEMA of
any proposed amendments to this chapter.



   (K)   Promulgate regulations. Promulgate rules and regulations as
necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, subject
however to the review and approval of IDNROWR and FEMA for any chapter
changes.



   (L)   Damage determinations. Make damage determinations of all
damaged buildings in the SFHA after a flood to determine substantially
damaged structures.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-190



§ 152.126  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   (A)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available
information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study.



   (B)   Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by
man-made or natural causes.



   (C)   This chapter does not imply that development, either inside or
outside of the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage.



   (D)   This chapter does not create liability on the part of the
village or any officer, consultant or employee thereof for any flood damage
that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
made lawfully there under.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)



§ 152.127  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.



   (B)   Where this chapter and other ordinances, easements, covenants,
or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.



   (C)   This chapter is intended to repeal the original ordinance or
resolution which was adopted to meet the National Food Insurance Program
regulations, but is not intended to repeal the resolution which the village
passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)



§ 152.998  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or
conditions of a variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this
chapter. Upon due investigation, the Administrative Department may determine
that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exist. The
Administrative Department shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.



   (B)   If such owner fails, after ten days notice, to correct the
violation, the village may make application to the Circuit Court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order
as the Court deems necessary to secure compliance with the chapter.



   (C)   The village may record a notice of violation on the title to
the property.



   (D)   The Administrative Department shall inform the owner that any
such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and,
therefore, may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be
suspended.



   (E)   Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such
other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)



§ 152.999  PENALTY.



   No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any
grading, excavation or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in
violation of any terms of this chapter. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each
day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is
committed, continued, or permitted shall constitute a separate offense. Upon
conviction of any such violation, such person, partnership, or corporation
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $750 for each offense per day.
In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any person,
partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be required to restore the site to the condition exiting
prior to commission of the violation, or to bear the expense of such
restoration.



(Ord. 3187, passed 1-22-19)



CHAPTER 153:  DEDICATION OF SCHOOL AND PARK SITES



Section



General Provisions



   153.01   Regulations part of Official Village Plan



   153.02   Requirements of other ordinances



   153.03   Introduction



   153.04   Successors



   153.05   Indemnification



Criteria for Requiring Dedication of Land for School Sites



   153.15   Land requirements and population ratio



   153.16   Calculation of land donation



   153.17   Calculation for cash in lieu of land



   153.18   School classification and size of school site



   153.19   Density formula



   153.20   School plat review



Payments and Land Contributions



   153.30   Time of conveyance of payment



   153.31   Land donation



   153.32   Land donation requirements



   153.33   Cash contributions in lieu of a school site



   153.34   Combined land donations and cash contributions



   153.35   Letter of credit or cash contribution in lieu of land
dedication



   153.36   Distribution of contributions



   153.37   Waiver



   153.38   Private agreements



   153.39   Annexations



Dedication of Park Sites and Payments of Fee in Lieu Thereof



   153.50   Introduction



   153.51   Criteria for requiring park and recreation land dedication



   153.52   Contributions in lieu of park sites



   153.53   Density formula



   153.54   Procedure for making contributions



   153.55   Reservation of additional land



   153.56   Combining with adjoining developments



   153.57   Topography and grading



   153.58   Improved sites



   153.59   Title to sites



   153.60   Sale of land; proceeds



   153.61   Annexations



 



   153.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.01  REGULATIONS PART OF OFFICIAL VILLAGE PLAN.



   This chapter is hereby incorporated as a part of the official village
plan.



(Ord. 1500, passed 3-6-95)



§ 153.02  REQUIREMENTS OF OTHER ORDINANCES.



   Where any other ordinance of the village requires a larger amount of
property for school sites in a particular subdivision or planned unit
development than the subdivider or developer of a planned unit development is
required to dedicate by virtue of the provisions of this chapter, such other
ordinance shall prevail and be complied with.



(Ord. 1500, passed 3-6-95)



§ 153.03  INTRODUCTION.



   As a condition of approval of any final plat of subdivision or a
planned unit development that is intended to be used or capable of being
used, entirely or in part, for residential purposes, the applicant,
subdivider, builder, property owner, or a developer (hereafter collectively
referred to as “developer”) will be required to dedicate land for school
sites, to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the
development, or to pay a cash contribution in lieu of actual land dedication,
or a combination of both at the option of the village, in accordance with the
criteria and formula set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 2172, passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.04  SUCCESSORS.



   In the event the village, or any of the school districts shall cease
being in existence, then this chapter shall be binding upon and inure to the
benefit of the successor municipality, or school district, as the case may
be, whose boundaries include the applicable subdivision, or planned unit
development.



(Ord. 2172, passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.05  INDEMNIFICATION.



   (A)   As a condition precedent to the village requiring any
developer to contribute any land or cash in lieu of land or combination of
cash and land to any school district, or park district each school district
or park district shall execute and deliver to the village an indemnification
agreement in a form approved by the village which among other things provides
such district will indemnify and hold the Village of Frankfort, its
President, Board of Trustees, officers, officials, employees, staff, agents
and representatives and their respective representatives, successors and
heirs harmless from any claims, demands, suits, proceedings, settlements,
orders, judgments and decisions of any type which has any reasonably logical
or factual relationship to this chapter including but not limited to:



      (1)   The studies and methodologies for determination of any
contributions.



      (2)   Objection or appeal process or determination.



      (3)   Collection or payment of any funds to benefit school
districts.



      (4)   The refund, credit for or return of funds or
reconveyance of land related to this chapter.



      (5)   The dedication of any land to benefit any district.



      (6)   The use of any land or funds required under this chapter.



   (B)   In addition, the school district(s) or park district will pay
all of the village's reasonable attorneys, expert witnesses, staff, and all
other related fees, costs and expenses, provided that prior to incurring any
significant fees, the village shall consult with the affected districts. The
foregoing indemnity shall not apply to willful misconduct on the part of the
village. If any district fails to execute and deliver the indemnification
agreement, the village is under no obligation to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.



(Ord. 2172, passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING DEDICATION OF LAND FOR SCHOOL SITES



§ 153.15  LAND REQUIREMENTS AND POPULATION RATIO.



   The ultimate number of students to be generated by a subdivision or
planned unit development shall bear directly upon the amount of land required
to be dedicated for school sites. The land dedication requirement shall be
determined by dividing (i) the estimated number of children in each of the
school age classifications set forth in the table in § 153.19 below that
will be generated by the proposed subdivision or planned unit development by
(ii) the maximum recommended number of students that can be served in each
such school classification as stated in § 153.18, and then multiplying the
foregoing derived quotient by (iii) the minimum recommended number of acres
for a school site of each such school classification as provided in § 153.18.



(Ord. 2172, passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.16  CALCULATION OF LAND DONATION.



   The product derived by the immediately foregoing multiplication
calculation in § 153.15 shall constitute the number of acres for elementary,
middle, and high school purposes in order to have sufficient land for school
sites to serve the estimated number of increased children in each such school
classification as a result of the development of the proposed subdivision or
planned unit development.



(Ord. 2172, passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.17  CALCULATION FOR CASH IN LIEU OF LAND.



   When the required land contribution calculated above is too small to be
practical for use as a school site or when the available land is
inappropriate for a school site, or when the development requires
improvements or additions to existing school sites, the village shall require
the developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the land dedication
required. The required amount shall be the product of the number of required
acres that are not being dedicated to the school district multiplied by the
fair market value of improved land, as provided in § 153.33.



(Ord. 2172, passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.18  SCHOOL CLASSIFICATION AND SIZE OF SCHOOL SITE.



   These requirements for acreage shall be presumed as the appropriate
acreage requirements and shall be used in calculating any cash in lieu of
land dedication herein. School classifications, maximum numbers of students
per school classification and minimum size of school sites within the village
shall be determined in accordance with the following criteria:



 


School Classification by Grades

 

Maximum Number of Students for each such School Classification

 

Minimum Number of Acres of Land for each School Site of such Classification



Elementary Schools, Grades K - 5
 
600 Students
 
11 Acres


Junior High Schools, Grades 6 - 8
 
700 Students
 
29 Acres


High Schools, Grades 9 - 12
 
1,500 Students
 
45 Acres



 



(Ord. 2172, passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.19  DENSITY FORMULA.



   (A)   The following table shall be used in calculating the amount of
required dedication of acres of land or the cash contribution in lieu of
land. It is recognized that population, density, age distribution and local
conditions may change over the years, and the specific formula for the
dedication of land, or the payment of fees in lieu thereof, as stated herein,
is subject to periodic review and amendment if necessary.



   TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIM4TE POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT CHILDREN PER
UNIT



 



Type of Unit
 
A
 
B
 
C
 
D
 
E
 
F
 
G


Pre-School

0 - 4 Years
 
Elementary Grades

K - 5

5 - 10 Years
 
Junior High Grades

6 - 8

11 - 13 Years
 
Total Grades

K - 8

5 -13 Years
 
High School Grades

9 - 12

14 - 17 Years
 
Adults

18 Years +
 
Total Per Dwelling Unit


Detached Single Family
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


2 bedroom
 
0.113
 
0.136
 
0.048
 
0.184
 
0.02
 
1.7
 
2.017


3 bedroom
 
0.292
 
0.369
 
0.173
 
0.542
 
0.184
 
1.881
 
2.899


4 bedroom
 
0.418
 
0.53
 
0.298
 
0.828
 
0.36
 
2.158
 
3.764


5 bedroom
 
0.283
 
0.345
 
0.248
 
0.593   
 
0.3
 
2.594
 
3.77


Attached Single- Family
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


1 bedroom
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
1.193
 
1.193


2 bedroom
 
0.064
 
0.088
 
0.048
 
0.136
 
0.038
 
1.752
 
1.99


3 bedroom
 
0.212
 
0.234
 
0.058
 
0.292
 
0.059
 
1.829
 
2.392


4 bedroom
 
0.323
 
0.322
 
0.154
 
0.476
 
0.173
 
2.173
 
3.145


Apartments
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Efficiency
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
1.294
 
1.294


1 bedroom
 
0
 
0.002
 
0.001
 
0.003
 
0.001
 
1.754
 
1.758


2 bedroom
 
0.047
 
0.086
 
0.042
 
0.128
 
0.046
 
1.693
 
1.914


3 bedroom
 
0.052
 
0.234
 
0.123
 
0.357
 
0.118
 
2.526
 
3.053




 



   (B)   A bedroom as used in this table shall include any room which
may be used for bedroom purposes, such as a den, study, loft or extra room
located on any floor in a dwelling unit which may be converted into a
permanent sleeping area and is not clearly identified for some other specific
purpose such as a kitchen (one per unit), dining room (one per unit), living
room (one per unit), family room (one per unit) and bathrooms. The final
determination of the number of bedrooms for any residence in a development
shall be made by the Village Administrator, or his or her designee. A
developer may file an original and ten copies of a written appeal including
arguments and supporting documents from the Village Administrator or his or
her designee's decision pertaining to the number of bedrooms in any residence
in a development within 30 days after the date of this decision. The
developer shall concurrently serve a copy of the appeal on the Village
Administrator, the affected school district clerk(s) and superintendent(s) in
the manner provided herein. Failure to timely appeal in accordance with this
provision shall bar an appeal or an objection at a later time on this
determination.



   (C)   For purposes of this section, service shall be made either by
personal service or by certified United States mail return receipt requested
accompanied with an affidavit fully describing the name, position, method,
and date of service. Pending appeal, the developer shall pay the school
contributions based on the initial determination of the village. Any affected
school district shall have the right, but not the obligation, to file an
original and ten copies of its response to the developer’s objection with
the Village Clerk within 30 days after receipt of the objection by the school
district. The school district(s) shall serve a copy of its response upon the
Village Administrator and the developer by personal service or certified mail
and file an affidavit of such service all as provided above.



   (D)   Based upon the parties written submittals, the Corporate
Authorities shall either affirm, reverse, reverse in part, or affirm in part,
the Village Administrator's, or his or her designee’s, bedroom
determination. The Corporate Authorities’ decision on the determination of
the number of bedrooms for a residence in a development shall be utilized by
the village to determine the developer’s land donation or cash contribution
obligations under this chapter.



(Ord. 2172, passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.20  SCHOOL PLAT REVIEW.



   The developer shall transmit copies of each subdivision plat or planned
unit development to the applicable school district at the same time as the
initial plan or plat for this development is transmitted to the village for
its review. Within 21 days after its receipt of the initial plan/plat, the
school district shall submit its written recommendations for land dedication
or cash in lieu thereof for this proposed development to the village, with a
copy to the developer.



(Ord. 2172, passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



PAYMENTS AND LAND CONTRIBUTIONS



§ 153.30  TIME OF CONVEYANCE OR PAYMENT.



   Time of dedication of land or payment of contribution in lieu of land.



   (A)   Land shall be dedicated to the appropriate school district or
districts, within 30 days after recording the final plat of subdivision or
plat for a planned unit development.



   (B)   Contributions of cash in lieu of or in combination with land
for each lot shall be paid prior to the issuance of the building permit
subject to the security required in § 153.35. However, all contributions
must be paid regardless of the issuance of building permits within two years
after the date of final plat or planned unit development approval. No
building permit shall be issued for a development until the developer has
dedicated the land, paid the cash in lieu of land, or combination of both in
full.



(Ord. 2172, passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.31  LAND DONATION.



   (A)   Location. School sites shall be located in accordance with
plans adopted by the applicable school district. For purposes of this
chapter, schools may be located within two miles of the village corporate
limits, provided that any such schools actually serve students who reside in
the village.



   (B)   Site suitability. Prior to the closing of the purchase of any
land for development, the due diligence practice of developers is to secure
soil boring data, soil compaction test results, environmental,
archaeological, drainage, wetlands, engineering studies, data and information
and other studies necessary to evaluate the suitability of the proposed
development site (the “development documents”). If any district
contemplates locating a school on the proposed development site, the
developer, at its sole cost, shall provide its already prepared development
documents, and prepare any additional development documents, that pertain to
the proposed school site to the applicable school district to enable the
school district to determine the suitability of the proposed to be dedicated
land for school site purposes. The applicable school district shall have the
right to reject any site which in the district’s sole determination, is not
suitable for school site purposes. If a school district rejects a proposed
site, the developer shall provide an alternative site, or if an additional
site is unavailable, then the developer shall provide cash in lieu of the
land dedication in accordance with this chapter.



   (C)   Improved land. For purposes of this chapter, IMPROVED LAND
shall be defined as vacant, entitled, fully improved land, which includes,
but is not limited to improved streets with curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street
lights, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, electricity, potable water, gas,
telephone, and communication utilities, such as cable and internet, available
at the property lines, and fine grading and grass seed. Sanitary sewer and
water mains shall be appropriately sized for a school and extended to each
school site within a right-of-way or easement designated by the village.
Sidewalks shall be provided along all street frontages. At least 20% of the
perimeter of the site shall have frontage on not less than two streets. The
site shall be developed to the standards set forth in the village ordinances.



   (D)   Additional developer requirements. Any developer that
dedicates land to a school district shall comply with the requirements for
land donations contained in § 153.32.



   (E)   Reservation of additional land. Where the Comprehensive Plan
of the village calls for a larger size school site(s) in a particular
proposed subdivision or planned unit development than the developer is
required to dedicate, the land needed beyond the developer’s contribution
shall, if determined by the  Corporate Authorities, be reserved for
subsequent purchase by the village or other public body designated by the
village provided that such acquisition is made within one year from the date
of approval of the final plat.



   (F)   Combining with adjoining developments. Where the subdivision
or planned unit development is less than 40 acres, a school site which is to
be dedicated should, where possible, be combined with dedications from
adjoining developments in order to produce usable school sites without
hardship on a particular developer.



   (G)   Unnecessary land. When, in the opinion of the school district
holding title to any parcel of land dedicated under this chapter, any such
parcel has become unnecessary or unsuitable or inconvenient, such parcel may
be sold as provided by applicable statutory authority and the proceeds shall
be held in trust by such school district, solely for such uses as are
provided for in this chapter, and the proceeds shall be subject to the
ten-year commitment for expenditure requirements from and after the date when
the land is converted to cash proceeds.



(Ord. 2172, passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.32  LAND DONATION REQUIREMENTS.



   Developers that donate land under this chapter to a school district
shall comply with the following requirements:



   (A)   Archaeological and environmental audit and indemnification.



      (1)   Prior to conveyance to a school district of any land,
the intended school district shall be furnished with (i) an archaeological
report that examines the existence of subsurface items of historical
significance and (ii) an environmental risk audit prepared by an
environmental professional meeting the minimum requirements of ILCS Ch. 415,
Act 5, § 22.2(j)(6)(E)(iii) certified to and acceptable to the grantee
assuring the grantee that there are no “hazardous substances” or
“underground storage tanks” (as hereinafter defined) on, under, to or
from the property. This environmental audit shall be what is commonly
referred to as a Phase I Environmental Audit, which shall meet the minimum
requirements for a Pre-Acquisition Audit as set forth in ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5,
§ 22.2(j)(6)(E)(v) (the “Phase I Audit”). In the event the Phase I audit
does not conclude that there is no presence or likely presence of a release
or substantial threat of a release of hazardous substance(s) or pesticide or
the presence of an underground storage tank on, under, to or from the
property, the developer shall furnish a Phase II Environmental Audit which
meets the minimum requirements for a Pre-Acquisition Phase II Environmental
Audit as set forth in ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 22.2(j)(6)(E)(vi), including a
soil toxicity analysis and recommendation from the environmental professional
meeting the minimum requirements of ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, §
22.2(j)(6)(E)(iii) which concludes that there is no presence or likely
presence of a release or substantial threat of a release of hazardous
substances on, under, to or from the subject property, and certifying that in
the judgment of the environmental professional there is no reasonable
probability that the land contains any hazardous substances in violation of
any federal or state environmental standards.



   In the event said Phase II Environmental Audit and/or soil toxicity
analysis discloses the presence or likely presence of a release or a
substantial threat of a release of any hazardous substances or the presence
of an underground storage tank at, on, under, to or from the land to be
conveyed, the developer shall first cause all such hazardous substances and
underground storage tanks to be removed at its sole cost and expense in
accordance with all federal, estate and local environmental laws, rules and
regulations and furnish the intended grantee with an unconditional “No
Further Remediation Letter” (i.e., without restriction or reference to a
site safety plan for future excavation and/or construction of and removing
soil contamination on the site) from the governmental agencies having
jurisdiction over the clean up prior to conveyance of any of the land to the
intended grantee. Prior to the conveyance of the land, the developer and the
owner of the land to be conveyed, shall execute and deliver to the intended
school district, an environmental indemnification agreement in form approved
by the applicable school district’s attorney, agreeing to defend, indemnify
and hold the village, its President and Board of Trustees, officers,
officials, employees, agents, successors and assigns, and the applicable
school district and its respective President, Board of Trustees, officers,
officials, employees, agents, successors and assigns, harmless from and
against any and all liability, claims, damages, causes of action and expenses
arising out of the presence of any hazardous substances or underground
storage tanks (hereinafter defined) in, under or upon the land to be conveyed
prior to the date of conveyance.



      (2)   The term HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE shall mean any substance,
material, waste, gas or particulate matter which is regulated by any local
governmental authority, the State of Illinois, the United States Government,
or which is



         (a)   Defined as a “hazardous waste,” “hazardous
material,” “hazardous substance,” “extremely hazardous waste,” or
“restricted hazardous waste” under any provision of Illinois law;



         (b)   Petroleum;



         (c)   Asbestos;



         (d)   Polychlorinated biphenyl;



         (e)   Radioactive material;



         (f)   Designated as a “hazardous substance” pursuant
to the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.;



         (g)   Defined as a “hazardous waste” pursuant to the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (“RCRA”), 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et
seq.;



         (h)   Defined as a “hazardous substance” pursuant to
the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, 42
U.S.C. §§ 9601 et seq.;



         (i)   Defined as a “hazardous substance” under
Illinois Environmental Protection Act (IEPA), ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, §§ 1, et
seq.;



         (j)   Any matter giving rise to liability under any
common law theory based on nuisance or strict liability; and



         (k)   Any substance or material defined or designated as
hazardous or toxic waste, hazardous or toxic materials, a hazardous or toxic
substance, or other similar term by any federal, state or local environmental
statute, regulation or ordinance presently in effect or that may be
promulgated in the future as such statutes, regulations or ordinance may be
amended from time to time through the closing.



      (3)   The term UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK shall mean and include
all underground storage tanks as defined in Section 9001 of the RCRA, 42
U.S.C. § 6991, and for purposes of this chapter, shall additionally mean and
include all underground storage tanks specifically excluded under
subparagraphs (a) through (i) of Section 9001 of RCRA, and shall also include
any such tanks which would be included in Section 900 l(i) of RCRA but for
the fact that they contain hazardous wastes.



   (B)   Soil conditions. The developer, at its own expense, shall
provide to the school district soil boring data, soil compaction test results
and such other engineering studies, data and information pertaining to the
proposed school site, which the school district may request to enable it to
determine the suitability of the proposed land dedication for school site
purposes. The school district shall have the right to reject any site which
the school district determines, in accordance with sound engineering
practices, is not suitable for school site purposes. Soil conditions shall
meet the following requirements:



      (1)   On sites (or those portions of the sites) not requiring
fill, the soils shall have a bearing of no less than 3,000 pounds per square
foot for building areas, parking lot areas and other areas that will be
required to support structures. All open space areas that will be used for
sport fields, dry bottom detention facilities or other open space uses, the
soils shall have a bearing of no less than 2,500 pounds per square foot. No
minimum soil support values are required for areas that will accommodate
wetlands, flood plains, riparian ways or wet bottom detention facilities.



      (2)   On sites (or portions of the sites) requiring fills,
only clean clay soil materials with an unconfined compression strength of
2,500 pounds per square inch (prior to compaction) (“clean clay fill”)
shall be placed in compacted layers of not more than 12 inches each within
five feet of the approved subgrade for the site as determined by the final
engineering plans therefor approved by the Village Engineer. For fill below
said five feet of compacted clay, only clean clay fill or “Clean
Construction of Demolition Debris” as defined in Section 3.160 of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Act (ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.160) may be
used to fill the site, except that in no event shall reclaimed asphalt
materials be used as fill material. The fill materials shall be compacted to
a minimum of:



         (a)   Ninety-five percent of modified proctor for those
areas of the site that will support buildings, parking lots and other
structures;



         (b)   Ninety percent of modified  proctor  sport 
fields,  dry  bottom  detention facilities or other open space uses;



         (c)   Fills shall be placed in lifts no greater than 12
inches thick;



         (d)   One compaction test will be required for each 12
inch lift of fill and for every 10,000 square feet of surface area filled;



         (e)   The village shall receive copies of the compaction
tests for each lift prior to the placement of the next lift; and



         (f)   The filled area shall be graded in a uniform
manner in order to provide a surface that will drain freely and not pocket
water.



      (3)   In addition:



         (a)   Soils shall not differ from those naturally
occurring;



         (b)   Soils shall not offer any restriction to the
ultimate use of the property;



         (c)   Topsoil shall be spread evenly and lightly
compacted to a minimum depth of six inches over the entire site;



         (d)   Topsoil must be good, friable soils with good
tillage and shall be without any admixture of subsoil, clay, gravel, stones,
debris, refuse, sand or other subsurface elements;



         (e)   Topsoil shall not be placed in a muddy or frozen
condition;



         (f)   Topsoil shall contain no toxic substances which
may be harmful to plant growth; and



         (g)   Topsoil shall be spread no later than the
placement of topsoil on the first lot adjacent to the site.



   (C)   Topography and grading.



      (1)   The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site
as well as its surroundings must be suitable for its intended purpose.
Wetlands and flood plains may be accepted for school district ownership and
maintenance, but shall not serve as a credit toward the required dedication,
unless agreed to in writing by the school district. Storm water detention
areas shall not be accepted for ownership and maintenance, and the portion of
a detention area designed to function primarily as a component of the storm
water control system shall not serve as a credit toward the required school
site dedication, unless agreed to by the school district. Wetlands, flood
plains, detention areas, retention areas and areas of steep slope shall not
be accepted as school sites and shall not serve as a credit toward the
required school site cash contribution in lieu of land dedication, unless
agreed to in writing by the school district.



      (2)   In addition, the following site conditions and
preparation standards shall be met:



         (a)   Slope:



            1.   Should  not  vary  greatly  in 
appearance  from  existing and adjacent slopes;



            2.   Optimum slopes range from 2% minimum to 5%
maximum. No less than 2% slope is acceptable under any circumstances;



            3.   Maximum allowable slope is 10%, except under
special conditions where greater slopes are desirable to enhance the use of
the site; and



            4.   On-site drainage patterns shall be designated
and constructed to ensure flow toward swales and drainage away from active
areas.



         (b)   Grading:



            1.   Rough grading shall be completed at time of
rough grading of adjacent contiguous area;



            2.   Grading shall comply with village approved
plans;



            3.   Subgrade shall be graded and compacted so it
will parallel finished grade;



            4.   Subgrade material shall be loosened and fine
graded to a depth of two to four inches. All stones over four inches in size,
sticks, debris, rubbish and other foreign substances shall be removed; and



            5.   Finished grades shall be uniform in slope
between points for which elevations have been established.



         (c)   Seeding:



            1.   All proposed school sites shall be seeded and
an acceptable stand of grass or vegetation established prior to dedication of
the area;



            2.   Seeding shall be completed during the fall or
spring planting times, depending upon the recommended seed planting
specifications;



            3.   Seeding shall be on moderately dry soil on a
seed bed which will easily accept and nurture germination of seeds;



            4.   Seeding shall be watered sufficiently so that
the vegetation becomes reasonably established; and



            5.   The developer shall be responsible for making
necessary reparations to the site caused by erosion or other damage.
Reparations shall be completed prior to acceptance of the site.



   (D)   Closing documents.



      (1)   Title to sites. Title to all sites shall be evidenced by
an ALTA survey certified and a title insurance policy for the benefit of the
affected school district or districts in the amount of the land value
demonstrating insurable title to such land free and clear of all encumbrances.



      (2)   Real estate taxes. The developer shall be responsible
for the payment of all real estate taxes to the date of conveyance, including
any agricultural roll back taxes which might be extended or levied against
such sites, for any tax years or periods prior to the time of conveyance.



      (3)   Conveyance. All sites shall be conveyed either by
warranty or trustee’s deed to the applicable school district or conveyed
directly to the Regional Board and School Trustees for the benefit of the
school district. The developer shall be responsible for conveying good,
merchantable title to such sites, and shall be responsible for payment of all
real estate taxes to the date of conveyance, including any agricultural roll
back taxes which might be extended or levied against such sites, for any tax
years or periods prior to the time of conveyance.



(Ord. 2172, passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.33  CASH CONTRIBUTIONS IN LIEU OF A SCHOOL SITE.



   The cash contributions in lieu of school sites derived in § 153.15
shall be held by the recipient school district solely for use in the
acquisition of land for a school site to serve the immediate or future needs
of students from that subdivision or development or for site improvements to
any existing school site which already serves such needs, which include
school buildings or other infrastructure necessitated and specifically and
uniquely attributed to the development, subdivision or planned unit
development in question.



   (A)   Use of cash contributions. Infrastructure under this chapter
shall be liberally construed to the maximum extent permitted by law and shall
include, but shall not be limited to the following:



      (1)   The development of parking lots, sidewalks, traffic
signals, connections with sewer, water and electrical lines, playgrounds,
recreation grounds, and athletic fields.



      (2)   The purchase of any material, goods or equipment
necessary to the development and construction.



      (3)   The construction of buildings, additions to existing
school buildings, remodeled or renovated instructional or non-instructional
spaces and the purchase or lease of prefabricated classroom



units to be used at a school site. Instructional and classroom equipment
incorporated into the school buildings or grounds so as to become fixtures.
FIXTURE shall mean such instructional and classroom equipment which is
permanently affixed or attached to a school building, or imbedded in school
grounds, by means of cement, plaster, nails, bolts, screws, or other similar
method, such that the equipment is not removable without damage to the
building or land.



   (B)   Fair market value.



      (1)   The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be based on
the fair market value of the acres of improved land, as defined in §
153.31(C). It has been determined that the present fair market value of
vacant entitled land plus improvements and graded land located in that
portion of the village within the corporate limits of:



         (a)   Frankfort Community Consolidated School District
157-C, Will County, Illinois is $130,000.



         (b)   Summit Hill School District 161-C, Will County,
Illinois is $90,000.



         (c)   Peotone Community Unit School District 207-U, Will
County, Illinois is $85,000.



         (d)   Matteson Elementary School District 159, Cook
County, Illinois is $85,000.



      (2)   2004 fair market value. The fair market value shall be
automatically adjusted in accordance with division (C) of this section.



   (C)   Annual adjustment of fair market value. The 2004 fair market
value identified in division (B)(2) above and subsequent appraisals accepted
and approved by the village as provided herein above shall be automatically
adjusted on July 1 of each calendar year, commencing on July 1, 2006. The
adjustment of the 2004 fair market value shall be based on the greater of the
following calculation in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) herein, which
calculation and information shall be submitted in writing by the school
districts to the village, provided that the school districts are not required
to submit a new appraisal, as provided in division (C)(3), each year.
Notwithstanding the information provided by other school districts, each
school district may, at its own discretion, provide any of the information
below, which the specific school district determines properly reflects the
increase in fair market value for its district. The districts shall use their
best efforts to provide this information to the village at least 60 days
prior to July 1:



      (1)   “CPI” of the United States Department of Labor
adjustment. The 2004 fair market value multiplied by a fraction, the
numerator of which is the “All Items” Consumer Price Index for Urban
Consumers (1982-84 = 100) for Chicago, Illinois, published by the United
States Department of Labor’s Bureau of Labor Statistics (“CPI”) for the
month of December preceding the year of adjustment and the denominator of
which is the CPI for the month of December preceding the month of adjustment.
If any index is calculated from a base different from the base period 1982-84
= 100, such index shall be converted to a base period of 1982-84 = 100 by use
of a conversion factor supplied by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. If the CPI
is discontinued or replaced, such other governmental cost of living index or
computation which replaces the CPI shall be used in order to obtain
substantially the same result as would be obtained if the CPI had not been
discontinued or replaced.



      (2)   Equalized assessed valuation adjustment by the County
Clerks of Will  and Cook Counties, Illinois. A calculation prepared by the
district, which is based on the extension documentation prepared by the
County Clerk of Will County, or if the property is located in Cook County,
the County Clerk of Cook County which establishes the annual percentage
increase in equalized assessed valuation of land for each township in the
village.



   (D)   Appraisal. In addition to the annual adjustments provided in
division (C)(1) and (C)(2) above, the school districts may from time to time
provide the village with an appraisal of the fair market value of entitled,
improved land in the village, as defined in § 153.31(C), as determined by an
appraisal prepared and certified by a member of the Appraiser Institute
submitted by the school districts and approved by the Corporate Authorities.
This appraised value shall become fair market value upon review, approval and
acceptance by the Corporate Authorities of the village.



   (E)   Objections. A developer may object to the fair market value
provided by this chapter in accordance with this division (E). If a developer
fails to object within 30 days after village approval of a final plat of
subdivision or the approval of a final plat or a planned unit development,
whichever is earlier, such developer waives any and all right to raise an
objection at a later time to the fair market value.



      (1)   Documentation for objections to fair market value of
land. The developer shall, at its sole cost, file its objection containing:



         (a)   An appraisal prepared and certified by a member of
the Appraiser Institute showing the fair market value of entitled improved
land, as defined in § 153.31(C), in the area of the development;



         (b)   An engineer’s estimate of probable cost for mass
grading and the public and site improvements for the proposed development as
provided in this chapter; and



         (c)   Such other documents it deems establishes the fair
market value of entitled and improved land in the area of development.



      (2)   Submittal of objection documents to interested parties.
The developer shall file an original and ten copies of its objection with the
Village Clerk and concurrently serve a copy of the objection upon the Village
Administrator and the affected school district’s board secretary and
superintendent by either certified United States mail return receipt
requested or by personal service and provide to the Village Clerk with
evidence by affidavit of the method, date or service and persons served and
if applicable mailing receipts of such service.



      (3)   Interested parties’ right to submit documentation. Any
affected school district shall have the right, but not the obligation, to
file a response to the developer’s objection with the Village Clerk within
30 days after receipt of the objection by the school district. The school
district(s) shall serve a copy of its response upon the Village Administrator
and the developer by personal service or certified mail and file an affidavit
of such service all as provided above.



      (4)   Disposition of objection. The Corporate Authorities or a
hearing officer designated by it shall conduct a hearing on the objection no
earlier than 45 days after the developer files its written objection (to the
Corporate Authorities). At the hearing the developer and its representatives
and the  affected school district(s) and its representative will be allowed
an opportunity to be heard. Based on the documents submitted by the parties
and the information from the hearing, the Corporate Authorities shall make a
final legislative determination of the fair market value of an acre of
improved land applicable to the proposed development. This determination
shall only apply to the proposed development and not to the general fair
market value provided in this chapter. Nothing in this division (E) shall be
construed as limiting or preventing the Corporate Authorities from utilizing
the provisions for fair market value as previously established in this
chapter.



   (F)   Non-use of cash contributions. If any portion of a cash
contribution in lieu of school site, is not committed for expenditure for the
purposes set forth herein within ten years after the date of receipt, it
shall be refunded to the owners of record of all lots, except lots dedicated
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, in the subdivision for which such
contribution was made. The refund shall be paid to the person who is the
owner of record on the day which is the tenth anniversary of the receipt of
such contribution. The amount of the refund due to each lot owner shall be
equal to the amount the lot owner actually paid, or if such information is
not available, then the amount of the original contribution, divided by the
total number of lots in the subdivision (excluding only those lots which were
dedicated pursuant to this chapter) for which such contribution was made.



(Ord. 2172, passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.34  COMBINED LAND DONATIONS AND CASH CONTRIBUTIONS.



   There may be situations in subdivisions or planned unit developments
when a combination of land dedication and a contribution in lieu of land are
both necessary. These occasions may arise when:



   (A)   Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the
location for a school site and that portion of the land within the
subdivision falling within the school location shall be dedicated as a site
as aforesaid, and a cash contribution shall be required in lieu of any
additional land that was required to be dedicated;



   (B)   A major part of the school site has already been acquired and
only a small portion of land is needed from the development to complete the
site. The remaining portions shall be required by dedication, and a cash
contribution in lieu thereof shall be required equal to the difference
between the fair market value of the land donated and the fair market value
of the land to be donated; or



   (C)   An affected school district makes a determination that a
combination of land and cash in lieu of land is in the district’s best
interest and such district provides a written request to the Corporate
Authorities to that effect, which the Corporate Authorities approve. The
combination of dedicated land and cash in lieu of land shall be in proportion
to the amount the developer is required to provide in accordance with this
chapter.



(Ord. 2172, passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.35  LETTER OF CREDIT OR CASH CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF LAND DEDICATION.



   To secure the payment of contribution of cash in lieu of land
dedication affecting plats approved for development and in addition to all
other requirements of the village, the developer shall post with the
benefitting taxing district cash or a letter of credit in the amount of 110%
of the estimated cash contribution for the development as exclusively
determined by the taxing district and approved by the Village of Frankfort.
If a letter of credit is issued, it must be issued by a sound financial
institution with offices located in the State of Illinois using a letter of
credit form approved by the village.



(Ord. 2172, passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.36  DISTRIBUTION OF CONTRIBUTIONS.



   All contributions of money received by the village under this chapter
shall be distributed quarterly to the appropriate school district.



(Ord. 2172, passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.37  WAIVER.



   An individual school district may waive all rights to contributions
under this chapter. The Village Administrator shall be notified of such
waiver. Such waiver shall not affect the rights of other school districts
under this chapter, unless a party to such agreement.



(Ord. 2172, passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.38  PRIVATE AGREEMENTS.



   In addition to terms contained in an annexation or pre-annexation
agreement that allow for the payment of additional fees to a school district,
an individual school district may enter into a private agreement with a
developer who is subject to the provisions of this chapter. Such private
agreement shall place no responsibility or liability upon the village for the
enforcement of any of the provisions or terms contained therein.
Specifically, in the event of such an agreement, the village shall not
enforce the requirement for payment of funds to such individual school
district prior to the issuance of a building permit. The school district
shall take full responsibility for collection of funds and for monitoring the
status of the building permit.



(Ord. 2172, passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.39  ANNEXATIONS.



   In conjunction with any annexation intended for residential
development, the developer shall make the following contributions, which
shall be incorporated into all annexation and pre-annexation agreements
between the village and a developer:



   (A)   Land or cash in lieu. A donation of land and/or cash donations
as required by this chapter as from time to time amended and the provisions
of this chapter shall be incorporated in any annexation or pre-annexation
agreements governing such land or cash in lieu of land.



   (B)   Additional school facilities fee. It is the policy of the
village to encourage developers to meet with representatives of the affected
school district to determine if any additional school facilities fees, or
other contributions separate from and in addition to the land dedications or
cash in lieu payments required by this chapter, are necessary as a result of
the impact of the development on the school district.



(Ord. 2172, passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



DEDICATION OF PARK SITES AND PAYMENTS OF FEE IN LIEU THEREOF



§ 153.50  INTRODUCTION.



   As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, or of a
final plat of a planned unit development, each subdivider or developer will
be required to dedicate land for park and recreational purposes, to serve the
immediate and future needs of the residents of the development, or cash
contributions in lieu of actual land dedication, or a combination of both,
based on the recommendation of the public body which will be the recipient of
the contribution, but subject to final determination of the Village Board, in
accordance with the criteria and formula in this subchapter.



(Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.51  CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING PARK AND RECREATION LAND DEDICATION.



   (A)   Requirements and population ratio.



      (1)   The ultimate density of a proposed development shall
bear directly upon the amount of land required to be dedicated for park
sites. The total requirement shall be ten acres of land per 1,000 of ultimate
population. The required ten acres may be allocated by the Village Board, in
its discretion, based upon the following criteria:



 

Types of Parks
 
Minimum Acres per Recreation Area
 
Size Range
1,000 People




Mini or Vest Pocket Park
 
0.20 acres
 
Not applicable


Playlot
 
0.5 to 2.9 acres
 
0.5


Neighborhood Playground
 
3 to 4.9 acres
 
1.5


Neighborhood Park and School to 6.9

Acres per Junior High School
 
5 acres per Elementary School
 
Not applicable


Neighborhood park
 
7 to 14.9 acres
 
1.5


Playfield
 
15 to 40 acres or more
 
1.5


Regional Community Park
 
40 to 100 acres or more
 
4




 



      (2)   The ultimate density of a proposed development shall be
calculated in accordance with § 153.53(A).



   (B)   Location. Any comprehensive park and recreation plan adopted
by the park district shall be used as a guideline in locating sites. A park
site adjoining all elementary school sites of not less than five acres may be
considered. A central location which will serve equally the entire
development is most desirable. In large developments these sites can be
located throughout the development according to established standards for
park area distances.



(Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.52  CONTRIBUTIONS IN LIEU OF PARK SITES.



   (A)   Criteria for requiring a contribution in lieu of park sites.
The village shall require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash
contribution in lieu of or in combination with the land dedication required
when so determined by the park district that would be the recipient of the
land, subject to final village approval. The cash contributions in lieu of
park and recreation land dedication shall be held in trust by the relevant
park district, solely for the acquisition of park and recreation land as
hereinbefore classified, which will be available to serve the immediate or
future needs of the residents of that subdivision or development or for the
improvement of other existing local park and recreation land which already
serves such needs. Improvement under this section shall be liberally
construed and shall include, but shall not be limited to, the development of:
parking lots; sidewalks; traffic signals; arterial streets; collector
streets; internal roadways; connections with sewer, water and electrical
lines; and streetlights, playgrounds; recreation grounds; athletic fields;
and other recreational facilities. Improvement shall also include excavation
and site preparation, and the purchase of any material goods or equipment
necessary to the development and construction. Improvement shall further
include the construction of buildings and additions to existing park
buildings. If any improvement provided for herein shall require voter
referendum approval under existing statutory authority before such funds may
be lawfully expended, then and in those cases such approval shall be first
obtained. If any portion of a cash contribution in lieu of park and
recreation land dedication, is not expended for the purposes set forth herein
within 20 years from the date of receipt, it shall be refunded to the owners
of record of all lots, except lots dedicated pursuant to the provisions of
this section, in the subdivision for which such contribution was made. The
refund shall be paid to the person who is the owner of record on the day
which is the twentieth anniversary of the receipt of such contribution. The
amount of the refund due to each lot owner shall be equal to the amount of
the original contribution, together with accrued interest thereon, divided by
the total number of lots in the subdivision (excluding only those lots which
were dedicated pursuant to this section) for which such contribution was
made. The payment of any refunds shall be calculated, approved and disbursed
exclusively by the park district. The Village of Frankfort shall not be
liable for any refund payments.



   (B)   Fair market value.



      (1)   The cash contributions in lieu of land shall be based on
the fair market value of the acres of land in the area improved as specified
herein, that otherwise would have been dedicated as park and recreation and
school sites. It has been determined that the present fair market value for
park district contributions of such improved land shall be:



         (a)   Frankfort Park District has established an acre
value of $130,000 per acre for park sites, but in no event less than the
amount currently in use for determining contributions in lieu of school sites
for Frankfort Community Consolidated School District 157-C, Will County,
Illinois.



         (b)   Frankfort Square Park District has established an
acre value of $70,000 per acre for park sites.



      (2)   Such figures shall be used in making any calculation
herein unless the subdivider or developer files a written objection thereto.
In the event of any such objection the developer shall submit an appraisal
showing the fair market value of such improved land in the area of his or her
development or other evidence thereof and final determination of based upon
such information submitted by the subdivider or developer and from other
sources which may be submitted to the Village Board by the park district or
others.



(Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.53  DENSITY FORMULA.



   (A)   Park dedications and contributions. The following table of
population density represents current and short-range project trends in
family size for new construction and shall be used in calculating the amount
of required dedication of acres of land for park sites or the cash
contributions in lieu of unless a written objection is filed thereto by the
subdivider or developer. A written objection shall be submitted and processed
in accordance with the same procedures applicable to school site
contributions set forth in § 153.19.



   POPULATION PER UNIT (PARK DONATION)



 



Type of Unit
 
Pre-School

0 - 4 Years
 
Total Grades

K - 8

5 -13 Years
 
High School Grades

9 - 12

14 - 17 Years
 
Adults

18 Years +
 
Total Per Dwelling Unit


Detached Single Family
 
 
 
 
 


   2 bedroom
 
0.113
 
0.184
 
0.02
 
1.7
 
2.017


   3 bedroom
 
0.292
 
0.542
 
0.184
 
1.881
 
2.899


   4 bedroom
 
0.418
 
0.828
 
0.36
 
2.158
 
3.764


   5 bedroom
 
0.283
 
0.593
 
0.3
 
2.594
 
3.77


Attached Single-Family
 
 
 
 
 


   1 bedroom
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
1.193
 
1.193


   2 bedroom
 
0.064
 
0.136
 
0.038
 
1.752
 
1.99


   3 bedroom
 
0.212
 
0.292
 
0.059
 
1.829
 
2.392


   4 bedroom
 
0.323
 
0.476
 
0.173
 
2.173
 
3.145


Apartments
 
 
 
 
 


   Efficiency*
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
1.294
 
1.294


   1 bedroom
 
0
 
0.003
 
0.001
 
1.754
 
1.758


   2 bedroom
 
0.047
 
0.128
 
0.046
 
1.693
 
1.914


   3 bedroom
 
0.052
 
0.357
 
0.118
 
2.526
 
3.053


NOTE: There are only three significant categories provided in this chart.
Because of the similarity of yields of all types of attached single-family,
only one category is provided. The same is true with apartments; thus only
one category.




 



   (B)   Demographic study. In the event a subdivider or developer
files a written objection to the table of estimated ultimate population
listed herein, the subdivider or developer shall submit its own demographic
study showing the estimated population to be generated from the subdivision
or planned unit development, including a detailed explanation of the
methodology used in developing an alternative generation table. The objection
shall be considered as a request for a variance to the subdivision
regulations and will be processed in accordance with the procedures
established under § 153.19. The demographic study shall be reviewed by the
park district which shall be authorized to submit a written statement of
acceptance or rejection of the objection to the plan commission within 21
days of the submittal of the objection to the village. Final determination of
the density formula to be used in such calculations shall be made by the
Village Board based upon its review of the Plan Commission’s recommendation
and the written comments submitted by the park district in response to such
objection. It is recognized that population density, age distribution and
local conditions change over the years, and the specific formula for the
dedication of land, or the payment of fees in lieu thereof, as stated herein,
is subject to periodic review and amendment as necessary.



(Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.54  PROCEDURE FOR MAKING CONTRIBUTIONS.



   (A)   Land contributions. Prior to the time of recording any plat or
development agreement, the park donations, if in the form of land, shall be
made in accordance with this subchapter. For all developments other than
PUDs, the ultimate population and the estimated number of children to be
served in each school classification of the subdivision shall be calculated
on the basis of a mix of bedrooms by dwelling unit type for each residential
zoning district, determined by the village on the basis of the current trends
resulting from actual permits issued in similar developments. For the
purposes of estimating the land donation requirement in PUDs, the bedroom mix
used for single-family detached dwelling units shall be based upon the
bedroom mix for that zoning district which is most representative of the lot
sizes approved, as established by the village on the basis of current trends
resulting from actual building permits issued for such representative zoning
district; and the bedroom mix used for single-family attached and
multiple-family dwelling units shall be based upon the number of units and
mix of bedrooms as indicated on the approved final PUD plat. Such
contribution shall then be subject to cash adjustment upon issuance of the
final building permit in the platted area in accordance with the following
procedures:



      (1)   Upon the issuance of the final building permit within
the platted area, the benefitting taxing district shall calculate the
difference between the contribution or deposit made and the actual
contribution required, based upon the actual building permits issued.



      (2)   The taxing district shall then promptly invoice the
developer for the difference, in the case of a shortfall in the contribution,
and shall provide a refund for the difference in the case of an overage. The
party being invoiced shall make payment to the taxing district within 30 days
of invoice.



   (B)   Cash in lieu of land contributions. Contributions of cash in
lieu of land shall be made at time of building permit issuance and shall be
determined from the following bedroom mixes:



      (1)   For single-family detached dwellings, a three-bedroom
mix throughout the development.



      (2)   For single-family attached and multiple-family dwellings
other than apartments, a two- bedroom mix except that the actual bedroom mix
shall be used for an approved PUD.



      (3)   For apartments, the mix shall be based upon 50% of the
dwelling units being one-bedroom and 50% being two-bedroom units, except that
the actual bedroom mix shall be used for an approved PUD.



   (C)   Adjustment; cash in lieu charge. Upon the issuance of a
building permit within the platted area for a residence having more or less
bedrooms than the number used to calculate the deposit under this subchapter,
an adjustment in the cash in lieu charge based upon the actual bedroom mix
shall be made by an additional charge or refund.



(Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.55  RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND.



   Where the comprehensive plan of the village calls for a larger amount
of the park and recreational land in a particular proposed subdivision or
planned unit development than the developer is required to dedicate, the land
needed beyond the developer’s contribution shall, if so determined by the
Village Board, be reserved for subsequent purchase by the village or park
district provided that such acquisition is made within one year from the date
of approval of the final plat.



(Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.56  COMBINING WITH ADJOINING DEVELOPMENTS.



   For all subdivisions and planned unit developments, public open space
which is to be dedicated should, where possible, be combined with dedications
from adjoining developments in order to produce usable recreation areas
without hardship on a particular developer.



(Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.57  TOPOGRAPHY AND GRADING.



   The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site as well as its
surroundings must be suitable for its intended purposes. Grading on sites
dedicated for park and recreational uses shall not differ greatly from
surrounding land.



(Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.58  IMPROVED SITES.



   All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full service of
electrical, water, sewer and streets (including enclosed drainage,
streetlights, and curb and gutter) as applicable to the locate of the site,
or acceptable provision made therefore. The sidewalks normally included
within the definition of “improved sites” may be delayed due to the delay
time between dedication of any such school sites and construction of school
facilities thereon.



(Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.59  TITLE TO SITES.



   All sites shall be conveyed to the park district either by warranty or
trustee’s deed. The subdivider or developer shall be responsible for
conveying good, merchantable title to such sites, and shall be responsible
for payment of all real estate taxes to the date of conveyance, including any
agricultural rollback which might be extended or levied against such sites,
for any tax years or period prior to the time of conveyance.



(Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.60  SALE OF LAND; PROCEEDS.



   When, in the opinion of the park district holding title to any parcel
of land dedicated under this chapter, any such parcel has become unnecessary
or unsuitable or inconvenient, such parcel may be sold as provided by
applicable statutory authority and the proceeds may be used as provided by
applicable law.



(Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.61  ANNEXATIONS.



   In conjunction with any annexation intended for residential
development, the developer shall make the following contributions, which
shall be incorporated into all annexation and pre-annexation agreements
between the village and a developer;



   (A)   Land or cash in lieu. A donation of land and/or cash donations
as required by this subchapter as from time to time amended and the
provisions of this subchapter shall be incorporated in any annexation or
pre-annexation agreements governing such land or cash in lieu of land.



   (B)   Additional park facilities fee. It is the policy of the
village to encourage developers to meet with representatives of the affected
park district to determine if any additional park facilities fees, or other
contributions separate from and in addition to the land dedications or cash
in lieu payments required by this subchapter, are necessary as a result of
the impact of the development on the park district.



(Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



§ 153.99  PENALTY.



   In addition to all other remedies available by law or equity any
person, owner, developer or subdivider who violates any provision of this
chapter is subject to a fine of not less than $250 and not more than $750 for
each day such violation occurs. Each day shall be considered a separate and
distinct offense.



(Ord. 2172, passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 2265, passed 2-21-06)



CHAPTER 154:  HISTORIC DISTRICT



Section



General Provisions



   154.01   Purpose



   154.02   Definitions



Historic Preservation Commission



   154.10   Composition of Historic Preservation Commission



   154.11   Qualifications



   154.12   Terms



   154.13   Officers



   154.14   Meetings



   154.15   Powers and duties



   154.16   Surveys and research



Landmarks and Historic District Designation



   154.30   Criteria for landmark designation



   154.31   Landmark designation procedures



   154.32   Criteria for Historic District designation



   154.33   Historic District designation procedure



Certificate of Appropriateness



   154.40   Required



   154.41   Exceptions



   154.42   Application requirements



   154.43   Standards for determination



   154.44   Hearing on application



   154.45   Issuance



   154.46   Appeals for denial



   154.47   Findings on appeal



   154.48   Natural destruction or demolition



Valet Parking Services



   154.60   Purpose



   154.61   Definitions



   154.62   Application and licensing



   154.63   Rules and regulations



 



   154.99   Penalty



   Appendix A:Map of Historical District



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 154.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the protection, enhancement,
perpetuation, and use of improvements of special character or historical
interest or value in the interest of health, prosperity, safety, and welfare
of the people of the village by:



   (A)   Providing a mechanism to identify and preserve the historic
and architectural characteristics of Frankfort that represents elements of
the village’s cultural, social, economic, political, and architectural
history;



   (B)   Promoting civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments
of the past as represented in the charm of the historic village;



   (C)   Stabilizing and improving the economic vitality and value of
Frankfort’s landmarks and historic areas;



   (D)   Protecting and enhancing the attractiveness of the village to
buyers, visitors, and shoppers, thereby supporting commerce and providing
economic benefit to the village;



   (E)   Fostering and encouraging preservation, restoration of
structures, areas, and neighborhoods and thereby preventing future urban
blight.



(Ord. 1454, passed 4-18-94; Am. Ord. 1455, passed 5-2-94)



§ 154.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases in this chapter
shall be interpreted giving them the same meaning as they have in common
usage and so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application.



   ALTERATION.  Any act or process that changes one or more of the
exterior architectural features of a structure, including, but not limited to
the erection, construction, reconstruction, or removal of any structure.



   AREA.  A specific geographic division of the village.



   ADDITION.  Any act or process which changes one or more of the
“exterior architectural features” of a structure designated for
preservation by adding to, joining with, or increasing the size or capacity
of the structure.



   BUILDING.  Any structure created for the support, shelter, or
enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind and which is
permanently affixed to the land.



   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.  A certificate from the Historic
Preservation Commission authorizing plans for alternations, construction,
removal, or demolition of a landmark or site within a designated historic
district.



   COMMISSION.  The village Historic Preservation Commission (1890 Theme
Committee).



   COMMISSIONERS.  Voting members of the Historic Preservation Commission.



   CONSTRUCTION.  The act of adding an addition to an existing structure
or the erection of a new principal or accessory structure on a lot or
property.



   DEMOLITION.  Any act or process that destroys in part or in whole a
landmark or site within the historic district.



   DESIGN GUIDELINES.  A standard of appropriate activity that will
preserve the historic and architectural character of a structure or area.



   EIGHTEEN NINETY THEME COMMITTEE (1890 THEME COMMITTEE). The village
Historic Preservation Commission.



   EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE.  The architectural and general
composition of the exterior of a structure including, but not limited to the
kind, color, and the texture of the building material and the type, design,
and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, and appurtenant
elements.



   HISTORIC DISTRICT.  An area designated as a HISTORIC DISTRICT by
ordinance of the Village Board and which may contain within definable
geographic boundaries one or more landmarks and which may have within its
boundaries other properties or structures that, while not of such historic
and/or architectural significance to be designated as landmarks, nevertheless
contribute to the overall visual characteristics of the landmark or landmarks
located with the historic district.



   LANDMARK.  Any building, structure or site that has been



designated as a LANDMARK by ordinance of the Village Board, pursuant to
procedures prescribed herein, that is worthy of rehabilitations, restoration,
and preservation because of its historic and/or architectural significance to
the village.



   OWNER OF RECORD.  The person, corporation, or other legal entity
listed as owner on the records of the County Recorder of Deeds.



   REHABILITATION.  The process of returning a property to a state of
utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient
contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of the property
that are significant to its historic, or architectural heritage.



   REMOVAL.  Any relocation of a structure on its site or to another site.



   REPAIR.  Any change that does not require a building permit, which is
not construction, relocation or alternation.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent or temporary location on or in the ground, including, but without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, buildings, fences, gazebos,
advertising signs, billboards, backstops for tennis courts, radio and
television antennae, including supporting towers, swimming pools, satellite
dishes, solar panels, and wind generation.



   STRUCTURAL CHANGE.  Any change or repair in the supporting members of
a building, structure, roof or exterior walls which would expand the building
in height, width, or bulk of the building.



(Ord. 1454, passed 4-18-94; Am. Ord. 1455, passed 5-2-94)



HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION



§ 154.10  COMPOSITION OF HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.



   The Historic Preservation Commission shall consist of five voting
members, residents of the village, appointed by the Mayor, and approved by
the Village Board.



(Ord. 1454, passed 4-18-94; Am. Ord. 1455, passed 5-2-94)



§ 154.11 QUALIFICATIONS.



   The members must have a demonstrated interest, knowledge and/or
expertise in historic preservation. Members may be selected from professions
such as architectural history, building construction, or engineering,
finance, historical and architectural preservation, neighborhood organizing
or real estate.



(Ord. 1454, passed 4-18-94; Am. Ord. 1455, passed 5-2-94)



§ 154.12  TERMS.



   Members of the Commission shall be appointed for terms of three years.
Of those members first taking office, one shall be appointed for one year,
two for two years, and two for three years. Alternate members shall be
appointed to serve in the absence of or disqualification of the regular
members. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Members shall
serve without compensation.



(Ord. 1454, passed 4-18-94; Am. Ord. 1455, passed 5-2-94)



§ 154.13  OFFICERS.



   (A)   Officers shall consist of a chairman, vice chairman, and a
secretary elected by the Preservation Commission who shall each serve a term
of one year and shall be eligible for reelection, but no member shall serve
as an officer for more than two consecutive years. The chairman shall preside
over meetings. In the absence of the chairman, the vice-chairman shall
perform the duties of the chairman. If both are absent, a temporary chairman
shall be elected by those present.



   (B)   The secretary to the Preservation Commission shall have the
following duties:



      (1)   Take minutes of each Commission meeting;



      (2)   Be responsible for publication and distribution of
copies of the minutes, reports, and decisions of the preservation Commission
to the members of the Preservation Commission;



      (3)   Give notice as provided herein or by law for all public
hearings conducted by the Preservation Commission;



      (4)   Advise the Mayor of vacancies on the Commission and
expiring terms of members; and;



      (5)   Prepare and submit to the Village Board a complete
record of the proceedings before the Commission on any matter requiring
Village Board consideration or action.



(Ord. 1454, passed 4-18-94; Am. Ord. 1455, passed 5-2-94)



§ 154.14  MEETINGS.



   (A)   A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. All
decisions or actions of the Historic Preservation Commission shall be made by
a majority vote of those members present and voting at any meeting where a
quorum exists. Meetings shall be held at regular scheduled times to be
established by resolution of the Commission at the beginning of each calendar
year or at any time upon the Commission at the beginning of each calendar
year or at any time upon the call of the Chairman. There shall be a minimum
of four meetings per year.



   (B)   No member of the Historic Preservation Commission shall vote
on any matter that may materially or apparently affect the property, income
or business interest of that member. No action shall be taken by the
Commission that could in any manner deprive or restrict the owner of a
property in its use, modification, maintenance, disposition, or demolition
until such owner shall first have had the opportunity to be heard at public
meetings of the Preservation Commission, as provided herein. The Chairman,
and in his absence the acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Preservation Commission shall be
open to the public. The Preservation Commission shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records
of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be
immediately filed in the office of the Preservation Commission and shall be a
public record.



(Ord. 1454, passed 4-18-94; Am. Ord. 1455, passed 5-2-94)



§ 154.15  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the following powers
and duties:



   (A)   To adopt its own procedural regulations;



   (B)   To conduct an ongoing survey to identify historically and
architecturally significant properties, structures, and areas;



   (C)   To investigate and recommend to the Village Board the adoption
of ordinances designating properties or structures having special historic,
community, or architectural value as “landmarks;”



   (D)   To investigate and recommend to the Village Board the adoption
of ordinances designating areas as having special historic, community, or
architectural value as “historic districts;”



   (E)   To keep a register of all properties and structures that have
been designated as landmarks or historic districts, including all information
required for each designation;



   (F)   To determine an appropriate system of markers and make
recommendations for the design and implementation of specific markings of the
streets and routes leading from one landmark or historic district to another;



   (G)   To advise owners of landmarks and property or structures
within historic districts on physical and financial aspects of preservation,
renovation, rehabilitation, and reuse, and on procedures for inclusion on the
State or National Register of Historic Places;



   (H)   To inform and educate the citizens of the village concerning
the historic and architectural heritage of the village by publishing and
holding programs and seminars;



   (I)   To hold public hearings and to review applications for
construction, alteration, removal, or demolition effecting proposed or
designated landmarks or structures or historic districts and issue or deny
certificates of appropriateness for such actions. Applicants shall be
required to submit plans, drawings, elevations, and specifications with their
applications;



   (J)   To develop specific guidelines for the alteration, demolition,
construction, or removal of landmarks or property and structures within
historic districts;



   (K)   To review proposed zoning amendments, applications for special
use permits or variances that affect proposed or designated landmarks and
historic districts. Such review shall be made prior to the date of the
hearing by the Planning Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals;



   (L)   To administer on behalf of the village any property of full or
partial interest in real property, including a conservation right as that
term is used in the Illinois Compiled Statutes, which the village may have or
accept as a gift or otherwise, upon designation by the Village Board;



   (M) To accept and administer on behalf of the village upon designation
by the Village Board, such gifts, grants and money as may be appropriate for
the purpose of this chapter;



   (N)   To call upon available village staff members, as well as other
experts, for technical advice;



   (O)   To testify before all boards and commissions, including the
Planning Commission and the Zoning Board of Appeals, on any matter affecting
historically and architecturally significant property and landmarks; and



   (P)   To periodically review the zoning chapter and to recommend to
the Planning Commission and the Village Board any amendments appropriate for
the protection and continued use of landmarks or property and structures
within historic districts.



(Ord. 1454, passed 4-18-94; Am. Ord. 1455, passed 5-2-94)



§ 154.16  SURVEYS AND RESEARCH.



   (A)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall undertake an
ongoing survey and research effort in the village to identify neighborhoods,
areas, sites, structures, and objects that have historic, community,
architectural or aesthetic importance, interest or value. As part of the
survey, the Historic Preservation Commission shall review and evaluate any
prior surveys and studies by any unit of government or private organization
and compile appropriate descriptions, facts and photographs.



   (B)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall identify potential
landmarks and adopt procedures to nominate them in groups based upon the
following criteria:



      (1)   The potential landmarks in one identifiable neighborhood
or district geographical area of the village;



      (2)   The potential landmarks associated with a particular
person, event, or historical period;



      (3)   The potential landmarks of a particular architectural
style or school, or of a particular architect, engineer, builder, designer,
or craftsman;



      (4)   Such other criteria as may be adopted by the
Preservation Commission to assure systematic survey and nomination of all
potential landmarks within the village;



(Ord. 1454, passed 4-18-94; Am. Ord. 1455, passed 5-2-94)



LANDMARKS AND HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATION



§ 154.30  CRITERIA FOR LANDMARK DESIGNATION.



   (A)   The Commission shall, upon investigation as is deems
necessary, make a preliminary determination as to whether a property,
structure, or area possesses the integrity of design, workmanship, materials,
location, setting and feeling and meets one or more of the following criteria:



      (1)   Significant value as part of the historic, heritage or
cultural characteristics of the community, county, state or nation;



      (2)   Its identification with a person or persons who
significantly contributed to the development of the community, county, state
or country;



      (3)   Representative of the distinguishing characteristics of
architecture inherently valuable for the study of a period, type, method of
construction or use of indigenous materials;



      (4)   Notable work of a master builder, designer, architect or
artist whose individual work has influenced the development of the community,
county, state or country;



      (5)   Its unique location or singular physical characteristics
that make it an established or familiar visual feature;



      (6)   Its character as a particularly fine or unique example
of a utilitarian structure, including, but not limited to, farmhouses,
historic commercial buildings, gas stations, or other commercial; structures,
with a high level of integrity or architectural significance;



      (7)   Area that has yielded or may be likely to yield,
information important in history or prehistory.



   (B)   A preliminary determination as to whether a property, a
structure or area meets one or more of the foregoing criteria shall be made
within 15 day of the filing of a nomination with the Commission.



(Ord. 1454, passed 4-18-94; Am. Ord. 1455, passed 5-2-94)



§ 154.31  LANDMARK DESIGNATION PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The application shall be submitted to the Planning Department,
and shall at the minimum include the following:



      (1)   The name and address of the property owner;



      (2)   The legal description and common street address of the
property;



      (3)   A written statement describing the property and setting
forth reasons in support of the proposed designation;



      (4)   Documentation that the property owner has been notified
or consents to the application for designation;



      (5)   A list of significant exterior architectural features
that should be protected; and



      (6)   An overall site plan and photographs of the landmark.
The plan shall also include a front, side and rear elevation drawing.



   (B)   The Commission shall schedule a public hearing after the
filing of an application to the Planning Department.



      (1)   Any person, group of persons or association, including,
but not limited to the Historic Preservation Commission, may request a
Historic Landmark designation for any structure, building or site within the
boundaries of the village which may have historic or architectural
significance as defined by the chapter. The Planning Department shall supply,
upon request, the application forms. Completed forms shall be submitted to
the Planning Department which shall be forwarded to the Commission for their
consideration;



      (2)   Notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the
public hearing shall be sent by mail to owner(s) of record and to the
nominator(s) as well as to the adjoining property owners, not less than 15
nor more than 30 days prior to the date of the hearing. A public notice also
shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the village.
The notice shall state the location of the property and a statement
summarizing how the proposed landmark meets the criteria set forth in
division (B) under criteria for landmark designation;



      (3)   Upon receipt of the application, the secretary of the
Commission shall schedule a public hearing, to be held within 60 days after
preliminary approval of application;



      (4)   During the public hearing, the Commission shall review
and evaluate the application according to the criteria established by
ordinance;



      (5)   If the Historic Preservation Commission finds at the
time that the application merits further consideration, then the Commission
may table the request until its next regularly scheduled meeting;



      (6)   A Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required for
alteration, construction, removal or demolition of a proposed landmark from
the date when the nomination form is presented to the Commission until the
final disposition of the request.



   (C)   A decision shall be made within 30 days following the date of
the closing of the public hearing.



      (1)   Following the closing of the public hearing, the
Secretary of the Commission shall prepare the Commission’s evaluation,
recommendation and all available information for submission to the Village
Board within 30 days.



      (2)   If the Commission decides that the landmark should be
designated, it shall do so by a resolution passed by a majority of the
Commission.



      (3)   The owner(s) of record shall be notified promptly by a
letter containing information of the Commission’s decision.



      (4)   A simple majority vote by the Village Board is necessary
for approval of a landmark designation. If the Village Board approves the
application for a designation, a notice will be sent to the property owner,
the Planning Department, the Building Inspector, the Village Clerk’s office
and recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds. If the Village Board denies
the petition, no petitioner or applicant can file for 90 days to the
Secretary of the Commission.



      (5)   Buildings designated as Historic Landmarks shall be
subject to issuance of Certificates of Appropriateness.



(Ord. 1454, passed 4-18-94; Am. Ord. 1455, passed 5-2-94)



§ 154.32  CRITERIA FOR HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATION.



   (A)   Nominations shall be made to the Historic Preservation
Commission on a form provided by the Commission. A filing fee may be required.



   (B)   The following criteria shall be used by the Historic
Commission in determining the designation of Historic Districts:



      (1)   The Historic District contains one or more landmarks
along with other such buildings, places or areas within its definable
geographic boundaries, which, while not of such historic significance to be
designated as landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual
characteristics of the landmark or landmarks located in such district;



      (2)   A significant number of structures meeting any of the
standards of § 154.31(B);



      (3)   Establishing a sense of time and place unique to the
village; and/or



      (4)   Exemplifying or reflecting the cultural, social,
economic, political or architectural history of the nation, the state or the
village.



   (C)   A preliminary determination as to whether a district or an
area meets one or more of the foregoing criteria shall be made within 60 days
of the filing of a nomination with the Commission.



(Ord. 1454, passed 4-18-94; Am. Ord. 1455, passed 5-2-94)



§ 154.33  HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Petition procedures.



      (1)   Any persons, group of persons, or association,
including, but not limited to, the Historic Commission, may present to the
Commission a petition requesting that a defined geographic area be designated
as an Historic District. The Planning Department shall supply, upon request,
the application forms. Completed forms shall be submitted to the Planning
Department which shall forward them to the Commission for their consideration.



      (2)   Notice of date, time place and purpose of the public
hearing shall be sent by mail to owner(s) of record and to the nominator(s)
as well as to the adjoining property owners, not less than 15 nor more than
30 days prior to the date of the hearing. A public notice also shall be
published in a newspaper having general circulation in the village. The
notice shall state the location of the property and a statement summarizing
how the proposed landmark meets the criteria set forth in § 154.32(B) under
criteria for historic designation.



      (3)   Upon receipt of the application, the Secretary of the
Commission shall schedule a public hearing to be held within 30 days from
after preliminary approval of application.



      (4)   During the public hearing, the Commission shall review
and evaluate the application according to the criteria established by
ordinance.



      (5)   If the Historic Preservation Commission finds at the
time that the application merits further consideration, then the Commission
may table the request until its next regularly scheduled meeting.



   (B)   Nominations.  Nominations shall be filed at the Planning
Department on a form provided by the Commission. Persons wishing guidance or
advice prior to completing an application may contact the staff of the
Planning Commission. A filing fee may be required.



      (1)   The name(s) and address(es) of the property owner(s).



      (2)   A map delineating the boundaries of the area to be
designated.



      (3)   A written statement describing the area and properties
within the proposed Historic District and setting forth reasons in support of
the proposed designation.



      (4)   A list and photographs of significant exterior
architectural features of all properties in the district that should be
protected.



   (C)   A decision shall be made within 30 days following the date of
the closing of the public hearing.



      (1)   Following the public hearing, the Secretary of the
Commission shall prepare the Commission’s evaluation, recommendation and
all available information for submission to the Village Board within 30 days
of closing the public hearing.



      (2)   If the Commission decides that the proposed historic
district should be designated, it shall do so by a resolution passed by a
majority of the Commission.



      (3)   The owner(s) of record shall be notified promptly by a
letter containing information of the Commission’s decision.



      (4)   A simple majority vote by the Village Board is necessary
for approval of a historic preservation designation. If the Village Board
approves the application for a designation, a notice will be sent to the
property owner, the Planning Department, the Building Inspector, the Village
Clerk’s office and recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds that the area
has been designated as such and that building located within the boundaries
of the Historic District shall be subject to issuance of Certificates of
Appropriateness. If the Village Board denies the petition, no petitioner can
file for 90 days to the Secretary of the Commission.



(Ord. 1454, passed 4-18-94; Am. Ord. 1455, passed 5-2-94)



CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS



§ 154.40  ISSUANCE.



   (A)   A Certificate of Appropriateness issued by the Commission
shall be required before a building permit, moving or building permit or
demolition permit is issued for any designated Historic Landmark or any
building, structure or a site or part thereof in the Historic District. It is
required if the building, structure or site will be altered, extended, or
repaired in such a manner as to produce major change in the exterior
appearance of such building or structure.



   (B)   Such major changes include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   Major changes by addition, alteration, maintenance,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, renovation or repair;



      (2)   Any new construction and demolition in whole or in part
requiring a permit from the village;



      (3)   Moving a building;



(Ord. 1454, passed 4-18-94; Am. Ord. 1455, passed 5-2-94)



§ 154.41  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   An exception to the Certificate of Appropriateness shall be
made if the applicant shows to the Commission that a failure to grant the
permit will cause an imminent threat to life, health, or property.



   (B)   Any projects deemed a minor project, or as minor changes to a
structure as determined by staff, are not required to obtain Certificate of
Appropriateness, but will require approval by the Director of Planning.



(Ord. 1454, passed 4-18-94; Am. Ord. 1455, passed 5-2-94)



§ 154.42  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Every application for a demolition permit or a building
permit, including plans and specifications shall be forwarded by the Planning
Department to the Historic Preservation Commission within 15 days following
receipt of the application by the Planning Department.



   (B)   The application for issuance of a Certificate of
Appropriateness must include:



      (1)   Street address of the property involved;



      (2)   Legal description of the property involved;



      (3)   Brief description of the present improvements situated
on the property;



      (4)   A detailed description of the construction, alteration,
demolition or use proposed together with any architect drawings or sketches
if those services have been utilized by the applicant and if not, a
sufficient description of the construction, alteration, demolition, and use
to enable anyone to determine what the final appearance and use of the real
estate will be;



      (5)   Owner’s name;



      (6)   Developer’s name, if different than owner;



      (7)   Architect’s name; and



      (8)   A filing fee is required.



(Ord. 1454, passed 4-18-94; Am. Ord. 1455, passed 5-2-94)



§ 154.43  STANDARDS FOR DETERMINATION.



   The standards in making a determination whether to approve or deny an
application for a Certificate of Appropriateness shall include, but not be
limited to:



   (A)   A reasonable effort should be made to provide a compatible use
for buildings which will require minimum alteration to the building,
structure or site and its environment or to use a property for its originally
intended purpose;



   (B)   The compatibility of proposed new additions or new
construction to the original architecture of the landmark or styles within
the historic district shall be evaluated against the following guidelines:



      (1)   The height of the proposed structure or additions or
alterations should be compatible with surrounding structures;



      (2)   The proportion of the front facade, that is, the
relationship between the width of the building to the height of the front
elevation;



      (3)   The relationship of building mass to the open space
between it and adjoining buildings or structures;



      (4)   The directional expression of a building or structure,
that is, the vertical or horizontal positioning;



      (5)   The roof shape;



      (6)   Architectural details, general design, materials,
textures and colors; and



      (7)   Landscape and appurtenances including signs, fences,
accessory structures and pavings.



   (C)   Deteriorated architectural features should be repaired rather
than replaced, wherever possible. In the event that replacement is necessary,
the new material should closely match the material being replaced in
composition, design, color, texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or
replacement of missing architectural features should be based on accurate
duplication of features, substantiated by historic, physical, or pictorial
evidence, rather than on conjectural designs or the availability of different
architectural elements from other buildings or structures.



   (D)   All buildings should be recognized as products of their own
time. Alterations to create an appearance inconsistent with the actual
character of the building should be discouraged.



   (E)   Many changes to building and environments which have taken
place in the course of time may distinguish the history of the building and
the neighborhood. Such changes should be recognized and respected.



   (F)   Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to buildings
should be done in such a manner that if they were to be removed in the
future, the essential form and integrity of the original building would be
unimpaired.



   (G)   Contemporary design for new buildings in a historic district
and additions to existing buildings or landscaping should not be discouraged
if such design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material, and
character of the district, building, or its environment.



   (H)   The distinguishing original qualities or character of a
building, structure, or site and its environment, shall not be destroyed. The
removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive architectural
feature should be avoided when possible.



   (I)   Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled
craftsmanship that characterize a building, structure, or site shall be
treated with sensitivity.



   (J)   The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with
the gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that
will damage or deface the historic building materials shall not be undertaken.



   (K)   Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve
archaeological resources affected by, or adjacent to, any project.



(Ord. 1454, passed 4-18-94; Am. Ord. 1455, passed 5-2-94)



§ 154.44  HEARING ON APPLICATION.



   (A)   Applications for a Certificate of Appropriateness are
available from the Planning Department. Such applications shall be completed
and submitted to the Planning Department, which shall be forwarded to the
Historic Preservation Commission. The Commission shall schedule a public
meeting for consideration of the application within 15 days nor more than 30
days before a hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation published in the
village.



   (B)   If the Historic Preservation Commission finds at the time that
the application merits further consideration, then the Commission may table
the request until its next regularly scheduled meeting.



(Ord. 1454, passed 4-18-94; Am. Ord. 1455, passed 5-2-94)



§ 154.45  ISSUANCE.



   (A)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall notify the
applicants of their decision within five days after the public meeting. Upon
approval of the application, the Commission shall direct the Planning
Department to issue signed Certificates of Appropriateness to the applicant
with copies forwarded to the Building Inspector.



   (B)   A Certificate of Appropriateness shall be invalid if changes
in the plans reviewed by the Commission are necessary in obtaining a building
permit, or if the building permit issued for the same work becomes invalid.
The Certificate of Appropriateness remains valid for the same period of
validity as the building permit.



   (C)   If the Commission’s decision is to postpone the issuance of
Certificate of Appropriateness for demolition or removal, the Commission
shall notify the owner in writing. During the period set forth for
postponement of the requested action, the Commission shall explore
alternatives to demolition or removal. Such alternatives may include
consultation with private civic groups, interested private citizens and other
public boards or agencies in an effort to find a persuasive means of
preserving the structure. If sale of property is considered a feasible
alternative to the owner, the building must remain on the open market,
dependent on its classification, for the following lengths of time:



      (1)   Designated landmarks:  six months;



      (2)   Historic and architecturally significant building in
historic district: six months;



      (3)   Non-significant buildings located within historic



district: three months;



   (D)   Failure to Reach Agreement. If, after a period not to exceed
the required waiting period, no alternative agreement has been reached with
the applicant, the Commission shall issue a Certificate of Appropriateness
for demolition or removal of the structure in question.



(Ord. 1454, passed 4-18-94; Am. Ord. 1455, passed 5-2-94)



§ 154.46  APPEALS FOR DENIAL.



   (A)   In the event of denial of an application for a Certificate of
Appropriateness, the Commission shall notify the applicant in writing of the
disapproval and the reasons therefore and shall recommend changes, if any, in
the proposed action that would cause the Commission to reconsider its denial.



   (B)   Within 15 days of receipt of the notification of disapproval,
the applicant may resubmit an amended application that takes into
consideration the recommendations of the Historic Preservation Commission.
The application shall be considered to be withdrawn if no written
modification on request for public hearing is received. Within 15 days of
receipt of a written modification, the Commission must either issue the
Certificate of Appropriateness or hold a hearing.



(Ord. 1454, passed 4-18-94; Am. Ord. 1455, passed 5-2-94)



§ 154.47  FINDINGS ON APPEAL.



   In the event of a denial of an application for a Certificate of
Appropriateness, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Village Board,
whose decision in this matter shall be final, subject only to judicial review
as provided by law.



(Ord. 1454, passed 4-18-94; Am. Ord. 1455, passed 5-2-94)



§ 154.48  NATURAL DESTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION.



   (A)   In the case of partial or complete natural destruction or
demolition of a site within a Historic Preservation District or of a
landmark, the owner will be required to obtain a Certificate of
Appropriateness from the Commission prior to reconstruction.



   (B)   Although exact duplication of the previous structure may not
be required, the exterior design of the property shall be in harmony with:



      (1)   The exterior design of the structure prior to damage.



      (2)   The character of the Historic Preservation District.



(Ord. 1454, passed 4-18-94; Am. Ord. 1455, passed 5-2-94)



VALET PARKING SERVICES



§ 154.60  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish requirements for the
operation of valet parking services for businesses located in the Historic
District of the village.  Since most all businesses located in the Historic
District have limited or no off-street parking, valet parking is an
additional means to meet the parking needs of commercial establishments.



(Ord. 1562, passed 3-18-96)



§ 154.61  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   VALET PARKING OPERATOR.  A person who employs one or more attendants
for the purpose of providing a valet parking service or who contracts his own
services, but not in the capacity of employee, to any business establishment,
for the purpose of providing a valet parking service to such establishment.



   VALET PARKING SERVICE.  A parking service provided to accommodate
patrons of any business establishment, which service is incidental to the
business of the establishment, and by which an attendant on behalf of the
establishment takes temporary custody of the patrons’ motor vehicle and
moves, parks, stores or retrieves the vehicle for the patrons’ convenience.



(Ord. 1562, passed 3-18-96)



§ 154.62  APPLICATION  AND LICENSING.



   (A)   Except as provided in § 154.63, no person shall conduct a
valet parking service unless he has a valid valet parking operator license
issued in accordance with this subchapter.  A separate license is required
for each loading area served.



   (B)   Applications for valet parking operator licenses shall be made
to the village.  Each valet parking operator license issued shall be for a
one-year period only, and shall have designated thereon the name and address
of the licensee and the business establishment to be served by the
licensee.  No fee required.



   (C)   Applications for the renewal of a valet parking operator
license shall be made to the village not less than 60 days prior to the
expiration of the license to be renewed.  The fee for a renewal shall be the
same as for a new license.



   (D)   Valet parking operator licenses shall be nontransferable, and
any attempt to transfer a license shall result automatically in the immediate
expiration of the license.



(Ord. 1562, passed 3-18-96)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.63  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No valet parking operator license, or renewal thereof, shall
be issued unless the applicant agrees to park all cars entrusted to him in
legal off-street sites acceptable to the village.



   (B)   No valet parking operator license, or renewal thereof, shall
be issued unless the applicant provides proof to the village that he has
obtained liability insurance covering all locations at which he operates or
seeks to operate in the minimum amounts of $1,000,000 per occurrence for
public liability, and $500,000 per occurrence for property damage.  The
insurance policy shall be for a term at least coextensive with the duration
of the license and shall not be subject to cancellation except upon 30
days’ prior notice to the village.  The insurance policy shall name the
village as a joint insured.  Upon termination or lapse of the licensee’s
insurance coverage, any license issued to him shall automatically expire.



   (C)   No valet parking operator license, or renewal thereof, shall
be issued unless the applicant provides proof to the village that the
business establishment for which the valet parking service is to be provided
has made available a loading zone at least 25 feet in length immediately
adjacent to its premises for the pickup and delivery of the patrons’
vehicles.  Where the loading zone is to be on-street, the business
establishment shall submit a plan designating an area for such use.  The
valet parking operator will not be allowed to stack vehicles into public
throughways or otherwise impair traffic flow on-street.  No license shall be
issued for the operation of a valet parking service at that establishment
until the designation of the curb loading zone, with proper signage, has been
approved.



   (D)   No valet parking operator license, or renewal thereof, shall
be issued to any applicant who has been found in violation of any provision
of this subchapter two or more times within the 180-day period prior to the
date of the application or three or more times within the 365-day period
prior to the date of the application.



   (E)   A maximum of two valet parking signs shall be posted by the
operator to designate the loading zone.  The signs shall be posted only
during the hours valet parking services are being provided and shall be
removed at all other times.  All signage shall conform to village ordinances.



   (F)   Every valet parking operator shall have a valid driver’s
license and insurance.  The valet parking operator shall place or cause his
agent to place on the dashboard of each patron vehicle a sign or placard of a
size no smaller than 8½ inches by 11 inches in such a manner so as to be
conspicuously visible through the windshield of the patron vehicle.  The
sign or placard shall contain the following information in red or black
letters no less than one inch high:  “This Vehicle Parked By (valet
parking operator) For Customer Of (business establishment).”  In addition,
each attendant of a valet parking operator shall, while on duty, wear
conspicuously placed on his clothing an insignia which identifies the valet
parking operator for whom the attendant is working.



   (G)   All valet parking attendants must, upon taking custody of a
patron’s vehicle, issue a numbered receipt to each customer containing the
name, address and telephone number of the company providing the valet service.



   (H)   The valet parking operator shall hold the village harmless and
indemnify it from any liability.



(Ord. 1562, passed 3-18-96)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Fees.  The Preservation Commission may establish an
appropriate system of processing fees for the review of nominations and
Certificates of Appropriateness.



   (B)   Penalties.  Any person who undertakes or causes an
alteration, construction, demolition, or removal of any nominated or
designated landmark or property within a nominated or designated landmark or
designated historic district without a Certificate of Appropriateness shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a
fine of not less than $50 nor more than $750.  Every day such violation
shall continue to exist shall constitute a separate violation.  The
Preservation Commission may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in
the name of the village to enjoin, correct or abate any violation of this
chapter.



(Ord. 1454, passed 4-18-94; Am. Ord. 1455, passed 5-2-94)



   (C)   Violation of any provisions of §§ 154.60 through 154.63 or
any of the codes adopted herein as codes established for the village shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense
and that each day that violation of §§ 154.60 through 154.63 exists shall
be considered a separate offense.  In addition to the foregoing, the village
shall have all other remedies available to it either in law or jury.  (Ord.
1562, passed 3-18-96)



(Am. Ord. 1943, passed 12-2-02)



APPENDIX A:  MAP OF HISTORICAL DISTRICT







 



To view Appendix A in PDF, please click HERE.



CHAPTER 155:  LAND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



Section



   155.01   Adoption by reference



§ 155.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The village subdivision regulations adopted by Ordinance 921, passed
August 2, 1976 and as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated as a part of this code as if fully set out herein.



(Ord. 921, passed 8-2-76; Am. Ord. 1314, passed 8-6-90; Am. Ord. 1721, passed
12-21-98; Am. Ord. 1729, passed 1-4-99; Am. Ord. 1820, passed 8-7-00; Am.
Ord. 1945, passed 12-16-02; Am. Ord. 2091, passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 2295,
passed 6-19-06; Am. Ord. 2392, passed 6-18-07)



CHAPTER 156:  ZONING CODE



Section



   156.01   Adoption by reference



§ 156.01  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   The village zoning ordinance adopted by Ordinance 1872, passed
September 17, 2001, and as may be amended from time to time, is hereby
adopted by reference and incorporated as a part of this code as if fully set
out herein.



(Ord. 1872, passed 9-17-01; Am. Ord. 1887, passed 4-15-02; Am. Ord. 1888,
passed 4-15-02; Am. Ord. 2174, passed 7-5-05; Am. Ord. 2230, passed 10-17-05;
Am. Ord. 2240, passed 11-21-05; Am. Ord. 2247, passed 12-5-05; Am. Ord. 2312,
passed 8-21-06; Am. Ord. 2313, passed 8-21-06; Am. Ord. 2342, passed
12-18-06; Am. Ord. 2360, passed 2-5-07; Am. Ord. 2432, passed 12-17-07; Am.
Ord. 2495, passed 8-4-08; Am. Ord. 2550, passed 12-1-08; Am. Ord. 2626,
passed 11-16-09; Am. Ord. 2643, passed 3-15-10; Am. Ord. 2780, passed 6-4-12;
Am. Ord. 2839, passed 4-29-13; Am. Ord. 2894, passed 2-3-14; Am. Ord. 2904,
passed 5-5-14; Am. Ord. 2957, passed 12-1-14; Am. Ord. 3041, passed 7-18-16)



CHAPTER 157:  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN



Section



   157.01   Adoption of the Comprehensive Plan



§ 157.01  ADOPTION OF THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.



   The Board of Trustees hereby finds that the facts stated in Ordinance
1556, passed 2-20-96, are true and correct and hereby adopts the Village of
Frankfort Comprehensive Plan.



(Ord. 1556, passed 2-20-96; Am. Ord. 2641, passed 3-2-10)



CHAPTER 158:  LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   158.01   Purpose



   158.02   Definitions



   158.03   Scope



   158.04   Requirements of a landscape plan



   158.05   Landscape material standards



   158.06   Planting specifications



   158.07   Tree preservation



Landscape Care



   158.15   Landscape care guidelines



Design Methodology



   158.25   Planting units



   158.26   Single-family residential



   158.27   Attached single-family residential



   158.28   Commercial, office, and industrial uses



   158.29   Stormwater retention/detention facilities



   158.295   Naturalized landscape reporting, monitoring and acceptance
standards



   158.296   Prohibited activities within naturalized landscape areas



   158.30   Parking lots and vehicular use areas



   158.31   Parkway standards



Legal Applications



   158.45   Creation of Village Tree Board



   158.46   Arborists license and bond



 



   158.99   Penalty



   Appendix A:  Overstory trees



   Appendix B:  Understory trees



   Appendix C:  Street trees



   Appendix D:  Evergreen trees



   Appendix E:  Preservation trees



   Appendix F:  Stormwater detention/retention trees



   Appendix G:  Unacceptable trees



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 158.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to preserve and promote the
health, safety, and general welfare of the public, and as part of the general
welfare, establish landscape requirements and guidelines for review of
landscape proposals for purposes of providing screening or transition buffer
areas which will promote compatibility among land uses, the planting of
street trees and stormwater detention/retention areas and other areas
required by village ordinance. These guidelines are established to promote
consistent review of landscape proposals resulting in higher quality design
for the village.



   (B)   These regulations are intended to minimize the harmful or
nuisance effects resulting from noise, heat, glare, and accumulation of dust
and provide shade, air purification, oxygen regeneration, ground water
recharge, storm water runoff retardation and privacy from noise and visual
intrusion of objectionable sights and activities. This chapter also
establishes a Village Tree Board for purposes of enforcing these guidelines.
This chapter supersedes any language on landscaping contained in Ordinance
No. 919, Frankfort Bicentennial Zoning Ordinance, Ordinance No. 921, the Land
Subdivision Regulations.



(Ord. 1565, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2341, passed 12-18-06)



§ 158.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP). 



      (1)   A design or practice employed with the primary objective
to minimize adverse water quality impacts, preserve beneficial features
on-site, avoid downstream erosion and habitat loss, maintain natural base
flows and groundwater recharge, prevent increases to downstream flooding,
provide multiple uses of drainage and storm water drainage facilities, and/or
provide for the economical, safe and aesthetically pleasing drainage system
for development.



      (2)   BMP methods have been published by the Northeastern
Illinois Planning Commission (NIPC) under the following titles: "Designing
Stormwater BMP in Northeastern Illinois," "Urban Stormwater BMP for
Northeastern Illinois," "Restoring and Managing Stream Greenways: A
Landowners Handbook," Chicago Wilderness "Biodiversity Recovery Plan," and
Village of Frankfort "Water Resource Management Plan." These, as well as
other sources, are recognized BMP which should be considered in the design of
a stormwater management system.



   BERM.  An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screen
undesirable views, and/or decrease noise.



   BUFFER.  A combination of physical space and vertical elements, such
as plants, berms, fences, or walls, the purpose of which is to separate and
screen incompatible land uses from each other.



   CALIPER.  A circumferential measurement of a tree's trunk recorded six
inches above grade for those trees having a caliper of four inches or less,
and 12 inches above grade for those trees with a caliper of above four inches.



   DECIDUOUS.  A plant with foliage that is shed annually.



   DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT.  A lot abutting two parallel streets, or two
streets which do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.







 



   EVERGREEN.  A plant with foliage that persists and remains green
year-round.



   LANDSCAPED AREA.  An area which consists of living landscape material.



   LIVING LANDSCAPE.  Low growing woody or herbaceous ground cover, turf,
shrubs, and trees.



   NATURALIZED LANDSCAPE.  Ecologically sensitive landscaping that uses
regionally native plant species to create, improve or restore specialized and
self-sustaining plant communities (prairie, woodland, etc.)



   OVERSTORY TREE.  A self-supporting woody plant having at least one
well-defined stem or trunk and normally attaining a mature height and spread
of at least 30 feet, and having a trunk that may at maturity, be kept clear
of leaves and branches at least eight feet above grade.



   PARKWAY.  That portion of village owned property between the curb
line, shoulder line, traveled portion of the roadway or alley and the private
property line.



   SCREEN.  An area of planting which provides an effective visual
barrier.



   TRANSITION YARD.  That portion of yard that separates two incompatible
uses.



   UNDERSTORY TREE.  A self-supporting woody plant having at least one
well-defined stem or trunk and normally attaining a mature height and spread
of less than 30 feet with branching less than eight feet above grade.



   VEHICULAR USE AREAS.  All areas subject to vehicular traffic
including, but not limited to, access ways, driveways, loading areas, service
areas, and parking stalls for all types of vehicles. This definition shall
not apply to covered parking structures or underground parking lots.



(Ord. 1565, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2341, passed 12-18-06)



§ 158.03  SCOPE.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all development
occurring after the effective date of this chapter and any development which
has not yet received final plat approval.



   (B)   Whenever an existing use or structure on a lot is expanded,
the development shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter provided
that the expansion exceeds 25% of either the gross floor area or lot area of
the existing development or where the cost of improvements exceeds the value
of existing structure by 50%. Existing value shall be determined by the value
of the building as stated in the most recent tax bill as provided by the
owner. The owner shall also provide the estimated costs of improvement.



   (C)   For any conforming or legally nonconforming building or use
which is in existence on the effective date of this chapter which subsequent
thereto is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or other cause,
and which is reconstructed, reestablished or repaired at a cost that exceeds
50% of the value of the building or use, landscaping shall be provided as
required by this chapter for equivalent new use or construction.



   (D)   All landscaping as required in this chapter shall supersede
all other landscaping requirements contained within the village code.



   (E)   All requirements in this chapter are minimum requirements.
Provision of landscaping in excess of these requirements is encouraged and
may be required when necessary to achieve the purpose of these regulations.



(Ord. 1565, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2341, passed 12-18-06)



§ 158.04  REQUIREMENTS OF A LANDSCAPE PLAN.



   (A)   Landscape plans.  Landscape plans shall be required as part
of each of the following development scenarios:



      (1)   Single-family detached residential developments of seven
or more units (single-family detached residential developments of six or less
units are not required to submit landscape plans, however they must still
comply with all regulations as described herein. This exemption does not
apply to required landscape plans for detention ponds, as outlined in §
158.29);



      (2)   Single-family attached residential developments;



      (3)   Commercial, industrial or public purpose development;



      (4)   Any modification to existing structures (except
single-family detached structures) that either increase the footprint by 25%,
or where the cost of improvements exceed the value of the existing structure
by 50%. Existing value shall be determined by the value of the building or
stated in most recent tax bill as provided by the owner. The owner shall
provide the estimated costs of improvements.



      (5)   Double frontage lots.



   (B)   Components of a landscape plan.  Landscape plans shall
include the following:



      (1)   North point and scale.



      (2)   Topographic information and proposed grades.



      (3)   Proposed structures and pavement.



      (4)   Existing utilities, above and or below ground.



      (5)   Location, type, size, quantity and planting condition
(balled and burlapped, bare root, etc.) of all proposed landscape materials.



      (6)   Common and botanical scientific names of all proposed
plant material.



      (7)   Location, size and common/botanical names of existing
vegetation that is to remain. (As required under § 158.07.)



      (8)   Identification of vegetation proposed to be removed. (As
required under § 158.07.)



      (9)   Symbols representing proposed plant material shall be
drawn to scale showing two-thirds of full mature size and labeled as to
quantity and type.



      (10)   Location of underground irrigation system, if any.



      (11)   Location of drain tiles, downspouts and sump pump
discharge.



      (12)   Planting schedule.



      (13)   Stormwater retention/detention pond improvement plan(s)
(refer to § 158.29).



   (C)   Revisions.



      (1)   Once a landscape plan has been approved and a building
permit issued, the village staff may authorize minor revisions to the
approved landscape plan including the substitution of equivalent plantings
and ground covers where such revisions do not diminish the benefits of the
approved landscape plan.



      (2)   A revision shall be considered minor where there is no
reduction in the quality of plant material, no significant change in size or
location of plant material, and new plants are of the same general category
(overstory, ornamental, evergreen, etc.) and have the same general design
characteristics (mature size, spread, density) as the materials being
replaced.



(Ord. 1565, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2341, passed 12-18-06)  Penalty, see §
158.99



§ 158.05  LANDSCAPE MATERIAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   All plant material shall comply with the provisions set forth
by the American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI (most recent edition)
(http://www.anla.ord/).



   (B)   Plant material used in conformance with the provisions of this
chapter shall be selected to provide:



      (1)   Climate hardiness of plant material.



      (2)   High disease resistance and stress tolerance.



      (3)   Adaptability of proposed plant material to the
particular microclimate (sun, shade, dry or wet soils, etc.) in which it is
to be located.



      (4)   Inclusion of native plant material where appropriate.



      (5)   Select plants for drought tolerance.



      (6)   Overall year round ornamental effect.



      (7)   Conformance with Best Management Practices (BMPs).



   (C)   Plant material shall be healthy, free of insects and diseases,
physical damage (bark bruises, cracked branches, scrapes, etc.), and exhibit
a straight central leader when applicable.



   (D)   Unless otherwise specified, minimum size requirements for
plant materials at time of planting are as follows:



      (1)   Overstory trees: 2.5" caliper and 6' clear of branches.



      (2)   Understory and ornamental trees:



         (a)   Single trunk – 2" caliper;



         (b)   Multi trunk – 6' height.



      (3)   Evergreen trees: 6' height.



      (4)   Large shrubs: 36" height



      (5)   Small shrubs: 18" – 24" height.



   (E)   The caliper of the trunk shall be measured six inches above
the ground for plants with calipers of four inch or less and 12 inches above
the ground for larger sizes.



   (F)   The use of stone, rock, or gravel as a ground cover is
discouraged unless used as a decorative accent or as part of an appropriate
landscape concept.



(Ord. 1565, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2341, passed 12-18-06)  Penalty, see §
158.99



§ 158.06  PLANTING SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Planting pits shall be one and one-half times as deep and
three times as wide as the root ball. Planting procedures should follow the
most current Northern Illinois Tree Specification. Native soil should be used
for backfill whenever possible.







 



   (B)   Trees and shrubs located in a planting bed shall be mulched
with a minimum of three inches of shredded hardwood bark, wood chips or other
organic mulch. All flower and groundcover beds shall be mulched with a
minimum one and one-half to two inch depth shredded hardwood bark, wood chips
or other organic mulch.



   (C)   The lower trunk of new trees shall be wrapped with burlap or
paper to prevent evaporation and sunscald. The wrapping should remain on the
tree for at least one year. Newly planted trees should be sprayed with an
antidesiccant prior to site delivery and immediately after installation to
prevent excessive moisture loss.



   (D)   Soil used in planter boxes, urban tree grates or similar areas
should have a soil composition of 45%-77% silt, 0%-25% clay, 25%-33% sand, a
soil acidity of pH 6.0 to 7.0, no more than 3% to 5% organic material, and a
minimum depth of three feet.



   (E)   Local ecotypes should be preserved. Therefore, all native seed
and plant stock should be obtained from sources within a 150-mile radius of
the village. Vendors from beyond that radius may supply the native seed
and/or plants, but they must demonstrate the materials come from local
genetic stock.



   (F)   Planting of garlic mustard, reed canarygrass, purple
loosestrife, common reed, and buckthorn is prohibited, as is installation of
any noxious weed as defined by the Illinois Administrative Code or by the
village.



(Ord. 1565, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2341, passed 12-18-06)  Penalty, see §
158.99



§ 158.07  TREE PRESERVATION.



   (A)   Intent.  It is the intent of this section to establish
regulations limiting the removal and ensuring the replacement of trees from
public and private property within the village and, in doing so, safeguard
the ecological and aesthetic environment of the community. These regulations
are further intended to dissuade the unnecessary clearing and disturbance of
land so as to preserve, insofar as practical, the existing natural vegetation
with plant material indigenous to the region, and preserve landscape buffers
to minimize the impact of adjoining conflicting land uses, enhance and
protect the integrity of roadway corridors, and reduce the surface heat and
negative visual impact of vehicular use areas.



   (B)   Scope.  Tree preservation requirements shall apply to all
development as outlined in § 158.03.



   (C)   Tree survey.



      (1)   For the properties with existing vegetation in areas
proposed for development, a tree survey shall be submitted prior to issuance
of building permit indicating deciduous plant material that is greater than
20 feet in height, or five inches in diameter measured six inches above the
ground (hereafter referred to as "surveyed deciduous trees") or evergreen
trees measuring five feet or more in vertical height (hereafter referred to
as "surveyed evergreen trees").



      (2)   The tree survey shall indicate the location, size, and
species (both scientific and common) of all surveyed deciduous and evergreen
trees measuring 20 feet in height or having a caliper of five inches measured
six inches above the ground, or all evergreen trees measuring five feet or
more in vertical height.



   (D)   Removal and replacement criteria.



      (1)   No existing surveyed deciduous or evergreen tree which
has been identified on the "Tree Preservation List" (Appendix E) shall be
removed without approval of village staff.



      (2)   Existing trees removed (with village approval) shall be
replaced according to the following schedule:



         (a)   Deciduous trees.



            1.   In the event a deciduous tree designated for
preservation is destroyed or removed, such trees shall be replaced with new
trees at a rate of one inch in caliper of replacement tree to each one inch
in caliper of removed tree.



            2.   In the event of a fraction of an inch, if the
fraction is less than one-half inch, it may be disregarded. If the fraction
is one-half inch or greater, it shall be counted as one inch.



         (b)   Evergreen trees.  In the event an evergreen tree
designated for preservation is destroyed or removed, such tree shall be
replaced with new trees at a rate of one vertical foot for each one vertical
foot of removed tree.



      (3)   Trees normally required by this chapter may not be
counted towards the required caliper inches to mitigate preservation trees.



      (4)   Village staff shall approve the type of replacement tree
to be planted as selected from the approved "Overstory Tree List" (Appendix
A). The following minimum sizes are required for replacement trees:



         (a)   Deciduous trees.  All replacement trees for
deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper of two and one-half inches in
diameter, as measured at diameter breast height (DBH) above the ground. Any
combination of tree sizes equaling two and one-half inches in diameter or
larger, may be used for tree replacement; i.e., one 24 inch tree equals two
6-inch and four 3-inch tree replacements or eight 3-inch replacements.



         (b)   Evergreen trees.  All replacement trees for
evergreen trees shall be a minimum height of six vertical feet. Any
combination of tree sizes six feet in height or greater may be used as tree
replacements.



      (5)   Village staff may vary the number of replacement trees
required depending on the desirability of the existing trees.



      (6)   For those areas of significant vegetation (50% or
greater contiguous lot coverage by existing vegetation and/or identified by
village personnel), lots shall be reviewed on an individual basis. Impact on
existing vegetation will be minimized on a cost effective basis. Emphasis
will be placed on maintaining contiguous plantings, and keeping disruption
confined to the perimeter as much as possible.



      (7)   (a)   All required replacement trees shall be planted
on the site from which the trees were removed. Relief from any portion or all
of the on-site tree replacement requirement may be granted by the code
official. Relief shall be based upon practical physical difficulties and/or
undue hardships related to conditions of the site.



         (b)   Where specific unique site conditions render
complete replacement impractical, cash-in-lieu of replacement trees may be
accepted by the village. The contribution in lieu of planting replacement
trees shall be $100 for each caliper inch of deciduous tree or $50 for each
vertical foot of evergreen tree and shall be paid to the village prior to the
issuance of any building permits.



   (E)   Preservation techniques.



      (1)   (a)   Prior to the development of any project,
temporary barriers shall be installed to protect and preserve the existing
vegetation.



         (b)   Wooden lath snow fencing, brightly colored plastic
construction fencing, chain link fencing, or an alternative barrier, shall be
installed at the periphery of the drip line of the tree or beyond to prevent
storage of materials or vehicles. Said fence or barrier shall be a minimum of
48 inches in height securely anchored to fence posts a minimum distance of
five feet on center.



      (2)   Wherever a change of grade is planned, the trees to be
preserved shall be protected by a wall so as to preserve the existing grade
for the roots.



      (3)   Wherever a change of grade is planned, the topsoil shall
be preserved for the new landscaping to be installed, unless imported topsoil
is used which meets planting specifications as outlined in § 158.06.



      (4)   All grading and construction equipment shall be
forbidden from encroaching upon the drip line of any tree.



      (5)   Crushed limestone or any other material which may be
detrimental to trees shall not be dumped within the drip line of any tree(s)
nor shall be located at any higher location where drainage toward the tree(s)
could adversely affect the health of said tree(s).



      (6)   No materials or vehicles shall be stored, driven, or
parked within the drip line of any trees.



      (7)   In the event that an underground utility line is to be
located within five feet of the trunk of a tree designated for preservation,
said utility line shall be augured to prevent damage to the trees root system.



      (8)   All trees to be preserved which have been subjected to
the construction activity within the drip line should be reviewed by a
qualified arborist and appropriate actions performed per the recommendation
of the arborist. None of the trees shall be topped, headed-back, skinned
(removal of interior branches), or climbed with spikes. All dead wood shall
be removed to reduce hazard.



   (F)   Enforcement.



      (1)   In the event that trees are destroyed/removed, leaving
no physical evidence for measurement, tree size in caliper inches will be
measured at the stump diameter.



      (2)   In the event that a tree designated for preservation is
destroyed or razed during the construction process or has been removed
without the approval of village staff, each tree shall be replaced in
accordance with the applicable exchange rates. A minimum of $500 per tree
penalty shall be assessed upon the owner of the property on which the trees
were removed. A temporary work stoppage shall commence until such time that
the village has determined the number and size of tree(s) destroyed. In
addition to the fines, destroyed trees must be replaced in accordance to
replacement ratios as mentioned above, by the next growing season.



(Ord. 1565, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2272, passed 3-20-06; Am. Ord. 2341,
passed 12-18-06)  Penalty, see § 158.99



LANDSCAPE CARE



§ 158.15  LANDSCAPE CARE GUIDELINES.



   (A)   General maintenance.  The owner, tenant or their agent, if
any, shall be responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping located on
the site required by the provisions of this chapter or by any approved
development plan for the site. Landscaping shall be maintained in good
condition so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance and shall
be kept free from refuse and debris. Any dead, or severely damaged or
diseased plant shall be replaced by the owner, tenant, or their agent during
the next planting season for the particular plant or plants in question.



   (B)   Pruning.



      (1)   The owner of trees overhanging public streets or
right-of-way shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not
obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street
intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the
surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead,
diseased, or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a
menace to the safety of the public.



      (2)   The village shall have the right to prune any tree or
shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light
or interferes with the visibility of any traffic control device or sign. The
property owner will be charged the cost of such service that the village
initiates for public safety.



   (C)   Tree topping.  It shall be unlawful for any person to top any
street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Topping is defined
as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in
diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal
canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other
causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where
other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this chapter at
the determination of the Village Tree Board.



   (D)   Dead or diseased tree removal on private property.  The
village shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased
trees on private property within the village, when such trees constitute a
hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a
potential threat to other trees within the village. The Village Tree Board
will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by
said owners at their own expense within 60 days after the date of the service
of notice. In the event of failure of the owners to comply with such
provisions, the village shall have the authority to remove such trees and
charge the cost of removal to the property owner.



   (E)   Public tree care.  The village shall have the right to plant,
prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs, within the right-of-ways
of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds, as may
be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry
and beauty of such public grounds. The Village Tree Board may remove any tree
or part thereof, which is in an unsafe condition or by reason of its own
nature, is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines,
or other public improvements, or is infected with any injurious fungus,
insect or other pest.



   (F)   The branches of deciduous trees and shrubs may be selectively
thinned by up to one-third in accordance with good horticultural practice;
however, in no case shall trimming result in reducing the overall size of the
plant below that specified on the approved landscape plan.



   (G)   Based upon the recommendations of the Village Tree Board,
certain types of trees will not be acceptable in parkway areas for reasons
pertaining to potential damage of public utilities, sidewalks, or potential
hazards to pedestrians and traffic safety.



   (H)   Failure to maintain required landscapes in good health and
neat appearance is subject to the penalties enumerated in this chapter and
subject to other penalties as may be provided by law.



(Ord. 1565, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2341, passed 12-18-06)  Penalty, see §
158.99



DESIGN METHODOLOGY



§ 158.25  PLANT UNITS.



   (A)   Plant units shall be calculated as follows:



      (1)   One overstory tree (2.5" caliper) = 10 plant units.



      (2)   One understory or ornamental tree (2" caliper) = 5 plant
units.



      (3)   One evergreen tree (10' or greater in vertical height) =
8 plant units.



      (4)   One evergreen tree (6' - 9' in vertical height) = 5
plant units.



      (5)   One large shrub (36" inches in height) = 2 plant units.



      (6)   One small shrub (24" inches in height) = 1 plant unit.



   In calculating the required number of plants any fraction shall be
rounded to the next whole unit.



   (B)   To ensure plant diversity a minimum number of species of trees
and a minimum number of species of shrubs shall be required on each parcel as
follows:



 


SIZE OF PARCEL (ACRES)

 

QUANTITY OF (TREE SPECIES)

 

QUANTITY OF (SHRUB SPECIES)



Less than 5 acres
 

3

 

3



Greater than 5 acres but less than 15 acres
 

5

 

5



Greater than 15 acres but less than 30 acres
 

7

 

7



30 or more acres
 

7

 

7




 



   (C)   Existing vegetation.  Credit against the landscape
requirements of this chapter shall be allowed for existing vegetation and
other landscape features on an equal basis to the quality and size of plant
material as required by this chapter for plant material that the applicant
proposes to preserve. Site inspection and approval by village staff is
required in order to receive credit for existing vegetation.



(Ord. 1565, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2341, passed 12-18-06)  Penalty, see §
158.99



§ 158.26  SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL.



   (A)   Parkway plantings.  Parkway plantings will be required in
accordance with § 158.31. For single-family detached residential
developments of seven or more units, a street tree master plan ("master
plan") must be submitted for approval. The master plan should attempt to
provide groupings of similar tree species along opposite street faces.
Selection must be made from more than one plant family/species per block face
to prohibit single species plantings. Plant material selection must be made
from the approved street tree list (see Appendix C).



   (B)   Double frontage.  Landscaping shall be provided on each
double frontage lot, along the frontage which does not have access to the
public right-of-way. The landscaping shall provide a buffer to the traffic
and noise associated with the right-of-way. The landscaping shall be located
parallel to the lot line and shall extend along the entire frontage of the
lot immediately adjacent to the property line. The required landscaping shall
be comprised exclusively of plant material in accordance with the following
schedule depending on the classification of the adjacent ROW.




Figure A. Landscape Area Adjacent to Residential ROW – Typical










 



   Residential: A minimum of a 15 foot wide landscaped area consisting of
a minimum of 75 plant units per 100 linear feet of frontage. Twenty-five
percent of the plant material by unit count must be evergreen.




Figure B. Landscape Area Adjacent to a Collector ROW – Typical










 



   Collector: A minimum of an 18-foot wide landscaped area consisting of a
minimum of 100 plant units per 100 linear feet of frontage. Thirty percent of
the plant material by unit count must be evergreen. The landscape plan shall
include a berm no less than two and one-half feet in height to be located in
a landscape, no fence and no access easement. Exceptions to this requirement
will be considered if the berm conflicts with the natural or proposed
drainage ways.




Figure C.  Landscape Area Adjacent to an Arterial ROW – Typical










 



   Arterial: A minimum of a 25 foot wide landscaped area consisting of a
minimum of 125 plant units per 100 linear feet of frontage. Forty percent of
the plant material by unit count must be evergreen. The landscape plan shall
include a landscape berm no less than three feet in height to be located in a
landscape, no fence and no access easement. Exceptions to this requirement
will be considered if the berm conflicts with the natural or proposed
drainage ways.



(Ord. 1565, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2341, passed 12-18-06)  Penalty, see §
158.99



§ 158.27  ATTACHED SINGLE-FAMILY HOUSING.



   (A)   Parkway plantings.  Parkway plantings will be required in
accordance with Article II, Section 7, Parkway Planting Standards. For
single-family attached residential developments of seven or more units, a
street tree master plan must be submitted for approval. The master plan
should attempt to provide groupings of similar trees along opposite street
faces. Selection must be made from more than one plant family/species per
block face to prohibit single specie plantings. Plant material selection must
be made from the approved street tree list. (see Appendix C)



   (B)   Front and side yards.  All front and side yards shall be
sodded and landscaped with trees and shrubs. A minimum ratio of ten plant
units shall be provided for each 1,500 square feet of yard area. At least 75%
of the plant material must include overstory trees by unit count.



   (C)   Rear yards.  A minimum of five plant units shall be provided
for each 1,500 square feet of yard area.



   (D)   Double frontage.  Double frontage lots comply with
requirements as outlined under § 158.26(B).



   (E)   Foundations.



      (1)   Foundation landscaping shall be provided on those sides
of the building which face a public right-of-way.



      (2)   The foundation landscaping shall be located in a
planting bed a minimum of ten feet in width adjacent to the building.



      (3)   The required foundation landscaping area shall remain
open and free of all paving except where sidewalks and driveways lead
directly into the building. In no case shall the foundation landscaping area
be reduced to extend across less than 50% of the building face due to said
sidewalks and driveways.



      (4)   Foundation landscaping shall consist of a minimum ratio
of 30 plant units for every 1,000 square foot area of planting bed which is
within ten feet of the foundation. Flowers, ornamental grasses, and
groundcover may also be used.



      (5)   The required foundation landscaping may be relocated
elsewhere on site provided in an alternate manner, such as through the use of
above ground planting containers or boxes per staff approval.



(Ord. 1565, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2341, passed 12-18-06)  Penalty, see §
158.99



§ 158.28  COMMERCIAL, OFFICE, AND INDUSTRIAL USES.



   (A)   Parkway plantings.  Parkway plantings will be required in
accordance with § 158.31.



   (B)   Transition yards.



      (1)   The required landscaping in transitional yards shall be
comprised of a combination of overstory trees, evergreen trees, ornamental
trees, and large shrubs. If shrubs are used, they shall be installed at a
minimum height of five feet. Additional small shrubs may be used, but shall
not count towards meeting the landscape requirements.



      (2)   A minimum of a 25 foot wide landscaped screen consisting
of a minimum of 125 plant units per 100 linear feet of frontage measured
along the length of a common boundary between two units. Forty percent of the
plant material (by unit count) must be evergreen. The landscape plan shall
include a landscape berm of no less than three feet in height to be located
in a landscape easement. Exceptions will be considered if the berm is
determined to conflict with the natural or proposed drainage ways. (See §
158.26, Figure C for typical illustration.)



      (3)   At the direction of village staff the required number of
plant units may be reduced in the following percentages:



         (a)   Up to a 75% reduction in plant material (by unit
count) for a solid fence structure with a minimum height of six feet,
constructed of solid masonry or brick material, a combination of wood with
masonry structural supports, or materials as approved by village staff.



         (b)   Up to a 50% reduction in plant material for an
earthen berm, a minimum of six feet high, with a maximum slope of 3:1.



      (4)   If existing woodlands are located within the transition
yard, preservation of those woodlands may substitute for part or all of the
required landscaping. If the existing woodlands are located in only a part of
the transitional yard, the required number of plant units may be
proportionally reduced. The substitution of existing woodlands for transition
yard landscaping is at the discretion of staff and shall be indicated on the
approved landscape plan.



      (5)   The area of the transitional yard not planted with
trees, shrubs, or existing woodlands shall be planted with sod, live
groundcover, flowers, ornamental grasses or some combination thereof.



   (C)   Service yards and exterior work areas.  Service yards and
exterior work areas shall be screened from view from residential and
commercial areas and public rights-of-way. The screening shall be consistent
of that required for transition yards (see § 158.28(B).)



   (D)   Requirements for open storage yards in industrial districts
when adjacent to commercial or residential uses or public right-of-way.



      (1)   Open storage yards shall be screened on all sides by
solid walls or fences (including solid doors or gates) no more than eight
feet high, but in no case lower in height than the materials to be stored. If
stored materials exceed eight feet in height, then landscaping shall be
provided along the outside perimeter of that portion of the fence or wall
visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent commercial or residential
land uses. The landscaping shall be in addition to the fence or wall. The
installed height of the landscaping shall be equal to or greater than
one-half the height of the fence or wall.



      (2)   Landscaping shall consist of 50 plant units per 100
linear feet of fence. Twenty-five percent of plant material must be evergreen.



(Ord. 1565, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2341, passed 12-18-06)  Penalty, see §
158.99



§ 158.29  STORMWATER RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITIES.



   Where naturalized landscape areas are installed around stormwater
retention/detention facilities, the areas must remain as naturalistic as
possible, resemble natural water features, provide habitat and stormwater
management benefits, and improve water quality.



   (A)   Stormwater retention/detention pond improvement plan.
Landscape improvement plans must be provided for all stormwater
retention/detention facilities. The plan must demonstrate the ability of the
proposed plant material to survive expected periods of inundation, based upon
hydrologic studies.



   (B)   Components of a stormwater retention/detention pond
improvement plan. Stormwater retention/detention pond improvement plans shall
include the following:



      (1)   North point and scale;



      (2)   Topographic information and proposed grades;



      (3)   Location of existing and/or proposed inlets/outlets;



      (4)   Identification of all plant zones by elevation range
(i.e. 721 - 723.5, HWL — 719, etc.)



      (5)   Identification of all seed mixes and planting rates per
plant zone (i.e. Prairie, Wet Prairie, Emergent Wetland, Riparian Woods,
Forested Wetland, Turf Grass, etc.);



      (6)   Hydrograph data for the 2- and 100-year rainfall events
on a time vs. stage graph. Data for 5- and 10-year events may also be
required if determined necessary by the Code Official;



      (7)   Herbivory protection netting for emergent planting zones
or as deemed necessary by the Code Official;



      (8)   Perimeter landscaping comprised of a minimum of 20 plant
units for every 100 linear feet of perimeter, or part thereof as measured at
high water level;



      (9)   Location, type, size, quantity, and planting condition
(balled and burlapped, bare root, etc.) of all proposed landscape materials;



      (10)   Common and botanical names of all proposed plant
material;



      (11)   Location, size and common/botanical name of existing
vegetation to remain;



      (12)   Symbols representing proposed plant material shall be
drawn to scale showing two-thirds of full mature size and labeled as to
quantity and type;



      (13)   Location of underground irrigation system, if any;



      (14)   Planting schedule;



      (15)   Near term monitoring and maintenance plan including the
following:



         (a)   Site location;



         (b)   Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the
party or parties responsible for near-term monitoring and management; and



         (c)   Schedule of expected near-term management and
monitoring activities;



      (16)   Long term operation and maintenance plan including the
following:



         (a)   Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the
property owner(s) of the stormwater facility;



         (b)   Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the
party or parties legally responsible for operations and management of the
stormwater facility;



         (c)   Written documentation of acceptance by public
agencies, as applicable; including associated capital expenses;



         (d)   A copy of the terms demonstrating that the
long-term management agreement is recorded against all lots in the project;



         (e)   Location map identifying all permanent access
(public and private), boundaries between traditional turfgrass areas and the
naturalized areas covered by the plan, overland flow paths, and control
structures;



         (f)   Educational pamphlet to be distributed at closing
for all lots in the development that the stormwater retention/detention
facility serves;



         (g)   Schedule of expected long-term management
activities; and



         (h)   Cost estimate for routine and non-routine expenses
and dedicated source(s) of funding for continued inspection, operation and
maintenance.



(Ord. 1565, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2341, passed 12-18-06)  Penalty, see §
158.99



§ 158.295  NATURALIZED LANDSCAPE REPORTING, MONITORING AND ACCEPTANCE
STANDARDS.



   (A)   Naturalized landscape letter of credit. A letter of credit is
required to cover naturalized landscape improvements and shall include
estimated cost of natural landscape installation, monitoring and
establishment management. The approved estimate shall be included in the
letter of credit (LOC) for the development, which will cover costs associated
with earthwork, planting, inspections, and maintenance to achieve village
acceptance requirements. The acceptance period is expected to last a minimum
of three years.



   (B)   Naturalized landscape security bond.



      (1)   A security bond may be provided to cover the expected
monitoring and management activities following substantial completion of the
installation of an approved landscape improvement plan. The security bond
will be held until the landscape is accepted by the village.



      (2)   Substantial completion means installation of all
naturalized landscaped materials, protection netting, and verification of
critical grades identified on the approved plan.



   (C)   Natural landscape specialist prequalification.  Naturalized
landscapes are to be installed and managed by individuals/companies with
qualifications and/or experience with such landscapes. Qualifications are to
be provided to the village through submittal of references, photographs,
resumes, and/or other means that demonstrate the ability to install and/or
manage naturalized landscapes.



   (D)   Near-term reporting.



      (1)   The developer is to notify the village a minimum of
24-hours prior to the start of plant installation.



      (2)   Following substantial completion, the developer is to
submit documentation that natural area landscape installation or revegetation
has been completed. Nursery packing lists indicating the species and
quantities of materials installed are to accompany this notice.



      (3)   The developer (or a designated representative) is to
submit an annual monitoring report to the village by February 28th of the
following year evaluating the progress of the naturalized landscape toward
design goals. The report shall include the following:



         (a)   A location map;



         (b)   Summary of annual monitoring observations,
including five to ten photographs representative of at least 20% of each
vegetative community to identify the following:



            1.   The limits of all vegetation areas by general
community type and dominant species within each planting zone (e.g., wetland
and prairie zones);



            2.   All plant species (native and non-native) in
each planting zone;



            3.   The five most dominant species within each
planting zone;



            4.   The percent survival of planted species;



            5.   The approximate percent ground cover by
native species within each planting zone;



            6.   The percent ground cover by non-native or
invasive species in each planting zone;



            7.   Erosion and sedimentation problems;



            8.   Water level or drainage problems;



            9.   Areas of bare soil larger than three
square-feet; and



            10.   Observations on specific management
strategies necessary to achieve acceptance requirements.



         (c)   Description of management performed during the
year;



         (d)   Tabular summary of annual progress relative to
acceptance standards;



         (e)   List of recommendations for management during the
upcoming year; and



         (f)   Quarterly observations/inspections of earthen dam
embankments, control structures/ spillways.



   (F)   Long-term reporting.  Every five years following village
acceptance of the naturalized landscape plantings, the owner of the property
shall submit a report to the village on the condition of naturalized
landscapes, recommended management actions to correct deficiencies, and a
proposed schedule for implementing the recommended actions. Following
implementation of corrective actions, documentation is to be provided to the
village demonstrating that deficiencies have been corrected.



   (G)   Naturalized landscape acceptance.



      (1)   Satisfactory landscape development associated with
naturalized vegetation in stormwater facilities or other naturalized areas
will be based on the following:



         (a)   Within three months of seed installation (or three
months after the start of the growing season following dormant seeding), at
least 90% of the seeded area, as measured by aerial cover, will be vegetated
or otherwise stabilized against erosion.



         (b)   Naturalized landscapes shall not have single areas
of more than three square-feet devoid of vegetation, as measured by aerial
coverage.



         (c)   Seeded areas shall have no rills or gullies and
basin shorelines shall be adequately protected against erosion.



         (d)   Areas seeded to turfgrass or low-maintenance turf
shall have 95% ground cover.



         (e)   Emergent areas shall have minimum of 35% ground
cover (average 50%) and other wetland and prairie areas shall have a minimum
of 35% ground cover (average 60%) by species in the approved plant list
and/or native species with native coefficient of conservation (C-) values 2
(per Swink and Wilhelm 1994 or more current version).



         (f)   Naturalized landscapes shall have a minimum of 30%
presence by species seeded or planted for the permanent matrix and/or native
species with C- value 2 (per Swink and Wilhelm 1994 or more current version).



         (g)   Installed woody materials shall be alive, in
healthy condition, and representative of the species.



         (h)   No specific plant community, individual or
collective, shall have more than 25% cover of non-native or weedy species.



         (i)   None of the three most dominant species may be
non-native or weedy, including but not limited to Barnyard grass
(Echinochloacrus-galli), Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense), Common reed
(Phragmites australis), Kentucky bluegrass (Poa pratensis), Purple
loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria), Reed canary grass (Phalaris arundinacea),
Sandbar willow (Salix interior), or Sweetclover (Melilotus spp.) unless
otherwise indicated on the approved planting plan.



         (j)   Cattails (Typha spp.) do not count towards the 25%
weed criterion provided they represent no more than 20% cover.



(Ord. 2341, passed 12-18-06)  Penalty, see § 158.99



§ 158.296  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES WITHIN NATURALIZED LANDSCAPE AREAS.



   The following activities are prohibited within areas of naturalized
landscaping except as needed to achieve and maintain a naturalized landscape
consistent with an approved plan and as directed by a village-approved
landscape restoration specialist:



   (A)   Dumping of yard waste, fill material or debris;



   (B)   Replacement of approved vegetation with non-approved materials;



   (C)   Construction or placement of structures;



   (D)   Application of pesticides, fertilizer, or herbicides;



   (E)   Mowing;



   (F)   Commercial, industrial, agricultural, residential
developments, buildings, or structures, including but not limited to signs,
billboards, other advertising material, or other structures;



   (G)   Removal or destruction of trees or plants, draining, plowing,
mining, removal of topsoil, sand, rock, gravel, minerals or other material;
and



   (H)   Operation of snowmobiles, dune buggies, motorcycles,
all-terrain vehicles or any other types of motorized vehicles.



(Ord. Ord. 2341, passed 12-18-06)  Penalty, see § 158.99



§ 158.30  PARKING LOTS AND VEHICULAR USE AREAS.



   (A)   Vehicular use areas adjacent to residential uses and public
right-of-way.



      (1)   Off-street parking lots for three or more cars or other
vehicular use areas shall provide an effectively solid landscape screen of
the parking area from adjacent residential uses and public ROW. The
landscaping shall consist of one of the following options:



         (a)   A minimum ten foot wide vegetative screen along
the perimeter of the parkway area. This may be located in the 25-foot green
space required in commercial and industrial districts. This screen shall
consist of 150 plant units per 100 linear feet and at least 75% of plant
material must be evergreen.



         (b)   A berm that is at least two and one-half feet
higher than the finished elevation of the parking lot (at the nearest point)
and landscaping that includes 125 plant units per 100 linear feet. A minimum
of 50% of the plant material must be evergreen. Plantings should be designed
in a natural grouping; a linear design is discouraged. The berm shall be
graded in an undulating manner to appear more natural.



         (c)   A minimum six foot wide vegetative screen along a
minimum three foot grade drop from the adjacent green area to the parking
lot, with landscaping that includes 100 plant units per 100 linear feet. A
minimum of 50% of the plant material must be evergreen. Slope should not
exceed a 4:1 ratio.



         (d)   A three foot high fence of brick or stone with a
minimum six-foot wide planting strip planted with 50 plant units per 100
linear feet. A minimum of 75% of the plant material must be overstory or
evergreen trees.



   (B)   Drive-thru lanes adjacent to other vehicular use areas. 
Drive-thru lanes shall be separated from adjacent driveways, parking lot
aisles and other vehicular uses areas by a curbed planting bed along the
entire length of the lane. The planting bed shall be a minimum of five feet
wide (excluding the curb) and shall contain a minimum of 100 plant units per
100 linear feet.



   (C)   Interior parking lot landscaping.



      (1)   The interior of a parking lot with more than 20 cars
shall include landscape islands planted with overstory trees at a ratio of
one landscape island for every ten parking spaces or fraction thereof. They
shall be evenly dispersed throughout the parking area. The planting beds
shall meet the following requirements:



         (a)   The minimum area of a planting bed for each tree
shall be 162 square feet with a minimum dimension of nine feet in any
direction. These planting beds shall be curbed with a barrier curb. Planting
beds may be combined to create larger planting islands within the parking lot.



         (b)   Planting beds shall not be used for snow storage.
Rather, separate snow storage areas shall be designated on the landscape plan.



         (c)   Small shrubs, flowers and groundcovers other than
turf grass may be planted in the tree planting beds, in addition to the
required overstory trees.



         (d)   Plant materials other than groundcover shall be
set back a minimum of three feet from the curb to avoid damage from
overhanging car bumpers and doors.



         (e)   Plant materials other than overstory trees shall
be limited to a mature height of no more than two feet within ten feet of any
curb at a driveway intersection.



      (2)   Curbed planting islands shall be placed at the ends of
each row of parking. These islands shall be a minimum of nine feet wide and
shall extend the length of the parking stalls. They shall be landscaped with
trees, shrubs, flowers or groundcover. (See graphic above.)



(Ord. 1565, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2341, passed 12-18-06)  Penalty, see §
158.99



§ 158.31  PARKWAY STANDARDS.



   Parkways should be planted according to the following standards for all
development of property, including any modifications of existing structures
which increases the footprint of the existing structure by 25% or in those
cases where the cost of improvements exceeds the value of the existing
structure by 50%.  Existing values shall be determined by the value of the
building as stated on the most recent tax bill as provided by the owner. The
owner shall also provide estimated costs of improvements.



   (A)   Street trees shall be planted along all public or privately
dedicated streets within a development at a rate of one overstory tree per 35
linear feet, (excluding driveways) or fraction thereof.



   (B)   Selection of tree species for street tree planting shall be
made from the approved street tree plant list available from the village (see
Appendix C). This list shall be updated by the village as needed to ensure
quality, disease resistance and hardiness.



   (C)   No street tree shall be planted closer than 30 feet from the
right-of-way line at an intersection or closer than eight feet from any drive
or alley way.



   (D)   Landscape materials shall be selected and located so as not to
obstruct visual or physical access to fire hydrants. Trees and shrubs shall
not be located closer than six feet to fire hydrants, transformers or above
ground utilities, and 15 feet from any street light.



   (E)   The parkways shall be planted in grass or low ground cover,
except where covered by pavement, trees, or shrubs, or up to two feet of
paving which is allowed along the curb.



   (F)   The use of stone, rock, or gravel is prohibited on public
parkways.



   (G)   Plantings under utility wires is discouraged. If overhead
utilities exist, plant selection shall be made from the approved understory
plant list (see Appendix B) and spacing requirement shall be reduced to one
tree per 25 linear feet.



   (H)   Parkways less than four feet in width do not require tree
plantings.



(Ord. 1565, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2341, passed 12-18-06)  Penalty, see §
158.99



LEGAL APPLICATIONS



§ 158.45  CREATION OF VILLAGE TREE BOARD.



   (A)   Creation. There is hereby created and established a Village
Tree Board which shall consist of five members, residents of this village,
who shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Village Trustees.



   (B)   Term of office.  The term of the five members of the Board,
to be appointed by the Mayor, shall be three years except that the term of
the two members appointed to the first Board shall be two years. In the event
that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his or her
successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.



   (C)   Removal. Any Board member who misses more than two consecutive
meetings may be recommended for removal by the Chair to the Mayor.



   (D)   Compensation. Members of the Board shall serve without
compensation.



   (E)   Duties and responsibilities. It shall be the responsibility of
the Board to study, investigate, counsel, develop and/or periodically update,
and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting,
replanting, removal, or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along
streets, and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to
the Village Board and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the
official Comprehensive Village Tree Plan. The Village Tree Board, when
requested by the village, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report
and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of
its work.



   (F)   Operation. The Village Tree Board shall choose its own
officers, make its own rules and regulations and keep a journal of its
proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction
of business.



(Ord. 1565, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2341, passed 12-18-06)



§ 158.46  ARBORIST LICENSE AND BOND.



   (A)   License. It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage
in the business or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing any parkway
trees within the village without first applying for and procuring a license.
The license fee shall be $75 annually in advance; provided, however, that no
license shall be required of any public service company or village employee
doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. Before any
license shall be issued each applicant shall first file evidence of
possession of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of $500,000 for
bodily injury and $1,000,000 property damage indemnifying the village or any
person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as
herein described.



   (B)   Bond. The property owner/developer shall provide a
non-revocable letter of credit payable to the village to ensure that the
landscaping as approved will be installed. The letter of credit shall reflect
115% of the cost of required landscaping as approved to ensure that such
landscaping will be installed. The owner must also grant the village the
right to enter upon the land for the purposes of installing the required
landscaping in the event that such landscaping is not installed. The letter
of credit shall be released when landscape installation is approved by the
village, with 15% retained by the village for a one-year guarantee period.



(Ord. 1565, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2341, passed 12-18-06)  Penalty, see §
158.99



§ 158.99  PENALTY.



   Violation of any provisions of this chapter or any of the codes adopted
herein as codes established for the village shall be punished by a fine of
not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense and that each day the
violation of this chapter exists shall be considered a separate offense. In
addition to the proceeding, the village shall have all other remedies
available to it either at law or in equity.



(Ord. 1565, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2341, passed 12-18-06)



APPENDIX A:  OVERSTORY TREES



   RECOMMENDED PLANT MATERIAL FOR OVERSTORY TREES*



 

Botanical Name
 
Common Name




Acer nigrum var.
 
Black Maple


Acer rubrum var.
 
Red Maple


Acer saccharum var.
 
Sugar Maple


Aesculus glabra
 
Ohio Buckeye


Carya Ovata
 
Shagbark Hickory


Celtis Occidentalis
 
Hackberry


Corylus colurna
 
Turkish Filbert


Ginkgo biloba (male only)
 
Maidenhair Tree


Gleditsia triancanthos inermis var.
 
Thornless Honeylocust


Gymnocladus dioicus
 
Kentucky Coffeetree


Juglans nigra
 
Walnut


Liridenron tulipfera
 
Tuliptree


Ostrya/Vriginiana
 
Ironwood


Plantanus acerifolia
 
London Planetree


Plantanus ocidentalis
 
Sycamore


Pyrus calleryana
 
Callery Pear


Quercus Alba
 
White Oak


Quercus bicolor
 
Swamp White Oak


Quercus ellipsoldalis
 
Hill’s Oak


Quercus Imbricaria
 
Shingle Oak


Quercus macrocarpa
 
Bur Oak


Quercus muehlenbergii
 
Chinkapin Oak


Quercus palustris
 
Pin Oak* (high maintenance Chlorosis)


Quercus robur
 
English Oak


Quercus rubra
 
Red Oak


Quercus velutina
 
Black Oak


Syringa Reticulate
 
Japanese Tree Lilac


Taxodium Distichum
 
Bald Cypres


Tilia americana
 
American Linden


Tilia cordata var.
 
Littleleaf Linden


Tilia euchlora “Redmond”
 
Redmond Linden


Tilia vulgaris
 
European Linden


Tilia Tomentosa
 
Sterling Silver Linden


Ulmus var.
 
Elm (newer hybrids)




 



*Certain species may not be recommended from time to time due to current
biological threats or other recognized industry practices.



(Ord. 1565, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2341, passed 12-18-06)



APPENDIX B:  UNDERSTORY TREES



   RECOMMENDED PLANT MATERIAL FOR UNDERSTORY TREES*



 

Botanical Name
 
Common Name




Alnus glutinosa
 
European Black Alder


Amelanchier canadensis
 
Shadblow Serviceberry


Amelanchier grandiflora
 
Apple Serviceberry


Amelanchier laevis
 
Allegheny Serviceberry


Amelanchier sanguinea
 
Juneberry


Betula nigra var.
 
River Birch


Betula platyphyllis japonicum
 
Whitespire Birch


Carpinus carolina
 
American Hornbeam


Corylus Cornuta
 
Hazelnut


Crataegus crus-galli inermis
 
Thornless Cockspur Hawthorn


Crataegus phaenopyrum
 
Washington Hawthorn


Crataegus viridis
 
Winter King Hawthorn


Magnolia x loebneri “Merrill”
 
Merrill Loebner Magnolia


Magnolia soulangeana
 
Saucer Magnolia


Magnolia stellata
 
Star Magnolia


Malus ‘prairiefire’
 
Prairiefire Crab


Malus ‘red jewel’
 
Red Jewel Crab


Pyrus calleryana “Chanticleer”
 
Chanticleer Pear


Syringa reticulata
 
Japanese Tree Lilac




 



*Certain species may not be recommended from time to time due to current
biological threats or other recognized industry practices.



(Ord. 1565, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2341, passed 12-18-06)



APPENDIX C:  STREET TREES



   RECOMMENDED PLANT MATERIALS FOR STREET TREES*



 

Botanical Name
 
Common Name




Acer x freemanii
 
Autumn Blaze or Marmo


Acer nigrum var.
 
Black Maple


Acer platanoides ‘Emerald Queen’
 
Emerald Queen Maple


Acer rubrum var.
 
Red Maple


Acer saccharum var.
 
Sugar Maple (for parkway greater than 10 ft.)


Carya Ovata
 
Shagbark Hickory


Celtis Occidentalis
 
Hackberry


Corylus colurna
 
Turkish Filbert


Ginko Biloba (male only)
 
Maidenhair Tree


Gleditsia triancanthos inermis var.
 
Thornless Honeylocust


Gymnocladus dioicus
 
Kentucky Coffeetree


Ostrya/Vriginiana
 
Ironwood


Plantanus acerifolia or occidentalis
 
London Planetree, Sycamore


Pyrus calleryana “Chanticleer”
 
Chanticleer Pear


Quercus Alba
 
White Oak


Quercus bicolor
 
Swamp White Oak


Quercus ellipsoldalis
 
Hill’s Oak


Quercus Imbricaria
 
Shingle Oak


Quercus rubra
 
Red Oak


Quercus velutina
 
Black Oak


Syringa reticulate
 
Japanese Tree Lilac


Tilia americana
 
American Linden


Tilia cordata var.
 
Littleleaf Linden


Tilia euchlora “Redmond”
 
Redmond Linden


Tilia tomentosa
 
Sterling Silver Linden


Ulmus var
 
Elm (newer hybrids)




 



*Certain species may not be recommended from time to time due to current
biological threats or other recognized industry practices.



(Ord. 1565, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2272, passed 3-20-06; Am. Ord. 2341,
passed 12-18-06)



APPENDIX D: EVERGREEN TREES



   RECOMMENDED PLANT MATERIALS FOR EVERGREEN TREES*



 

Botanical Name
 
Common Name




Abies Concolor
 
White Fir


Juniperus Virginiana
 
Eastern Red Cedar


Picea Abies
 
Norway Spruce


Picea Glauca
 
White Spruce


Picea Gluaca Densata
 
Black Hills Spruce


Picea Omorika
 
Serbian Spruce


Picea Pungens
 
Colorado Green Spruce


Picea P. ‘Gluaca’
 
Colorado Blue Spruce


Pinus Flexilus
 
Limber Pine


Pinus Ponderosa
 
Ponderosa Pine


Pinus Strobus
 
Eastern White Pine


Pseudtotsuga Meniesii
 
Douglas Fir


Pinus Sylvestris
 
Scotch Pine


Taxodium Distichum
 
Bald Cypress


Tsuga Canadensis
 
Canadian Hemlock




 



*Certain species may not be recommended from time to time due to current
biological threats or other recognized industry practices.



(Ord. 2341, passed 12-18-06)



APPENDIX E:  PRESERVATION TREES



   RECOMMENDED PLANT MATERIALS FOR PRESERVATION TREES*



 

Botanical Name
 
Common Name




Aesculus species
 
Buckeye/Horse Chestnut


Acer rubrum
 
Red Maple


Acer saccharum
 
Sugar Maple


Carpinus caroliniana
 
Blue Beech


Carya var.
 
Hickory


Celtis occidentalis
 
Hackberry


Fraxinus americana var
 
White Ash


Gymnocladus dioicus
 
Kentucky Coffeetree


Juglans nigra
 
Walnut


Ostrya Virginiana
 
Ironwood


Platanus occidentalis
 
Sycamore


Quercus (all except palustris)
 
Oaks (all except Pin Oak)


Taxodiumdistichum
 
Bald Cyprus


Tilia americana
 
American Linden




 



*Certain species may not be recommended from time to time due to current
biological threats or other recognized industry practices.



(Ord. 1565, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2272, passed 3-20-06; Am. Ord. 2341,
passed 12-18-06)



APPENDIX F:  STORMWATER DETENTION/RETENTION TREES



   RECOMMENDED PLANT MATERIALS FOR DETENTION TREES*



 

Botanical Name
 
Common Name




Acer rubrum
 
Red Maple


Acer saccharum
 
Sugar Maple


Alnus glutinosa
 
European Alder


Alnus rugosa
 
Speckled Alder (native)


Betala nigra
 
River Birch


Carpinus caroliniana
 
Blue Beach


Carya ovata
 
Shagbark Hickory


Crataegus crus-galli inermis
 
Thornless Hawthorne


Gymnocladus Dioicus
 
Kentucky Coffeetree


Jaglans nigra
 
Black Walnut


Platanus occidentalis
 
Sycamore


Quercus bicolor
 
Swamp White Oak


Quercus rubra
 
Red Oak


Taxodium disfichum
 
Bald Cyprus




 



*Certain species may not be recommended from time to time due to current
biological threats or other recognized industry practices.



(Ord. 1565, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2341, passed 12-18-06)



APPENDIX G: UNACCEPTABLE TREES



   PLANT MATERIAL LIST FOR UNACCEPTABLE TREES



 

Botanical Name
 
Common Name




Acer ginnala
 
Amur Maple


Acer negundo
 
Box Elder


Acer platanoides
 
Norway Maple


Acer pseudoplatanus
 
Sycamore Maple


Acer saccharinum
 
Silver Maple


Ailanthus altissima
 
Tree-of-Heaven


Betula papyrifera
 
Paper/white Birch


Cercidiphyllum japonicum
 
Katsura


Elaegnus angustifolia
 
Russian Olive


Frangula alnus
 
Glossy Buckthorn


Fraxinus Var.
 
Ash


Ginko Biloba (female)
 
Female Ginko


Maclura Pomifera
 
Osage Orange, Hedge Apple


Malus spp.
 
Apples, Crabapples (unless otherwise noted)


Morns alba
 
White Mulberry


Pinus nigra
 
Austrian Pine


Populus spp.
 
Poplars, Cottonwoods, Aspen


Prunus spp.
 
Cherries, Plums


Rhamnus spp.
 
Buckthorn


Salix spp.
 
Willows


Ulmus
 
Elms (other than newer hybrids)




 



(Ord. 1565, passed 4-1-96; Am. Ord. 2341, passed 12-18-06)



CHAPTER 159:  LOW INTEREST LOAN PROGRAM FOR COMMERCIAL IMPROVEMENTS



Section



General Provisions



   159.01   Purpose



   159.02   Façade improvement low interest program



   159.03   Project eligibility criteria



   159.04   Borrower eligibility



   159.05   General terms and conditions



Development and Design Standards



   159.15   Design standards



   159.16   Building and structure design



   159.17   Site development and landscape



   159.18   Signs



   159.19   Screening



   159.20   Utility services



   159.21   Parking areas



   159.22   Lighting



   159.23   Miscellaneous structures and street hardware



Administration



   159.35   Submittal requirements



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 159.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of these design guidelines is to establish criteria for the
remodeling of existing structures within the established program area (see
Exhibit 1 attached to Ord. 1818). These criteria are not intended to restrict
imagination, innovation, or variety, but rather to assist in focusing on
design principles, which can result in an improved appearance within the
village, preserve and increase taxable values, and promote the public health,
safety, and welfare.



(Ord. 1818, passed 8-7-00)



§ 159.02  FAÇADE IMPROVEMENT LOW INTEREST PROGRAM.



   (A)   The purpose of the Low Interest Loan Program is to provide
funding assistance to existing businesses located along the Route 30 and 45
corridor, and within the Historic Downtown District (as depicted on the
district map attached to Ord. 1818) in improving the façades of their
existing structures.



   (B)   Applicants making improvements within the guidelines herein
established may apply for funding under this program after receiving a
certificate of appropriateness from the Design Review Committee (1890's
Committee). Funding under the program is to be provided in the form of a
commercial loan interest rate buy-down of 3%. The 3% buy-down is to be
provided from a fund established by the Village Board as part of the fiscal
year budget and paid to the lending institution at time of loan closing.



(Ord. 1818, passed 8-7-00)



§ 159.03  PROJECT ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA.



   The intent of the program is to encourage the rehabilitation,
renovation and reuse of existing commercial buildings within the designated
districts. The renovation of exterior building façades and site improvements
are eligible improvements for consideration. New construction or
non-permanent improvements, including interior rehabilitation, are not
eligible under this loan program. Permanent interior improvements are
eligible in the Historic District, based on the age of the building.
Properties or structures must comply with all village ordinances, or be
brought into compliance prior to occupancy permit, unless otherwise granted a
variance by the Village Board. The following improvements are considered
eligible items for funding under this program:



   (A)   Exterior renovation.



      (1)   Exterior painting;



      (2)   Tuck pointing;



      (3)   General façade repair;



      (4)   Cleaning of stone and brick;



      (5)   Window or door repair or replacement;



      (6)   Roof or wall repair or replacement, installation of
awnings;



      (7)   Signage;



      (8)   Other permanent façade improvements.



   (B)   Site improvements.



      (1)   Paving/curbing of parking areas;



      (2)   Enclosure of dumpster areas, sidewalks, and bike paths;



      (3)   Installation of bike racks;



      (4)   Landscaping.



   (C)   Professional fees.



      (1)   Architectural services;



      (2)   Engineering services;



      (3)   Other professional consulting services.



(Ord. 1818, passed 8-7-00)



§ 159.04  BORROWER ELIGIBILITY.



   The following parties will be eligible to apply for the Commercial
District Façade Low Interest Improvement Loan and shall be considered to be
individuals as well as partnerships or corporations:



   (A)   Business owner-occupant either presently occupying or
proposing to occupy a building.



   (B)   Business-tenant occupant presently occupying or proposing to
occupy a building or a portion thereof. (Owner will be required to be
notified of proposed improvements.)



   (C)   Building owner who is not an occupant either presently owning
or proposing to own a building. The owner or the proposed owner must have
signed tenants for at least 51% of the net lease space included in the area
proposed to be renovated under this program.



(Ord. 1818, passed 8-7-00)



§ 159.05  GENERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS.



   The following terms and conditions will apply to all projects.



   (A)   Funds will be limited to permanent improvements, and not to be
used for working capital or refinancing of existing debt.



   (B)   No more than one loan will be made for improvements at any one
building within a fiscal year, except multiple grants may be made to separate
commercial tenants in a single building.



   (C)   All improvements applied for under this program must be in
conformance with all building, plumbing, electrical, and other construction
codes and standards presently in force (or which may come into force during
the course of this program) by the village. At the conclusion of such
rehabilitation, the portion of the building rehabilitated must be eligible
for occupancy under applicable village ordinances.



   (D)   All exterior improvements must conform to design guidelines as
outlined by the Commercial District Façade Improvement Committee, and must
receive a certificate of appropriateness before a building permit is issued
for the project.



   (E)   Eligible professional fees are limited to no greater than 10%
of the estimated cost of construction.



   (F)   Approved applicants must provide a cost estimate of proposed
improvements for approval by the village.



   (G)   Improvements approved under the program must be completed
within one year of application approval.



   (H)   All commercial loan rates are to be approved by the village
prior to payment of 3% buy-down from the village at closing. Loan terms are
to be fixed for a maximum of ten years, with loan amounts applicable under
this program not to exceed $200,000.



   (I)   The village reserves the right to provide applicants with a
grant, rather than a buy-down, for those applicants who are making
improvements which receive a certificate of appropriateness under the terms
of this program, but who are not seeking a loan to pay for such improvements.
In such cases the grant shall not exceed a value equal to a 3% buy-down of a
comparable commercial loan with a five-year term. A comparable commercial
loan shall be determined by taking the average commercial rate of three local
lending institutions and amortizing the average rate.



(Ord. 1818, passed 8-7-00)



DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS



§ 159.15  DESIGN STANDARDS.



   The following are the purposes of the architectural design standards
set forth by the village:



   (A)   To create an architectural identity and to avoid monotony in
exterior design and appearance of property;



   (B)   To promote the growth of the village, and to protect and
enhance land values, investments, and the general welfare of the citizens of
the village;



   (C)   To protect and to stabilize the general appearance of
buildings, structures, landscaping and open space areas throughout the
village;



   (D)   To encourage and promote acceptability, attractiveness,
cohesiveness and compatibility of new development, so at to maintain and
improve the current standards of property values throughout the village;



   (E)   To guide prospective contractors, architects, designers and
developers in preparing their project for review by the Plan Commission and
Village Board.



(Ord. 1818, passed 8-7-00)



§ 159.16  BUILDING AND  STRUCTURE DESIGN



   The following terms and conditions will apply to all projects:



   (A)   Visual compatibility.  All developments applying for a
façade improvement loan permit shall meet the following terms and conditions
for visual compatibility:



      (1)   Height.  The height of the proposed building or
structure shall be visually compatible with adjacent buildings.



      (2)   Proportion of front façade.  The relationship of the
width to the height of the front façade of the proposed building or
structure shall be visually compatible with buildings, public right-of-ways,
and places to which it is visually related.



      (3)   Proportion of openings.  The relationship of the width
to the height of windows of the proposed building or structure shall be
visually compatible with buildings, public right-of-ways, and places to which
it is visually related.



      (4)   Rhythm of spacing and buildings on streets.  The
relationship of a building or structure to the open spaces between it and
adjoining buildings or structures shall be visually compatible with the
buildings, public right-of-ways, and places to which it is visually related.



      (5)   Relationship of materials, texture, and color.  The
relationship of the materials, texture, and color of the façade of the
proposed building or structure shall be visually compatible with the
predominant materials used in the buildings and structures to which it is
visually related.



      (6)   Roof shapes.  The roof shape of the proposed building
or structure shall be visually compatible with the buildings to which it is
visually related.



      (7)   Walls of continuity.  Building façades and
appurtenances such as walls, fences, and landscape masses shall, when it is a
characteristic of the area, form cohesive walls of enclosure along a street
to ensure visual compatibility with the buildings, public right-of-ways, and
places to which such elements are visually related.



      (8)   Scale of building.  The size and mass of the proposed
building or structure in relation to open spaces, windows, door openings,
porches, and balconies shall be visually compatible with the buildings,
public right-of-ways, and places to which it is visually related.



      (9)   Directional expression of front elevation.  A building
shall be visually compatible with the buildings, public right-of-ways, and
places to which it is visually related in its directional character, whether
this be vertical character, horizontal character, or non-directional
character.



   (B)   Additional guidelines.  In addition to the terms and
conditions stated above, all buildings and structures shall adhere to the
following guidelines:



      (1)   Buildings and structures shall be consistent with the
established neighborhood character and



with any adjacent residential property.



      (2)   Building materials shall be selected for suitability to
the type of buildings and the design in which they are used. Buildings shall
use the same materials, or those which are architecturally harmonious, for
all building walls and other exterior building components that are wholly or
partially visible from public right-of-ways.



      (3)   Building materials shall be of durable quality.
Inappropriate materials or building methods, and those which will produce
inconsistency with the structure and architecture of the building, shall be
avoided.



      (4)   Flat or mansard roofs shall be discouraged. Front or
side gabled roofs should be consistent in design and pitch with the
surrounding area.



      (5)   Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves, and
parapets, shall have good proportions and relationships to one another.



      (6)   Building color scheme should be harmonious with other
structures to which it is visually related in the aspect of character and
quality of structures in the surrounding area.



      (7)   Monotony of design shall be avoided, however, structures
should complement each other in harmonious design.



      (8)   Façades greater than 100 feet in length must
incorporate recesses and projections along at least 20% of the length of the
façade. Windows, awnings, and arcades must total at least 60% of the façade
length abutting a public row.



(Ord. 1818, passed 8-7-00)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 159.17  SITE DEVELOPMENT AND LANDSCAPE.



   The purpose of these criteria is to establish a checklist of those
items that affect the aesthetic and physical aspect of Frankfort’s
environment. Pertinent to appearance is the design of the site, building and
structures, planting, signs, street hardware, and miscellaneous other objects
that are observed by the public.



   (A)   Relationship of buildings to site.



      (1)   The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable
transition with the streetscape, and to provide for adequate planting, safe
pedestrian movement, and parking areas.



      (2)   Site planning in which setbacks and yards are in excess
of zoning restrictions is encouraged to provide an interesting relationship
between buildings.



      (3)   Parking areas shall be treated with decorative elements,
building wall extensions, plantings, berms, or other innovative means so as
to screen parking areas from view of public right-of-ways.



      (4)   The height and scale of each building shall be
compatible with the site and existing adjoining buildings.



   (B)   Relationship of buildings and site to adjoining area.



      (1)   Attractive landscape transition to adjoining properties
shall be required.



      (2)   Harmony in texture, lines, and masses is required.
Monotony shall be avoided.



   (C)   Landscape and site treatment.  Landscape elements included in
these criteria consist of all forms of planting and vegetation, ground forms,
rock groupings, water patterns, and all visible construction, except
buildings and utility structures.



      (1)   Modification to topography will be permitted where it
contributes to the quality of the overall appearance of the site.



      (2)   Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance
architectural features, strengthen vistas and important axes, and provide
shade.



      (3)   Unity of design shall be achieved by repetition of
certain plant varieties and other materials, and by correlation with adjacent
developments.



      (4)   Plant material shall be selected for interest in its
structure, texture, and color, and for its ultimate growth. Plants that are
indigenous to the area and others that will be hardy, harmonious to the
design, and of sufficient appearance shall be used. The use of artificial
plants is prohibited.



      (5)   Parking areas and traffic ways shall be enhanced with
landscape islands containing trees or tree groupings.



      (6)   Screening of service yards and other places that tend to
be unsightly shall be accomplished by use of planting; screening shall be
equally effective in the winter and summer.



      (7)   In areas where grass or ground cover will not prosper,
other materials, such as paving of brick, stone and cobbles, should be used.
Carefully selected plants should be combined with such materials where
possible. The use of concrete and asphalt is not encouraged.



(Ord. 1818, passed 8-7-00)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 159.18  SIGNS.



   All signs must meet current village codes and ordinances. In addition,
the following shall serve as general guidelines for review of sign proposals:



   (A)   Every sign shall have a sufficient scale and proportion in its
design and in its visual relationship to buildings and surroundings.



   (B)   Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural
element of the building and site to which it principally relates.



   (C)   The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the
minimum needed to convey the sign’s major message, and shall be composed in
proportion to the area of the sign face.



   (D)   Each sign shall be compatible with signs on adjoining premises
and shall not compete for attention.



   (E)   Colors shall be used harmoniously and with restraint.
Excessive brightness and brilliant colors shall be avoided.



   (F)   Lighting shall be harmonious with the design. If external spot
or floor light is used, it shall be arranged so that the light source is
shielded from view. Backlit block signage shall be discouraged.



   (G)   Wall signs shall be part of the architectural concept. Size,
color, lettering, location, and arrangement shall be harmonious with the
building design and other surrounding designs as well.



(Ord. 1818, passed 8-7-00)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 159.19  SCREENING.



   (A)   Screening of service yards, utility meters and hardware,
mechanical equipment, refuse areas, and/or other potentially unattractive
areas shall be screened by the use of berms, dense plantings, masonry walls,
or fences, as approved by the Design Review Committee. Non-vegetation
screening shall use materials and design similar to the architecture of the
structure. Screening shall be effective in the winter and summer seasons.



   (B)   The degree of visibility and screening of service yards,
utility meters and hardware, mechanical equipment, refuse areas, and/or other
potential unattractive places shall be evaluated using the following criteria:



      (1)   The degree of visibility from all adjacent public
right-of-ways;



      (2)   The architectural compatibility of screening with the
building and structure;



      (3)   Possible visibility from future buildings and public
right-of-ways;



      (4)   Internal overall appearance in relation to the site.



(Ord. 1818, passed 8-7-00)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 159.20  UTILITY SERVICES.



   Newly installed utility services, and service revisions that are
necessary from exterior alterations, shall be located underground.



(Ord. 1818, passed 8-7-00)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 159.21  PARKING AREAS.



   Parking areas shall comply with the provisions of current village
ordinances and shall be treated with decorative elements, building wall
extensions, plantings, berms, or other innovative ways to adequately screen
parking areas from public right-of-ways. All parking areas shall include
concrete curbing along pavement edges.



(Ord. 1818, passed 8-7-00)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 159.22  LIGHTING.



   (A)   Outdoor lighting, where provided, should enhance the building
design and the adjoining landscape. Lighting standards, fixtures and all
exposed accessories shall comply with the village’s requirements, and
design and signs should be harmonious with the design of the surrounding
areas. Excessive brightness, flashing lights, and brilliant colors shall not
be permitted.



   (B)   Lighting in connection with miscellaneous structures and
street hardware shall meet the criteria applicable to site, landscape,
building and sign requirements.



(Ord. 1818, passed 8-7-00)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 159.23  MISCELLANEOUS STRUCTURES AND STREET HARDWARE.



   Miscellaneous structures and street hardware shall be designed to be
part of the architectural concept of design and landscape. Materials shall be
compatible with buildings, scale shall be sufficient, colors shall be in
harmony with buildings and surroundings, and proportions shall be attractive.



(Ord. 1818, passed 8-7-00)  Penalty, see § 10.99



ADMINISTRATION



§ 159.35  SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.



   All exhibits required for the permanent file must be able to be reduced
to legal size (8½ x 11) by folding, photo reduction, and the like. However,
larger mounting boards, material samples, or other exhibits may be used for
the Design Review Committee presentation. Ten black or blue-line prints of
the following are required for submittal for presentation to the Design
Review Committee. In addition, the following submittal requirements must be
submitted for the relevant project types:



   (A)   Building structure proposals.  Complete elevations of all
proposed construction and related elevations of existing structures are
required, containing the following information (all proposals shall include a
building material presentation board):



      (1)   Building elevations for side of the building;



      (2)   Script of building material;



      (3)   Identify color scheme;



      (4)   Pitch of roof.



   (B)   Site plan.  A site plan is required for projects requesting
funding for site improvements:



      (1)   Scale and north arrow;



      (2)   Address of site;



      (3)   All property and street pavement lines;



      (4)   Proposed ingress and egress to the site, including the
number of proposed on-site parking spaces. Delineate traffic flow with
directional arrows;



      (5)   Location of proposed existing landscape;



      (6)   Proposed number of each type of plant (botanical and
common name), and installation size of plants proposed for all landscape
areas;



      (7)   Location of street trees along parkways;



      (8)   Location of existing and proposed buildings on site, and
all buildings within 50 feet of the site’s boundary;



      (9)   Location of all existing and proposed lighting standards.



   (C)   Sign proposal.  An elevation is required of each face of the
proposed sign, showing the following information:



      (1)   All specifications, including size of letters and
graphics;



      (2)   Description of sign and frame materials and colors,
including supports;



      (3)   Wall anchorage details for wall-mounted signs;



      (4)   All backlit block signs are strongly discouraged.



   (D)   Elevation.  Elevations and description of building materials
for ground-mounted signs. An elevation drawn to scale of the entire wall of
the building to which the sign is to be fixed, correctly locating the sign.



   (E)   Lighting proposals; site plan.  A site plan is required
containing the following information:



      (1)   Scale and north arrow;



      (2)   Address of site;



      (3)   All property and street pavement lines;



      (4)   Location of all existing and proposed lighting
standards, complete with photometric diagram;



      (5)   Cut sheet of proposed lighting fixture.



(Ord. 1818, passed 8-7-00)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   ACCEPTANCES AND DEDICATIONS



      II.   ANNEXATIONS



      III.   BONDS



      IV.   CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS



      V.   EASEMENTS



      VI.   FRANCHISES



      VII.   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS



      VIII.   STREET NAME CHANGES



      IX.   VACATIONS



      X.   ZONING CHANGES



      XI.   STREET ADDITIONS



TABLE I:  ACCEPTANCES AND DEDICATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


683
 
12-7-70
 
Accepting dedication of right-of-way for public road purposes for a strip of
land connecting the southernmost end of Elsner Road with U.S. Route 45 being
that part of the northwest quarter of section 28, township 35 north, range 12
east of the third Principal Meridian, and that part of the northeast quarter
of section 29, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal
Meridian.


749
 
2-7-72
 
Dedicating a portion of a certain street known as Colorado Avenue, being that
part of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of section 21,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


3040
 
7-18-16
 
Amending Ordinance No. 2987 to allow for land dedication in lieu of a cash
donation in condition 1 of the major planned unit development (PUD) change
for the Frankfort Commons II Development, southeast corner of St. Francis
Road and LaGrange Road.


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE II:  ANNEXATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




295
 
5-4-14
 
Annexing territory beginning at the center of section 28 in township 35
north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


462
 
9-19-55
 
Annexing certain territory being lots 21 to 25 inclusive, in Arthur T.
McIntosh and Com-pany’s Kean Avenue Estates, a subdivision of part of the
southwest quarter of section 22 in township 35 north, range 12 east of the
third Principal Meridian.


466
 
7-16-56
 
Annexing certain territory being blocks 17, 18, 19, and 20, except public
service and highway right-of-way in Bowen’s Addition to the village, in
section 28, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal
Meridian.


467
 
7-16-56
 
Annexing certain territory being all that part of the west half of the
northwest quarter lying north and south of the Indian Boundary Line of
section 27 in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal
Meridian.


472
 
4-1-57
 
Annexing certain territory being that part of the west three-fourths of the
northwest quarter of section 28, township 35 north, range 12 east of the
third Principal Meridian; and the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter
of section 27 and that part of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter
of section 27.


479
 
10-7-57
 
Annexing certain territory being the northwest quarter of the southeast
quarter of section 21, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third
Principal Meridian (except that part dedicated for highway purposes).


480
 
10-21-57
 
Annexing certain territory commencing at the northwest corner of the
southwest quarter of section 27.


485
 
9-15-58
 
Annexing certain territory being that part of the west three-fourths of the
northwest quarter of section 28, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the
third Principal Meridian.


491
 
7-20-59
 
Annexing certain territory being that part of the north half of section 21,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


492
 
7-20-59
 
Annexing certain territory being the northwest quarter of the southwest
quarter of section 27 and that part of the southwest quarter of the northwest
quarter of section 27 lying south of the right-of-way of the Elgin, Joliet,
and Eastern Railway Company, all in township 35 north, range 12 east of the
third Principal Meridian; and that part of the 100-foot wide operating
right-of- way of the Elgin, Joliet, and Eastern Railway Company situated in
the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of section 27, township 35
north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


497
 
11-2-59
 
Annexing certain territory being the south 660 feet of the west half of the
southwest quarter of the northwest quarter in section 22, in township 35
north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian


498
 
11-2-59
 
Annexing certain territory commencing at a point on the center line of
section 21, west of the intersection of the east line of section 21 with the
center line of said section, located in the northeast quarter of section 21
in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


504
 
1-18-60
 
Annexing certain territory beginning 40 feet south and 33 feet west of the
northeast corner of the southeast quarter of section 28, township 35 north,
range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


505
 
2-15-60
 
Annexing certain territory being all that part of the west three-quarters of
the northwest quarter of section 28, in township 35 north, range 12 east of
the third Principal Meridian.


506
 
2-15-60
 
Annexing certain territory being the 100-foot right-of-way of the Elgin,
Joliet, and Eastern Railway Company as located in the northwest quarter of
section 28, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


507
 
2-15-60
 
Annexing certain territory being the north half of the southwest quarter of
section 28, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal
Meridian.


508
 
2-15-60
 
Annexing certain territory being that part of the northeast quarter of
section 21, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


510
 
5-16-60
 
Annexing certain territory commencing at the intersection of the east line of
section 21 with the center line of said section, the northeast quarter of
section 21, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


517
 
10-3-60
 
Annexing certain territory being the east 385 feet of the south 226.5 feet of
the west half of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of section
22, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


520
 
11-7-60
 
Annexing certain territory being that part of the west three-fourths of the
northwest quarter of section 28 lying north and west of the center line of
Highway Route U.S. 45 and lying north of the south line of Nebraska Avenue,
in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian; and that
part of the northwest quarter of section 28, lying westerly of the
northwesterly line of Highway Route No. 45, and lying between the south line
of Nebraska Avenue, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal
Meridian.


526
 
8-7-61
 
Annexing certain territory being the south ten acres of that part of the
northwest quarter of section 28 lying westerly of the center line of U.S.
Route 45, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


537
 
11-19-62
 
Annexing certain territory being the north half of the north half of the
southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of section 27, township 35 north,
range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


563
 
11-1-65
 
Annexing certain territory being the north 835 feet of the east half of the
southeast quarter of section 28, township 35 north, range 12 east of the
third Principal Meridian.


573
 
5-16-66
 
Annexing certain territory being all that part of the northwest quarter of
the northwest quarter north and south of the Indian Boundary Line of
fractional section 27 in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third
Principal Meridian.


579
 
11-7-66
 
Annexing certain territory being the west half of the southwest quarter of
section 21, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal
Meridian.


580
 
4-17-67
 
Annexing certain territory being that part of the west three-quarters of the
northwest quarter of section 28, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the
third Principal Meridian.


582
 
6-5-67
 
Annexing certain territory being all of block 16 except the south 150 feet
conveyed to the Public Service Company of Northern Illinois of Bowen’s
addition to the village located in section 28, township 35 north, range 12
east of the third Principal Meridian.


592
 
7-17-67
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the right-of-way of U.S.
Route No. 45 in the county, beginning at the point where the northern
boundary of the present village limits, intersect with the right-of-way,
running north along and including all of the right-of-way to the point where
it intersects with the northernmost boundary of the right-of-way to the point
where it intersects with the northernmost boundary of the right-of- way of
St. Francis Road.


593
 
11-20-67
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the right-of-way of U.S.
Route No. 30 in the county, beginning at the point where the eastern boundary
of the present village limits, intersect with  right-of-way  running 
east  along and including all of the right-of-way to the point where it
intersects with the easternmost boundary of the right-of- way of Pfeiffer
Road.


594
 
12-4-67
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the right-of-way of Sauk
Trail in the county, beginning at the point where the eastern boundary of the
present village limits, intersect with right-of-way, running southeast along
and including all of the right-of-way to the point where it intersects with
the easternmost boundary of the right-of- way of Pfeiffer Road.


595
 
11-20-67
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the right-of-way of Center
Road in the county, beginning at the point when the southern boundary of the
present village limits, intersect with the right-of-way, running south along
and including all of the right-of-way to the point where it intersects with
the southernmost boundary of the right-of- way of Steger Road.


596
 
12-4-67
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the right-of-way of U.S.
Route No. 45 in the county, beginning at the point where the western boundary
of the present village limits, intersect with the right-of-way, running
southwest along and including all of the right-of-way to the point where it
intersects with the southernmost boundary of the right-of-way of Laraway Road.


597
 
12-4-67
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the right-of-way of U.S.
Route No. 30 in the county, beginning at the point where the western boundary
of the present village limits, intersect with the right-of-way, running west
along and including all of the right-of-way to the point where it intersects
with the westernmost boundary of the right-of-way of Wolf Road.


598
 
12-4-67
 
Annexing certain territory being that part of the east half of the southeast
quarter of section 29, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third
Principal Meridian.


600
 
2-19-68
 
Annexing certain territory being the south 23 acres of the northwest quarter
of section 34, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal
Meridian.


601
 
4-1-68
 
Annexing certain territory being the north 330 feet of the south 2,322.2 feet
of the west 1,320 feet of the northwest quarter of section 34, in township 35
north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


608
 
9-9-68
 
Annexing certain territory being lots 12, 13, 14, and 41 in Arthur T.
McIntosh and Company’s Kean Avenue Estates, a subdivision of part of the
southwest quarter of section 22, township 35 north, range 12 east of the
third Principal Meridian.


610
 
1-20-69
 
Annexing certain territory being that part of the northwest fractional
quarter of section 27, south of the Indian Boundary Line, in township 35
north, range 12, commencing at the northeast corner of lot 34 in Unit No.
Five of Krusemark’s Addition to the village.


618
 
4-7-69
 
Annexing certain territory being that part of the south half of the northeast
quarter of section 21, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third
Principal Meridian.


626
 
8-18-69
 
Annexing certain territory being lot 37 in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s
Kean Avenue Estates, a subdivision of part of the southwest quarter of
section 22, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


637
 
10-20-69
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the right-of-way of Sauk
Trail in the county, beginning at a point where it intersects with the
easternmost boundary of the right-of- way of Pfeiffer Road running southeast
along and including all of the right-of- way to a point where it intersects
with the center line of Harlem Avenue in the county.


640
 
11-3-69
 
Annexing certain territory being the southeast quarter of the southwest
quarter, and the west half of the southeast quarter of section 28, township
35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


646
 
2-16-70
 
Annexing certain territory being the west 331 feet of block 16 in Bowen’s
Addition to the village, in section 28, township 35 north, range 12 east of
the third Principal Meridian.


647
 
2-16-70
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the Elgin, Joliet, and
Eastern Railroad right-of-way commencing at the east line of the highway
known as U.S. Route 45, running west to the western section line of section
28, all in section 28, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third
Principal Meridian.


654
 
4-6-70
 
Annexing certain territory being the south 17 feet of lot two, and lots
three, four, and eight in Osgood’s Subdivision of the south part of the
southwest quarter of section 15 in township 35 north, range 12 east of the
third Principal Meridian.


658
 
5-4-70
 
Annexing certain territory being the south 382 feet of the north 1,217 feet
of the east half of the southeast quarter of section 28, township 35 north,
range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


659
 
5-4-70
 
Annexing certain territory being the south 633.5 feet of the east half of the
southeast quarter of section 28, township 35 north, range 12 east of the
third Principal Meridian.


674
 
10-19-70
 
Annexing certain territory being lot 36 in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s
Kean Avenue Estates, a subdivision of part of the southwest quarter of
section 22, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


675
 
10-19-70
 
Annexing certain territory being the south half acre of that part of the west
half of the northwest quarter of section 28, township 35 north, range 12 east
of the third Principal Meridian.


681
 
12-7-70
 
Annexing certain territory being part of the northeast quarter of section 29,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


686
 
2-1-71
 
Annexing certain territory being lot 16 in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s
Kean Avenue Estates, a subdivision of part of the southwest quarter of
section 22, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


688
 
2-15-71
 
Annexing certain territory being lot 15 in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s
Kean Avenue Estates, a subdivision of part of the southwest quarter of
section 22, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


693
 
3-1-71
 
Annexing certain territory being the south half of the north half of the
southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of section 27 in township 35
north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


697
 
4-19-71
 
Annexing certain territory being that part of the northwest quarter of
section 27, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian,
commencing on the north line of the Public Service Company right-of-way and
the present easterly limits of the village.


698
 
2-15-71
 
Annexing certain territory being that part of the east 80 acres of the
southeast fractional quarter of section 28, township 35 north, range 12 east
of the third Principal Meridian.


703
 
6-7-71
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the right-of-way of Laraway
Road in the county, beginning at the westernmost boundary of the right-of-
way of Wolf Road in the county.


704
 
6-7-71
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the right-of-way of the
Frankfort Township-New Lenox Township Town Line Road in the county, beginning
at the southernmost boundary of the right-of-way of Laraway Road in the
county.


705
 
6-7-71
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the right-of-way of the Penn
Central Company right-of-way, formerly the New York Central Railroad Company
right-of-way, in the county.


706
 
6-7-71
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the right-of-way of 116th
Avenue, also known as Owen Road, in the county, beginning at the southernmost
boundary of the right-of- way of the Penn Central Company right-of-way,
formerly known as the New York Central Railroad company right-of-way, in the
county.


707
 
6-7-71
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the right-of-way of Steger
Road in the county, beginning at the easternmost boundary of the right-of-
way of the Frankfort Township-New Lenox Township Town Line Road in the county.


708
 
6-7-71
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the right-of-way of U.S.
Route No. 30 in the counties of Will and Cook, beginning at the easternmost
boundary of Pfeiffer Road.


709
 
6-7-71
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the right-of-way of
Ridgeland Avenue in Cook County, beginning where the southern right-of- way
line of U.S. Route No. 30 intersects with said Ridgeland Avenue.


710
 
6-7-71
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the right-of-way of Sauk
Trail in the counties of Cook and Will, beginning at the westernmost boundary
of the right-of-way of Ridgeland Avenue in Cook County.


711
 
6-7-71
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the right-of-way of Harlem
Avenue in the counties of Will and Cook, beginning at the southernmost
boundary of the right-of-way of Sauk Trail in the counties of Cook and Will.


716
 
6-7-71
 
Annexing certain territory being the south five acres of the east half of lot
nine in School Trustee’s Subdivision of section 16, township 35 north,
range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


717
 
6-7-71
 
Annexing certain territory being part of the west half of the northeast
quarter of section 21, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third
Principal Meridian.


733
 
11-15-71
 
Annexing certain territory being the west 600 feet of the east 932.31 feet
measured on the north line  of lot 13,  in the School Trustee’s
Subdivision of section 16, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third
Principal Meridian; the west 600 feet of the east 2257.31 feet of the
northwest quarter as measured on the north line of section 21, in township 35
north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian; and the east half of
the southeast quarter of lot 13, in School Trustee’s Subdivision of part of
section 16, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal
Meridian.


735
 
12-6-71
 
Annexing certain territory being the west 330 feet of the northwest quarter
of section 34, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal
Meridian, that part of the northwest quarter of section 34 lying north of the
northerly line of Industry Avenue, all in township 35 north, range 12 east of
the third Principal Meridian; and the north 66 feet of the south 696.20 feet
of the west 2,575 feet of the northwest quarter of section 34, in township 35
north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


737
 
12-6-71
 
Annexing certain territory being the south 7.89 feet of the east half of the
southeast quarter of lot 13 in School Trustees Subdivision of part of section
16, the north 700.84 feet of the west 307.31 feet of the east 1,657.31 feet
of the northwest quarter of section 21, and the west 427 feet of the east
1,350 feet of that part of the northwest quarter of section 21 lying north of
the centerline of Colorado Avenue extended west in Lincoln Meadows Unit No.
Two Subdivision, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal
Meridian.


740
 
1-3-72
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the right-of-way of the Penn
Central Company right-of-way, formerly the New York Central Railway company
right-of-way, beginning at the east line of the right- of-way of the road
known as Wolf Road.


742
 
1-3-72
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the right-of-way of Laraway
Road beginning at the east line of the right-of-way of the road known as Wolf
Road.


743
 
1-3-72
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the right-of-way of 116th
Avenue also known as Owens Road beginning at the southernmost boundary line
of the right-of-way of Laraway Road.


744
 
1-3-72
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the right-of-way of Wolf
Road beginning at the southernmost boundary line of the right-of-way of
Laraway Road.


745
 
1-3-72
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the right-of-way of the
highway known as U.S. Route 45 beginning at the southernmost boundary line of
the right-of-way of Laraway Road.


746
 
1-3-72
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the right-of-way of Pfeiffer
Road beginning at the south line of the right-of-way of U.S. Route 30.


747
 
1-3-72
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the right-of-way of Harlem
Ave. in the counties of Will and Cook, beginning at the south line of the
right- of-way of U.S. Route 30 in the counties.


748
 
2-7-72
 
Annexing certain territory being that part of the northeast quarter of the
northwest quarter of section 21, township 35 north, range 12 east of the
third Principal Meridian, commencing at the northeast corner of lot one,
block five, in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s Lincoln Meadows Unit No.
two.


750
 
2-7-72
 
Annexing certain property being the south 630 feet of that part of the
northwest quarter of section 22, township 35 north, range 12 east of the
third Principal Meridian.


754
 
2-7-72
 
Annexing certain territory being that part of the east half of the northeast
quarter of section 21, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third
Principal Meridian.


758
 
3-20-72
 
Annexing certain territory being the north 300 feet of the south 1,500 feet
of the east 300 feet of the east half of the northeast quarter of section 21
in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


771
 
7-24-72
 
Annexing certain territory being that portion of the right-of-way of 84th
Avenue, beginning at the north line of the right-of-way of U.S. Route 30.


772
 
7-24-72
 
Annexing certain territory being part of the northwest quarter, section 23,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


775
 
8-7-72
 
Annexing certain territory being the east 660 feet of the north 330 feet of
the south 1,992.20 feet of the northwest quarter of section 34, in township
35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian, and the west 660
feet of the north 330 feet of the south 1,992.20 feet of the northwest
quarter of section 34, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third
Principal Meridian.


776
 
8-7-72
 
Annexing certain territory being the north 363 feet of the south 1,332.20
feet of the east 720 feet of the west 1320 feet of the northwest quarter of
section 34, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal
Meridian.


778
 
9-11-72
 
Annexing certain territory being the east 660 feet of the west 1,320 feet of
the northwest quarter of section 34, in township 35 north, range 12 east of
the third Principal Meridian.


779
 
9-11-72
 
Annexing certain territory being the north 330 feet of the south 1,662.20
feet of the west 1,320 feet of the northwest quarter of section 34, in
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


780
 
9-11-72
 
Annexing certain territory being the north 300 feet of the south 678.2 feet
of the west 726 feet of the northwest quarter of section 34, in township 35
north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


781
 
9-11-72
 
Annexing certain territory being the north 525 feet of the south 903.2 feet
of the east 800 feet of the west 1,526 feet of the northwest quarter of
section 34, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal
Meridian.


782
 
9-11-72
 
Annexing certain territory being the east 330 feet of the west 1,716 feet of
the northwest quarter of section 34, in township 35 north, range 12 east of
the third Principal Meridian.


795
 
12-4-72
 
Annexing certain territory being the north 525 feet of the south 903.20 feet,
of the northwest quarter of Section 34, township 35 north, range 12 east of
the third Principal Meridian.


796
 
12-4-72
 
Annexing certain territory being the north 225 feet of the south 903.20 feet
of the west 726 feet of the northwest quarter of section 34, in township 35
north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


798
 
12-18-72
 
Annexing certain territory being the east 330 feet of the west 660 feet of
the northwest quarter of section 34, in township 35 north, range 12 east of
the third Principal Meridian.


813
 
4-16-73
 
Annexing certain territory being the north 363 feet of the south 1,332.20
feet of the west 600 feet of the northwest quarter of section 34, in township
35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


815
 
5-7-73
 
Annexing certain territory being that part abutting the westerly right-of-way
line of Route No. 45 as laid out and abutting the westerly line (Center Line
of old Highway) of that part of the south fractional half of section 32 lying
north and south of the Indian Boundary line.


822
 
6-4-73
 
Annexing certain territory being part of the northwest quarter of section 21,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


824
 
6-18-73
 
Annexing certain lands being part of the northwest fractional quarter lying
north and south of the Old Indian Boundary Line, of section 27, township 35
north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


825
 
7-2-73
 
Annexing certain lands being part of the east half of the northwest quarter
of section 27, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal
Meridian.


826
 
7-2-73
 
Annexing certain lands commencing at the northwest corner of Unit eight of
Krusemark’s Addition to the village.


838
 
10-1-73
 
Annexing certain lands being lot 21 of Bowen’s Addition to the village
subdivision of the northwest order of section 28, township 35 north, range 12
east of the third Principal Meridian.


843
 
11-19-73
 
Annexing certain territory being the west 650 feet of that part of the
southwest quarter of section 25, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the
third Principal Meridian.


845
 
12-17-73
 
Annexing certain lands being that part of the northeast quarter of section
21, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian,
commencing at the northeast corner of Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s
Lincoln Meadows, Unit Two, a subdivision in section 21.


846
 
12-17-73
 
Annexing certain lands being that part of the northeast quarter of section
21, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian,
commencing at the northeast corner of Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s
Lincoln Meadows, Unit Two, a subdivision in section 21.


847
 
12-17-73
 
Annexing certain lands being the south half of the north half of the east
half of lot eight in School Trustees Subdivision of section 16, township 35
north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian; and the north quarter
of the east half of lot eight in School Trustees Subdivision of section 16,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


858
 
3-4-74
 
Annexing certain lands being that part of the southeast quarter of the
northwest quarter of section 27, township 35 north, range 12 east of the
third Principal Meridian, commencing at the point of intersection of the
centerline of State Aid Route No. 47 (Sauk Trail).


859
 
3-18-74
 
Annexing certain lands being the east 275 feet of the north 792 feet of the
northwest fractional quarter north and south of the Indian Boundary Line
except the east 40 acres thereof, in section 33, township 35 north, range 12
east of the third Principal Meridian.


860
 
4-1-74
 
Annexing certain lands being the north half of the south half of the east
half of lot nine in School Trustees Subdivision of section 16, township 35
north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


877
 
11-21-74
 
Annexing certain lands being that part of Bowen Street as presently dedicated
and used, a 66 foot right-of-way in section 22, township 35 north, range 12
east of the third Principal Meridian; and land commencing at a point on the
north line of lot 13 in the subdivision of part of the southwest quarter of
section 22, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal
Meridian.


883
 
4-21-75
 
Annexing certain lands being lot 13 in the School Trustee’s Subdivision of
section 16, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian;
and the northwest quarter of section 21, township 35 north, range 12 east of
the third Principal Meridian.


887
 
6-16-75
 
Annexing certain lands being the north 100 feet of the south 925 feet of the
west 212 feet of the west half of the southwest quarter of the northwest
quarter of section 22, and the east 38 feet of the west 250 feet of the north
100 feet of the south 925 feet of the west half of the southwest quarter of
the northwest quarter of section 22, both in township 35 north, range 12 east
of the third Principal Meridian; and the west 50 feet of the south 825 feet
of the west half of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of section
22, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


900
 
10-6-75
 
Annexing certain lands being lot A in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company Kean
Avenue Estates, a subdivision of part of the southwest quarter of section 22,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


901
 
11-3-75
 
Annexing certain lands being the north half of the south half of the east
half of lot eight, the south quarter of the east half of lot eight, the north
quarter of the east half of lot nine, and the south half of the north half of
the east half of lot nine, all in School Trustees Subdivision of section 16,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


902
 
11-17-75
 
Annexing certain lands being the southwest quarter of lot 14 in School
Trustees Subdivision of section 16, in township 35 north, range 12 east of
the third Principal Meridian.


903
 
12-1-75
 
Annexing certain lands commencing at the point of intersection of the center
line of State Aid Route. No. 47 (Sauk Trail) and the east line of the west
558.98 feet of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter.


926
 
9-20-76
 
Annexing certain lands being that part of the south half of lot 14 in School
Trustees Subdivision of section 16, township 35 north, range 12 east of the
third Principal Meridian.


941
 
4-18-77
 
Annexing certain lands being that part of the northeast quarter of section
21, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian,
commencing at the northeast corner of Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s
Lincoln Meadows, Unit Two, a subdivision in section 21.


943
 
5-2-77
 
Annexing certain lands being the east 90 feet of the west 558.98 feet of that
part of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of section 27,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


945
 
5-16-77
 
Annexing certain lands being the north 165 feet of the south 825 feet of the
west 530 feet of the west half of the southwest quarter of the northwest
quarter of section 22, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third
Principal Meridian.


947
 
6-6-77
 
Annexing certain lands being that part of the north half of section 27,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian, beginning
at the northeast corner of Unit No. Nine of Krusemark’s Addition to the
village.


958
 
9-19-77
 
Annexing certain lands being that part of the southeast quarter of the
northwest quarter of section 27, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the
third Principal Meridian, beginning at the point of intersection of the
center line of State Aid Route No. 47 (Sauk Trail), as now located, and the
east line of the west 558.98 feet of southeast quarter of the northwest
quarter.


964
 
10-17-77
 
Annexing certain lands being the west 330 feet of the south 660 feet of the
east half of the southwest quarter of section 27, township 35 north, range 12
east of the third Principal Meridian; and the east 330 feet of the west 660
feet of the south 660 feet of the east half of the southwest quarter of
section 27, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


966
 
1-16-78
 
Annexing certain lands being Cambridge Subdivision, a resubdivision of lots
38, 43, D, E, and F in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s Kean Avenue
Estates, a subdivision of part of the southwest quarter of section 22, in
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


978
 
5-15-78
 
Annexing certain lands being that part of the north half of section 27,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian, beginning
at the southeast corner of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of
section 27.


984
 
7-17-78
 
Annexing certain lands being the east 627 feet of the north 792 feet of the
northwest fractional quarter, north and south of the Indian Boundary Line, of
section 33, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


992
 
11-6-78
 
Annexing certain lands being the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter
of section 27, and that part of the southeast  quarter of the northwest
quarter of section 27 lying southerly of the southerly right-of-way of the
Elgin, Joliet, and Eastern Railroad, all in township 35 north, range 12 east
of the third Principal Meridian.


994
 
11-20-78
 
Annexing certain lands being the north 300 feet of the south 1,500 feet of
the east 300 feet of the east half of the northeast quarter of section 21, in
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian; and that
part of the northeast quarter of section 21, in township 35 north, range 12
east of the third Principal Meridian, commencing at the northeast corner of
the northeast quarter of section 21.


1034
 
2-4-80
 
Annexing certain real property being the New Frankfort Settlement.


1049
 
11-17-80
 
Annexing certain lands in the southeast quarter of section 20, township 35
north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian, commencing at the
northeast corner of southeast quarter.


1080
 
8-16-82
 
Annexing certain lands being part of the northeast quarter of section 21,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


1098
 
10-3-83
 
Annexing certain lands being the east half of section 20, township 35 north,
range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


1130
 
3-4-85
 
Annexing certain lands being part of the southeast quarter of section 20, in
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


1155
 
4-7-86
 
Annexing certain lands being part of the south half of the northeast quarter
of section 21, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal
Meridian.


1162
 
8-18-86
 
Annexing certain lands being the north 700 feet of the west 330 feet of the
northwest fractional quarter, north and south of the Indian Boundary Line,
except the east 40 acres thereof of section 33, township 35 north, range 12
east of the third Principal Meridian.


1167
 
8-25-86
 
Annexing certain territory being that part of the northwest quarter of
section 22, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian,
commencing at the southwest corner of the northwest quarter of section 22.


1187
 
9-9-87
 
Annexing certain lands being the north 660 feet of the west half of the
southwest quarter of the northwest quarter, in section 22 of township 35
north, range 12 of the third Principal Meridian.


1188
 
9-9-87
 
Annexing certain lands being that part of lots five through seven and 9
though 23 in Osgood’s subdivision of the south part of the southwest
quarter of section 15, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third
Principal Meridian.


1189
 
9-9-87
 
Annexing certain lands being lots one and two in Osgood’s Subdivision of
the south part of the southwest quarter of section 15, in township 35 north,
range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


1192
 
10-5-87
 
Annexing certain lands being the north half of the southwest quarter of
section 34, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


1194
 
10-5-87
 
Annexing the following lands:


(1)
 
That part of the northeast quarter of section 21, in  township 35 north,
range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian, commencing at the northeast
corner of the northeast quarter of section 21.


(2)
 
The north 300 feet of the south 1,500 feet of the east 300 feet of the east
half of the northeast quarter of section 21, township 35 north, range 12 east
of the third Principal Meridian.


(3)
 
The south 150 feet of the north 300 feet of the south 1,500 feet of the east
300 feet of the east half of the northeast quarter of section 21, in township
35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


1196
 
11-2-87
 
Annexing certain lands being that part of the southeast quarter of section
20, beginning on the south line of the southeast quarter.


1199
 
12-7-87
 
Annexing certain lands being the southeast quarter of section 24, township 35
north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


1200
 
12-7-87
 
Annexing certain lands being the north half of the east half of the northeast
quarter of section 36, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third
Principal Meridian.


1207
 
3-7-88
 
Annexing certain lands being the east 102.18 feet of the west 468.98 feet of
that part of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of section 27,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


1213
 
5-2-88
 
Annexing certain lands being the east 350 feet of the northwest quarter of
section 21, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


1214
 
5-16-88
 
Annexing certain lands being lots 152 and 153, in Arthur T. McIntosh’s
Second Addition to Lincoln Estates, a subdivision of part of the east half of
section 23, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal
Meridian.


1224
 
7-18-88
 
Annexing certain lands to the village.


1227
 
8-15-88
 
Annexing certain lands to the village.


1233
 
9-6-88
 
Annexing a tract of land lying in the northeast quarter of section 21,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


1234
 
9-6-88
 
Annexing land being the north 142.4 feet of the south 800 feet of the east
250 feet of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of section 21,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian; and the
north 282.2 feet of the west 350 feet of the south 800 feet of the east 600
feet of the southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of section 21,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


1235
 
9-6-88
 
Annexing land commencing at the southeast corner of the west half of the
southwest quarter of section 21 in township 35 north, range 12 east of the
third Principal Meridian.


1236
 
9-6-88
 
Annexing land being part of the north half of the northwest quarter of
section 22, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


1237
 
9-6-88
 
Annexing land being lots B and C in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s Kean
Avenue Estates, a subdivision of part of the southwest quarter of section 22,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


1238
 
9-6-88
 
Annexing land being that part of the west half of the northwest quarter of
section 27, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian,
beginning at a point on the south right- of-way line of Sauk Trail at the
northeast corner of the Church Addition to the village.


1239
 
9-6-88
 
Annexing land being part of the east half of the northwest quarter of section
27, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


1240
 
9-6-88
 
Annexing land being that part of the east half of the northwest quarter of
section 27, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


1241
 
9-6-88
 
Annexing land being the south 20 acres of the southwest quarter of the
southwest quarter of section 27, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the
third Principal Meridian.


1242
 
9-6-88
 
Annexing land being part of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of
section 28, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal
Meridian.


1244
 
10-17-88
 
Annexing a tract of land lying in the northeast quarter of section 21,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


1245
 
10-17-88
 
Annexing land being part of the southwest quarter of section 21, township 35
north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


1246
 
10-17-88
 
Annexing land being part of the east half of the southwest quarter of section
21, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


1247
 
10-17-88
 
Annexing land being part of the east half of the southwest quarter of section
21, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


1256
 
4-3-89
 
Annexing certain lands being the west 650 feet of that part of the southwest
quarter of section 25, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third
Principal Meridian.


1259
 
4-3-89
 
Annexing certain lands being that part of the northwest quarter of the
southwest quarter of section 26, township 35 north, range 12 east of the
third Principal Meridian, commencing at the southwest corner of the northwest
quarter.


1276
 
9-29-89
 
Annexing Parcel I, a certain part of the southeast 1/4 of Section 15,
Township 35 North, Range 12, east of the Third Principal Meridian; and Parcel
II, Lot 24 in Osgood’s Subdivision.


1277
 
9-29-89
 
Annexing Parcel I, a certain part of the West fraction of the northwest
fractional quarter south of the Indian Boundary Line of Section 23, Township
35 North, Range 12 east of the Third Principal Meridian; Parcel II, certain
territory north and south of the Indian Boundary Line of Section 22, Township
35 North, Range 12 east of the Third Principal Meridian; Parcel III, a
certain part of the northwest fractional quarter north of the Indian Boundary
Line of Section 23, Township 35 North, Range 12 east of the Third Principal
Meridian; Parcel IV, a certain part of the southeast quarter of Section 22,
Township 35 North, Range 12 east of the Third Principal Meridian, lying
northwesterly of the Indian Boundary Line and lying north of the centerline
of Lincoln Highway.


1278
 
9-29-89
 
Annexing certain tract lying north of U.S. Route 30.


1279
 
9-29-89
 
Annexing certain territory in the east half of the northeast quarter of
Section 15, Township 35 North, Range 12, east of the Third Principal Meridian.


1280
 
9-29-89
 
Annexing certain Parcel I, a certain part of the east half of the northwest
quarter of Section 15, Township 35 North, Range 12, east of the Third
Principal Meridian; and Parcel II, in the same, except where used as cemetery.


1281
 
9-29-89
 
Annexing a certain tract of the east half of the northeast quarter of Section
15, Township 35 North, Range 12, east of the Third Principal Meridian.


1282
 
9-29-89
 
Annexing Parcel I, the south 60 acres of the southwest quarter of Section 11,
Township 35 North, Range 12, east of the Third Principal Meridian; and Parcel
II, the north half of the northwest quarter of Section 14, in same.


1283
 
10-16-89
 
Annexing a certain part of a tract lying south of U.S. Route 30 (Lincoln
Highway).


1288
 
12-28-89
 
Annexing a certain part of Township 35 North, Range 12, east of the Third
Principal Meridian (Prestwick Subdivision Annexation).


1301
 
6-18-90
 
Annexing certain lands to the village.


1303
 
6-18-90
 
Annexing certain lands to the village.


1320
 
9-17-90
 
Annexing certain lands to the village.


1344
 
4-15-91
 
Authorizing annexation agreement for certain real estate owned by RWS
Development Corporation described in said agreement.


1375
 
4-20-92
 
Authorizing an annexation agreement between the village and Cole Taylor Bank
for Weiland Farm property.


1376
 
4-20-92
 
Annexing Parcel I, the southeast fractional quarter of Section 22, both north
and south of the Indian Boundary Line; and Parcel II, the southwest quarter
of Section 22 in Township 35 North, Range 12, east of the Third Principal
Meridian.


1391
 
9-8-92
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
the American National Bank and Trust Company and Frankfort Ventures, Inc. for
certain property described in the agreement (Sybaris).


1406
 
3-15-93
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
Marquette National Bank for certain property described in the agreement
(Hunter Woods Estates, First Edition).


1407
 
3-15-93
 
Annexing certain lands to the village (Hunter Woods Estates, First Edition).


1430
 
10-4-93
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
Mostar Ltd. for certain property described in the agreement.


1431
 
10-4-93
 
Annexing certain lands to the village (Mostar Ltd.).


1493
 
2-21-95
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
the Board of Education for certain property described in the agreement
(School District Number 157C).


1494
 
2-21-95
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
Brett Rizzi for certain property described in the agreement (Frankfort Garden
Center).


1495
 
2-21-95
 
Annexing certain lands to the village (Frankfort Garden Center).


1497
 
3-6-95
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
Amoco Oil Company and Archibald Candy Corporation for certain property
described in the agreement.


1498
 
3-6-95
 
Annexing the North 270 feet of the East 320 feet of the Southeast Quarter of
Section 24, Township 35 North, Range 12 East of the Third Principal Meridian.


1507
 
4-3-95
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
John and Ilene Semanic for certain property described in the agreement.


1508
 
4-3-95
 
Annexing certain lands to the village (Semanic property).


1516
 
5-5-95
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
NSLB and O’Donnell Construction for certain property described in the
agreement.


1517
 
5-5-95
 
Annexing the South 165 feet of the North 382 feet of the East 264 feet of the
East three-quarters of the Northeast Quarter of Section 29, in Township 35
North, Range 12, East of the Third Principal Meridian.


1523
 
6-8-95
 
Annexing certain lands to the village (School district number 157C).


1529
 
8-7-95
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
James and Deborah Vanderlaan for certain property described in the agreement
(Lawndale subdivision).


1530
 
8-7-95
 
Annexing certain lands to the village (Lawndale subdivision).


1533
 
9-5-95
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
the Franklin Public Library for certain property described in the agreement
(Frankfort Public Library District).


1534
 
9-5-95
 
Annexing certain land to the village (Frankfort Public Library District).


1558
 
3-4-96
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
Michael Hargens and Richard Wiesch for certain property described in the
agreement (Harvest Ridge Subdivision).


1559
 
3-4-96
 
Annexing certain land to the village (Harvest Ridge Subdivision).


1575
 
5-20-96
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
the First National Bank of Evergreen Park as trustee for Trust #13809, as
owner for certain property described in the agreement (Settler’s Pond
Subdivision).


1576
 
5-20-96
 
Annexing certain land to the village (Settler’s Pond Subdivision).


1597
 
11-18-96
 
Clarifying Ord. 1098 annexing certain lands to the village (Butternut Creek
Woods Subdivision Unit No 1 through 6).


1606
 
12-16-96
 
Authorizing the execution of a pre- annexation agreement between the village
and Pinnacle Bank as Trustee under Trust #1116, as owner for certain property
located in the village (Gas City - Harlem Avenue).


1609
 
2-18-97
 
Annexing certain land to the village (Sangmeister - Laraway & Wolf Roads).


1612
 
2-18-97
 
Annexing certain land to the village (Homestead Subdivision - Wolf & Laraway
Roads).


1614
 
2-18-97
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
American Islamic Association, Inc. (American Islamic - St. Francis Road).


1615
 
2-18-97
 
Annexing certain land to the village (American Islamic - St. Francis Road)


1617
 
2-18-97
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
Walter Mark (Mark Property - Laraway Road).


1618
 
2-18-97
 
Annexing certain land to the village (Walter Mark Property - Laraway Road).


1622
 
3-17-97
 
Annexing certain surrounded territory to the village (9029 W. Lincoln
Highway).


1623
 
4-7-97
 
Annexing certain land to the village (Hughes & Duggan Property - Rt. 45).


1625
 
4-7-97
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
Edward Tracy (Golden Gate Nursery - Rt. 45).


1626
 
4-7-97
 
Annexing certain land to the village (Golden Gate Nursery - Rt. 45).


1629
 
4-21-97
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Gates Property - Wolf Road.)


1630
 
4-21-97
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Orseske Property - 22744 S. Wolf
Road.)


1634
 
6-2-97
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Sandalwood Subdivision - Northwest
Corner of Laraway and Wolf Roads.)


1634-A
 
6-16-97
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
Sandalwood, Inc., as petitioners for certain property located in the village
(Sandalwood Subdivision - Laraway and Wolf Roads).


1636
 
6-16-97
 
Authorizing the execution of a pre- annexation agreement between the village
and Art Mark and Mark Younglove as petitioners for certain property located
in the village (Mark Property - 10622 Steger Road).


1638
 
7-7-97
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Village of Frankfort Regional WWTP
Property).


1640
 
7-7-97
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Trinity Farm - Steger Road).


1644
 
8-4-97
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between village and Broadacre
Management Co.  (Walnut Creek Subdivision - St. Francis Road)


1645
 
8-4-97
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Walnut Creek Subdivision - St.
Francis Road)


1648
 
9-8-97
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between village and Perrin,
L.L.C. (Swanson Tools/Bachman Imports - 211 E. Ontario).


1649
 
9-8-97
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Swanson Tools/Bachman Imports - 211
E. Ontario).


1652
 
9-8-97
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Marczali Property - East of Rt. 45
between St. Francis and La Porte Roads).


1653
 
9-8-97
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Hughes & Duggan Property - Rt. 45).


1664
 
11-3-97
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between village and Joseph and
Lisa Fortune (Fortune Property - 8346 West Lincoln Highway).


1665
 
11-3-97
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Fortune Property - 8346 West Lincoln
Highway).


1668
 
11-3-97
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between village and Loretta L.
Jordan (Valley View Motel - 10957 West Lincoln Highway).


1669
 
11-3-97
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Valley View Motel - 10957 W. Lincoln
Highway).


1675
 
12-15-97
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between village and Howard G.
Ohlhausen (Southeast corner of Harlem Avenue and Laraway Road).


1676
 
12-15-97
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Southeast corner of Harlem Avenue and
Laraway Road).


1677
 
12-15-97
 
Authorizing execution of pre-annexation agreement between village and Gas
City, Ltd. (Gas City Property - Rt. 30 and Wolf Road).


1678
 
1-5-98
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between village and Harris Bank
Trust #189 (Auto Haus - 19915 S. LaGrange Road)


1679
 
1-5-98
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Auto Haus - 19915 S. LaGrange Road).


1687
 
2-2-98
 
Annexing certain land into the village (West Property - 300 ft. south of Rt.
30 and east of the Gas City Property).


1688
 
2-2-98
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Gas City Property - Rt. 30 and Wolf
Road).


1690
 
3-16-98
 
Authorizing annexation agreement between village and Newbrook Group, Inc.
(Newbrook Subdivision - 116th Avenue, North of Laraway).


1691
 
3-16-98
 
Annexing certain land into village (Newbrook Subdivision—116th Avenue,
North of Laraway).


1695
 
4-6-98
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between village and William
Weber (Weber Property—108th Avenue).


1696
 
4-6-98
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Weber Property—108th Avenue).


1698
 
4-6-98
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between village and Frederick
Eul (Eul Property—7800 West Lincoln Highway).


1699
 
4-6-98
 
Annexing certain property into village (Eul Property—7800 West Lincoln
Highway).


1714
 
9-8-98
 
Annexing certain property into the village (Frankfort Prairie Park).


1717
 
10-5-98
 
Annexing certain property into the village (422 Spruce).


1732
 
3-1-99
 
Authorizing execution of pre-annexation agreement for property located at
23050 South LaGrange Road.


1733
 
3-15-99
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement for certain property into the
village (Rizzi Property—8215 West Lincoln Highway).


1734
 
3-15-99
 
Annexing certain property into the village (Rizzi Property—8215 West
Lincoln Highway).


1746
 
7-6-99
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between village and Trust
#1-2712 (Plank Trail Estates Subdivision—7405 West Lincoln Highway).


1747
 
7-6-99
 
Annexing certain property into the village (Plank Trail Estates
Subdivision—7405 West Lincoln Highway).


1754
 
8-2-99
 
De-annexing Malone & Maloney Property—88th Avenue and 198th.


1759
 
10-4-99
 
Annexing certain property into the village (The Sybaris—Rt. 30).


1780
 
2-7-00
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
Trust # 97-1757, (Lakeview Estates Subdivision— southwest corner of 80th
Avenue and Laraway Road).


1781
 
2-7-00
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Lakeview Estates
Subdivision—southwest corner of 80th Avenue and Laraway Road).


1786
 
3-20-00
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
Trust 6468 and Slager Development (Stonebridge Valley Subdivision—Laraway
Road, west of 116th).


1787
 
3-20-00
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Stonebridge Valley
Subdivision—Laraway Road, west of 116th).


1788
 
3-20-00
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
Trust 74-2693 and William McEnery (Gas City— U.S. Route 45 and Laraway
Road).


1789
 
3-20-00
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Gas City—U.S. Route 45 and Laraway
Road).


1800
 
5-15-00
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Huffstutler—21239 S. 88th Avenue).


1834
 
12-18-00
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
an association of Franciscan Sisters of the Sacred Heart (St. Francis Woods
property— 9201 St. Francis Road).


835
 
12-18-00
 
Annexing certain land into the village, (St. Francis Woods property—9201
St. Francis Road).


1836
 
12-18-00
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
Michael L. Lemmons (Autumn Fields Subdivision— southeast corner of Wolf and
Laraway Roads).


1837
 
12-18-00
 
Annexing certain property into the village (Autumn Fields
Subdivision—southeast corner of Wolf and Laraway Roads).


1853
 
5-21-01
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
Trust No. 1-5082 (Flagstone Subdivision—Scheer Road).


1854
 
5-21-01
 
Annexing certain property into the village (Flagstone Subdivision—Scheer
Road).


1909
 
8-5-02
 
Annexing certain property into the village (Prairie Crossings—Southeast
corner of Wolf and Rt. 30).


1911
 
8-5-02
 
Annexing certain property into the village (Cobblestone Walk
subdivision—Southwest corner of Laraway Road and 116th Avenue).


1913
 
8-5-02
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Brookmeadow Estates
subdivision—Northeast corner of Laraway and Scheer Roads).


1915
 
8-30-02
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Bobbie Noonan—8717 W. Lincoln
Highway).


1917
 
8-5-02
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Settler’s Croft
subdivision—Locust Street extended approximately 750 feet north of
Colorado).


1925
 
8-19-02
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Ashton Meadows
subdivision—Northeast corner of Scheer and Steger Roads).


1938
 
11-4-02
 
Amending Ordinance 1909.


1952
 
3-3-03
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement (Church of Latter Day
Saints—South Wolf Road).


1953
 
3-3-03
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Church of Latter Day Saints).


1966
 
4-28-03
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement (Lakeview South
subdivision—northwest corner of Steger Road and 80th Avenue).


1967
 
4-28-03
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Lakeview South subdivision).


1968
 
4-28-03
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement (Misty Falls
subdivision—southeast  corner of Laraway Road and 116th Avenue).


1969
 
4-28-03
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Misty Falls subdivision).


1976
 
6-16-03
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village and Harper
Business Park LLC (Harper Business Park—south of Laraway Road, west of
Pfeiffer Road).


1977
 
6-16-03
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Harper Business Park).


1978
 
6-16-03
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village and New
Lenox State Bank Trust 2224 (Christakes property—Northwest and southwest
corner of Route 45 and Lincolnway Lane).


1979
 
6-16-03
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Christakes property).


1983
 
6-16-03
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Wolf & Laraway LLC Parcel—Northwest
corner of Wolf and Laraway Roads).


2011
 
9-2-03
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village and Harris
Bank Trust #469 (Donald Blume Parcel—23234 South Harlem Avenue).


2012
 
9-2-03
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Donald Blume Parcel).


2014
 
9-2-03
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village and Mark
Ruane Trust (Mark Ruane Parcels—23564 South Harlem Avenue).


2015
 
9-2-03
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Mark Ruane Parcels).


2017
 
9-2-03
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village and First
United Bank Trust #2040 (Warning Parcel—23504 South Harlem Avenue).


2018
 
9-2-03
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Warning Parcel).


2020
 
9-2-03
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village and
Marquette National Bank Trust #6238 (Vito Caprio Parcels—7348 West Stuenkel
Road).


2021
 
9-2-03
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Vito Caprio Parcels).


2023
 
9-15-03
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village and Donald
and Yvonne Blume (Blume residence—23234 South Harlem Avenue).


2024
 
9-15-03
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Blume residence).


2026
 
9-15-03
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village and First
United Bank Trust #1902 (Warning Parcels—23504 South Harlem Avenue).


2027
 
9-15-03
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Warning Parcels).


2051
 
2-17-04
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village, New Lenox
State Bank Trust #2688 and Lincoln-Way Partners, Inc. (Vistana of Frankfort
Subdivision—Northeast corner of Wolf Road and Steger Road).


2052
 
2-17-04
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Northeast corner of Wolf Road and
Steger Road).


2053
 
2-17-04
 
Annexing certain land into the village (23050 S. La Grange Road).


2067
 
5-3-04
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village and
Frankfort Elementary School District 157C (40-acre school site
parcel—Northwest corner of Laraway Road and 116th Avenue).


2068
 
5-3-04
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Frankfort Elementary School District
157C—Northwest corner of Laraway Road and 116th Avenue).


2070
 
5-3-04
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village and Harold
and Mary Kay Keuch (5-acre parcel—223 S. Harlem Avenue).


2071
 
5-3-04
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Harold and Mary Kay Keuch
parcel—23223 S. Harlem Avenue).


2078
 
5-17-04
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village and
Highlander Development, Inc. (Five Oaks Subdivision—Southwest corner of
Wolf and Steger Roads).


2079
 
5-17-04
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Five Oaks Subdivision—Southwest
corner of Wolf and Steger Roads).


2094
 
7-19-04
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village and David
and Daniel Bengtson, First Midwest Trust Company TUT 72-20720, dated July 18,
1988 (Majestic Pines Subdivision—South of Laraway Road, east of Pfeiffer
Road).


2095
 
7-19-04
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Majestic Pines Subdivision—South of
Laraway Road, east of Pfeiffer Road).


2097
 
7-19-04
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village and Gander
Partners, LLC (Stonecreek Subdivision—East of Pfeiffer Road, between
Laraway Road and Steger Road).


2098
 
7-19-04
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Stonecreek Subdivision—East of
Pfeiffer Road, between Laraway Road and Steger Road).


2100
 
7-19-04
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village State Bank
of Countryside Trust #01-2279 and Indian Rock LLC (Dieter’s
Subdivision—Between 92nd Avenue and 93rd Avenue, south of Franklin and
north of the Old Plank Road Trail).


2101
 
7-19-04
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Dieter’s Subdivision—Between 92nd
Avenue and 93rd Avenue, south of Franklin and north of the Old Plank Road
Trail).


2136
 
12-20-04
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village and
Ironwood Drive Development, LLC (Charmaine Subdivision—890 and 895 Ironwood
Drive).


2137
 
12-20-04
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Charmaine Subdivision—890 and 895
Ironwood Drive).


2139
 
12-20-04
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Trinity Farms—9436 Steger Road).


2141
 
12-20-04
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village, Trust
#8699, dated September 21, 1987, MB Financial Bank N.A., as successor trustee
to South Holland Trust and Savings Bank and Gerald L. and Carol A. Hofbauer
(Gerald L. and Carol A. Hofbauer Parcel—7119 W. Steger Road).


2142
 
12-20-04
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Gerald L. and Carol A. Hofbauer
Parcel—7119 W. Steger Road).


2148
 
1-18-05
 
Authorizing execution of pre- annexation agreement between the village and
Founders Bank TUT (Saunoris commercial parcel—19600 S. Harlem Avenue).


2150
 
2-7-05
 
Authorizing execution of first amendment to annexation agreement between the
village and Frankfort Elementary School District.


2164
 
6-6-05
 
Authorizing execution of pre- annexation agreement between the village,
Bitter Creek Land Company, LLC and Equitarian Associates, LLC (Palomino Trace
Subdivision—7528 W. Dralle Road).


2165
 
6-6-05
 
Authorizing execution of pre- annexation agreement between the village and
Outback Properties (Erinwood II Subdivision—north of Dralle Road, between
80th Avenue and Pfeiffer Road).


2169
 
6-20-05
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village and Wayne
and Phyllis Greene (5-acre parcel—7031 W. Steger Road).


2170
 
6-20-05
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Wayne and Phyllis Greene
Parcel—7031 W. Steger Road).


2179
 
8-1-05
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village and Patrick
and Mary Rose O’Gorman, Standard Bank and Trust Company, Trustee (St.
Francis Estates Subdivision—west of LaPorte Meadows Subdivision and 88th
Avenue).


2180
 
8-1-05
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Patrick and Mary Rose O’Gorman and
Standard Bank and Trust Company, Trustee—St. Francis Estates Subdivision,
west of LaPorte Meadows Subdivision and 88th Avenue).


2182
 
8-15-05
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village and Gateway
II Phase III, LLC (Sara Springs Subdivision—Route 45, north of Steger Road).


2188
 
8-15-05
 
Annexing certain land into the village (William J. McEnery—Lighthouse
Pointe Townhomes, Tract 2 of Phase 3).


2195
 
9-6-05
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village and Gander
Properties, LLC (Jackson Creek Subdivision—Janssen Farm, Steger Road).


2196
 
9-6-05
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Gander Partners, LLC—Janssen Farm,
Steger Road).


2200
 
9-19-05
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village and
Bernilda Wille, Trustee—Bernilda Wille property, northeast corner of Harlem
Avenue and Stuenkel Road).


2201
 
9-19-05
 
Annexing certain land into the village (Bernilda Wille, Trustee—Bernilda
Wille property, northeast corner of Harlem Avenue and Stuenkel Road).


2203
 
9-19-05
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village and David
and Jeanne M. Paul (22723 Scheer Road).


2204
 
9-19-05
 
Annexing certain land into the village (David and Jeanne M. Paul—22723
Scheer Road).


2213
 
10-3-05
 
De-annexing certain land from the village (Malone & Moloney property—south
of LaPorte Avenue and east of 88th Avenue).


2231
 
11-7-05
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village and James
Malecky and First Midwest Bank, Trustee (Country Crossing North Subdivision,
Phase 2—east side of Pfeiffer Road).


2232
 
11-7-05
 
Annexing certain land into the village (James Malecky and First Midwest Bank,
Trustee—Country Crossing North Subdivision, Phase 2).


2234
 
11-7-05
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between the village and James
Malecky and First Midwest Bank, Trustee, Country Crossing South
Subdivision—northeast corner of Pfeiffer Road and Laraway Road).


2235
 
11-7-05
 
Annexing certain land into the village (James Malecky and First Midwest Bank,
Trustee—Country Crossing South Subdivision).


2288
 
6-5-06
 
Pre-annexation agreement between the village and Marie Esch for property
located at 24561 S. Harlem Avenue.


2289
 
6-5-06
 
Annexing property located at 24561 S. Harlem Avenue.


2297
 
6-19-06
 
Annexing property located at the southwest corner of 93rd and Franklin
Avenues.


2298
 
6-19-06
 
Annexing property located at the southwest corner of 93rd and Franklin
Avenues.


2325
 
10-16-06
 
Annexing property located at the northwest corner of U.S. Route 30 and
Frankfort Square Road, Cappell Commons.


2326
 
10-16-06
 
Annexing property located at the northeast corner of Pfeiffer Road and Steger
Road, Stone Creek Subdivision, Phase 3.


2327
 
10-16-06
 
Annexing property located at the northeast corner of Pfeiffer Road and Steger
Road, Stone Creek Subdivision, Phase 3.


2348
 
1-8-07
 
Pre-annexation agreement between village and Prairie Bank and Trust for
property at 7661 S. Harlem Avenue.


2349
 
1-8-07
 
Annexing property located at the northwest corner of Stuenkel Road and 88th
Avenue.


2364
 
3-5-07
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between village and Michelle
Heckenast Revocable Living Trust for property located at 23023 S. Scheer Road.


2365
 
3-5-07
 
Annexing property located at 23023 S. Scheer Road.


2367
 
3-5-07
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between village and Bridgeview
Bank Group for property located at the west 500 feet of the southwest corner
of Steger Road and 88th Avenue.


2368
 
3-5-07
 
Annexing property located at the west 500 feet of the southwest corner of
Steger Road and 88th Avenue.


2369
 
3-5-07
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between village and Michael J.
Marinier and Declan Hughes for property located at 23266 South 88th Avenue.


2370
 
3-5-07
 
Annexing property located at 23266 South 88th Avenue.


2374
 
3-5-07
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between village and Frankfort
Park District for property located at the northwest corner of Laraway Road
and 80th Avenue.


2375
 
3-5-07
 
Annexing property located at northwest corner of Laraway Road and 80th Avenue.


2377
 
4-2-07
 
Annexing property located at northwest corner of Stuenkel Road and 88th
Avenue.


2398
 
7-16-07
 
Annexing property located at northwest corner of U.S. Route 30 and Frankfort
Square Road.


2407
 
9-4-07
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between village and Jim and
Christy Bertrand for property located at 21125 South 94th Avenue.


2408
 
9-4-07
 
Annexing property located at 21125 South 94th Avenue.


2438
 
1-22-08
 
Amending the Waterstone Subdivision annexation agreement for the property
located at the northwest corner of Stuenkel Road and 88th Avenue.


2445
 
3-3-08
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between village and Charles R.
Jabaay, Jr. and Dean T. Vaundry  for the CD & ME banquet facility property
located at 23320 S. La Grange Road.


2447
 
3-17-08
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between village and Steger Road
Investment LLC for Tracts 1, 2, 3 and 4; Ronald P. and Cumanda A. Rose for
Tract 5; Steger Road Investment II LLC and Steger Road Investment IIA LLC for
Tract 6; Steger Road Investment III LLC for Tract 7; and Frankfort Pond
Development LLC (South Point Business Park property).


2448
 
3-17-08
 
Annexing Tracts 1 through 7 of the South Point Business Park property.


2501
 
8-18-08
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between village and Frankfort
Fire Protection District for the property located at the southeast corner of
Wolf Road at the EJ&E Railroad tracks.


2502
 
8-18-08
 
Annexing property located at the southeast corner of Wolf Road at the EJ & E
Railroad tracks.


2533
 
11-17-08
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between village and GNC
Properties Inc. Unit VII, LLC and Garry and Nancy Cooper for property located
at Charrington Drive and 92nd Avenue.


2534
 
11-17-08
 
Authorizing execution of annexation agreement between village and GNC
Properties Inc. Unit I, LLC for property located at 21337 and 21325 93rd
Avenue.


2535
 
11-17-08
 
Annexing property located at 21337 and 21325 93rd Avenue.


2546
 
12-1-08
 
Annexing property located at Charrington Drive and 92nd Avenue.


2578
 
4-6-09
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between village and the
Frankfort Fire Protection District for the Frankfort Fire Station No. 4
property, located at the northeast corner of Steger Road and 80th Avenue.


2579
 
4-6-09
 
Annexing Frankfort Fire Station No. 4 property located at the northeast
corner of Steger Road and 80th Avenue.


2588
 
5-18-09
 
Annexing Ivaldo Basso residence located on the north side of Ironwood Drive
at the terminus of Butternut Trail.


2747
 
10-17-11
 
Annexing Robert D. Watson property located at 23262 S. 88th Avenue.


2792
 
8-6-12
 
Authorizing execution of an annexation agreement between the village, Will
and Cook Counties, and the Frankfort Public Library District for Frankfort
Public Library District property located at 8731 West Lincoln Highway.


2793
 
8-6-12
 
Annexing Frankfort Public Library District property located at 8731 West
Lincoln Highway.


2858
 
8-19-13
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
Chicago Title Land Trust Co. Tut 12407 for property located at 23953 S.
Harlem Avenue.


2859
 
8-19-13
 
Annexing the C. Ted Nelson residence located at 23953 S. Harlem Avenue.


2887
 
1-6-14
 
Annexing property located at the southeast corner of U.S. Route 30 and 94th
Avenue.


2923
 
7-7-14
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
Riverside Medical Center for property located at the southwest corner of U.S.
Route 45 and Steger Road.


2924
 
7-7-14
 
Annexing certain property located at the southwest corner of U.S. Route 45
and Steger Road.


3028
 
5-2-16
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
Julio and Sureia Martinez for property located at 7121 W. Stuenkel Road.


3029
 
5-2-16
 
Annexing certain land located at 7121 W. Stuenkel Road.


3053
 
9-6-16
 
Annexing certain land located at 21655 S. 108th Avenue.


3104
 
8-7-17
 
Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement between the village and
Colorado Acres, LLC (Iron Gate Estates Subdivision - 445 W. Colorado Avenue).


3105
 
8-7-17
 
Annexing certain land located in Will and Cook Counties at Iron Gate Estates
Subdivision - 445 W. Colorado Avenue.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE III:  BONDS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1451
 
3-21-94
 
Confirming the sale of $5,990,000 General Obligation Refunding Bonds
(Waterworks and Sewerage Alternate Revenue Source), Series 1994.


1452
 
4-4-94
 
Authorizing and providing for the issue of $5,990,000 General Obligation
Refunding Bonds (Waterworks and Sewerage System Alternate Revenue Source),
Series 1994, for the purpose of refunding certain outstanding general
obligation bonds and providing for the collection, segregation and
distribution of the revenues of the combined waterworks and sewerage system
of the village.


1550
 
12-18-95
 
Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 1995 to pay the principal and
interest on $5,990,000 General Obligation Refunding Bonds (Waterworks and
Sewerage System Alternate Revenue Source), Series 1994.


1552
 
1-22-96
 
Authorizing the issuance of $15,500,000 Waterworks and Sewerage System
Revenue Bonds for the purpose of refunding outstanding bonds of the village.


1553
 
1-22-96
 
Authorizing the issuance of $15,500,000 General Obligation Alternate Bonds
for the purpose of refunding outstanding bonds of the village.


1554
 
1-22-96
 
Authorizing the issuance of $8,000,000 Waterworks and Sewerage System Revenue
Bonds for the purpose of financing capital improvements.


1555
 
1-22-96
 
Authorizing the issuance of $7,200,000 General Obligation Alternate Bonds for
the purpose of financing waterworks and sewerage system capital improvements.


1563
 
3-18-96
 
Providing for the issuance of General Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series
1996A and General Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series 1996B.


1600
 
12-16-96
 
Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 1996 to pay the principal and
interest on $5,000,000 General Obligation Bonds (Waterworks and Sewerage
System Alternate Revenue Source), Series 1991.


1601
 
12-16-96
 
Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 1996 to pay the principal and
interest on $5,990,000 General Obligation Refunding Bonds (Waterworks and
Sewerage System Alternate Revenue Source), Series 1994.


1602
 
12-16-96
 
Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 1996 to pay the principal and
interest on General Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series 1996A and General
Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series 1996B.


1881
 
2-4-02
 
Authorizing the issuance of $8,900,000 General Obligation Refunding Bonds,
Series 2002.


1941
 
12-2-02
 
Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2002 to pay the principal and
interest on $4,395,000 General Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series 2001.


1942
 
12-2-02
 
Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2002 to pay the principal and
interest on $8,900,000 General Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series 2002.


2037
 
12-15-03
 
Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2003 to pay the principal of
and interest on $4,395,000 General Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series 2001.


2038
 
12-15-03
 
Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2003 to pay the principal of
and interest on $8,900,000 General Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series 2002.


2435
 
12-17-07
 
Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2007 to pay the principal of
and interest on $4,395,000 General Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series 2001.


2436
 
12-17-07
 
Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2007 to pay the principal of
and interest on $8,900,000 General Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series 2002.


2542
 
12-1-08
 
Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2008 to pay the principal of
and interest on $4,395,000 General Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series 2001.


2543
 
12-1-08
 
Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2008 to pay the principal of
and interest on $8,900,000 General Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series 2002.


2551
 
12-15-08
 
Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2008 to pay the principal of
and interest on $1,538,882 General Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series 1996B.


2631
 
12-7-09
 
Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2009 to pay the principal of
and interest on $1,538,882 General Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series 1996B.


2632
 
12-7-09
 
Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2009 to pay the principal of
and interest on $8,900,000 General Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series 2002.


2684
 
12-6-10
 
Abating the tax levied for the year 2010 to pay the principal of and interest
on $1,538,882 general obligation refunding bonds, Series 1996B.  (See Ord.
1563, passed 3-18-96, above.)


2685
 
12-6-10
 
Abating the tax levied for the year 2010 to pay the principal of and interest
for the issuance of not to exceed $8,900,000 general obligation refunding
bonds, Series 2002.  (See Ord. 1881, passed 2-4-02, above.)


2732
 
8-8-11
 
Authorizing redemption of outstanding General Obligation Bonds, Series 2002.


2756
 
12-5-11
 
Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2011 to pay the principal of
and interest on $1,538,882 General Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series 1996B.


2757
 
12-5-11
 
Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2011 to pay the principal of
and interest on $8,900,000 General Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series 2002.


2820
 
12-3-12
 
Abating the tax heretofore levied for the year 2012 to pay the principal of
and interest on $1,538.882 General Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series 1996B.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE IV:  CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




673
 
10-19-70
 
Authorizing agreement for the extension of water and sewer service south on
Center Road between the village and certain adjacent property owners.


687
 
2-1-71
 
Amending Ordinance 673.


1031
 
12-3-79
 
Authorizing the village and the Frankfort Park District to enter into an
intergovernmental cooperation agreement for the enforcement of certain park
district ordinances.


Res.
 
4-7-80
 
Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement with the county
for a witness assistance program.


1071
 
1-4-82
 
Authorizing membership in the Intergovernmental Self Insurance Agency.


1074
 
2-1-82
 
Authorizing Contract with the southwest Agency for Risk Management for the
purpose of seeking the prevention or lessening of casualty losses to
municipal properties and injuries to persons or property which might result
in claims being made against such units.


1142
 
8-19-85
 
Amending Ordinance 1074.


1156
 
4-7-86
 
Authorizing the execution of a grant agreement between the village and the
Environmental Protection Agency for the design and construction of a sewage
treatment improvement and/or modification project.


1157
 
6-2-86
 
Authorizing the execution of a grant agreement between the village and the
Environmental Protection Agency for the design and construction of a sewage
treatment improvement and/or modification project.


1221
 
6-20-88
 
Amending Ordinance 1074.


1362
 
10-21-91
 
Authorizing an agreement between Frankfort Crossings Limited Partnership.


1370
 
1-20-92
 
Authorizing an agreement relating to the recapture of costs for sewer service
improvements for Abbey Woods and a utility easement between Frankfort
Partners and New Lenox State Bank.


1380
 
5-18-92
 
Authorizing membership in the Southwest Agency for Health Management and
authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement creating the
Southwest Agency for Health Mangement.


1539
 
11-6-95
 
Amending Article II of the Contract and Bylaws of the Southwest Agency for
Risk Management.


1551
 
1-22-96
 
Authorizing the execution of a collective bargaining agreement between the
village and the Teamsters Local No. 714 Law Enforcement Division.


1621
 
3-17-97
 
Authorizing an agreement relating to the recapture of costs incurred for the
construction of the Jackson Creek Sanitary Lift Station and Force Main.


1737
 
4-5-99
 
Authorizing an agreement between the Village of Frankfort and the Village of
New Lenox.


1738
 
4-5-99
 
Authorizing an agreement between the Village of Manhattan and the Village of
Frankfort.


1768
 
12-6-99
 
Authorizing an agreement between the Village of Frankfort and the Village of
Mokena.


1807
 
6-19-00
 
Authorizing the execution of a public improvement agreement between New Lenox
State Bank (Trust No. 2224), Lincoln-Way High School District No. 210 and the
village.


1956
 
3-17-03
 
Authorizing the sale and/or scrapping of certain surplus property.


2030
 
10-6-03
 
Approving a public improvements recapture agreement between the village and
Blue Danube properties.


2151
 
2-22-05
 
Approving public improvements recapture agreement between the village and
Suresh Mehta and Hinsbrook Bank & Trust Co., Trustee (Tuffy Auto Recapture
Agreement).


2222
 
10-17-05
 
Authorizing entry into an intergovernmental agreement with Frankfort Park
District for location of two village well facilities on Jackson Creek Park
site property.


2223
 
10-17-05
 
Authorizing entry into an intergovernmental agreement with Frankfort Park
District for improvements at Main Park.


2287
 
6-5-06
 
Approving a public improvements recapture agreement between the village and
Gulfstream Development, Inc.


2301
 
7-3-06
 
Approving a five-year extension of the Abbey Woods Recapture Agreement.


2309
 
8-7-06
 
Approving the execution of the Commissioners Park Intergovernmental Agreement
between the village and the Franklin Park District.


2311
 
8-21-06
 
Authorizing an agreement for the purchase of certain property.


2353
 
1-22-07
 
Approving a public improvements recapture agreement between the village and
McNaughton Development, Inc.


2359
 
2-5-07
 
Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement with Will County for collection of
special service area taxes.


2522
 
10-6-08
 
Authorizing intergovernmental agreement with Frankfort Park District for
Frankfort Main Park.


2547
 
12-1-08
 
Approving 93rd Avenue sanitary sewer extension recapture agreement with GNC
Properties Unit VII, LLC and Garry and Nancy Cooper.


2746
 
10-17-11
 
Approving annexation agreement between Village of Frankfort, Will and Cook
Counties and North Star Trust Co., as trustee, for Robert D. Watson property
located at 23262 S. 88th Avenue.


2775
 
5-21-12
 
Adopting the Will Electric Aggregation Group Plan of Operation and Governance.


2825
 
1-7-13
 
Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement between the
village, Will and Cook Counties and the Frankfort Park District for the
conveyance of Michele Bingham Park.


2900
 
4-28-14
 
Authorizing the sale of certain surplus property.


2933
 
8-18-14
 
Authorizing the sale of certain surplus property.


2939
 
9-15-14
 
Authorizing the sale of certain surplus property.


2946
 
10-20-14
 
Authorizing the sale of certain surplus property.


2949
 
11-17-14
 
Authorizing the sale of certain surplus property.


2960
 
1-20-15
 
Authorizing the sale of certain surplus property.


2964
 
3-16-15
 
Authorizing the sale of certain surplus property.


2970
 
5-18-15
 
Authorizing the sale of certain surplus property.


2978
 
7-20-15
 
Authorizing the sale of certain surplus property.


2993
 
10-19-15
 
Authorizing the sale or scrapping of certain surplus property.


3001
 
11-16-15
 
Authorizing the execution of an amendment to a lease agreement between the
village and My Sister’s and Me Boutique, Inc.


3016
 
3-21-16
 
Authorizing the sale or scrapping of certain surplus property owned by the
village.


3024
 
4-25-16
 
Authorizing the sale of certain surplus property owned by the village.


3030
 
5-16-16
 
Authorizing the disposal of certain surplus property owned by the village.


3049
 
8-15-16
 
Authorizing the sale of certain surplus property owned by the village.


3067
 
11-7-16
 
Authorizing the sale of certain surplus property owned by the village.


3076
 
1-17-17
 
Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement to establish
Laraway Communication Center.


3083
 
3-20-17
 
   Authorizing the sale of certain surplus property owned by the village.


3122
 
11-20-17
 
Authorizing the sale of certain surplus property owned by the village.


3136
 
3-19-18
 
Authorizing the sale of certain surplus property owned by the village.


3155
 
5-21-18
 
Authorizing the sale of certain surplus property owned by the village.


3167
 
8-20-18
 
Authorizing the sale of certain surplus property owned by the village.


3180
 
11-19-18
 
Authorizing the sale of certain surplus property owned by the village.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE V:  EASEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




653
 
3-2-70
 
Vacating public utility easement in Pacific Street, between Maple Street and
Locust Street.


—
 
5-11-84
 
Granting easement to village on a certain portion of the property previously
dedicated as Smith Street to provide for the future utilities service to
Chesterfield Federal Savings and Loan Association and Herbert P. Folkers’
property.


1388
 
8-3-92
 
Authorizing Commonwealth Edison Company to use public ways and other public
property with the operation and maintenance of an electric system.


1389
 
8-3-92
 
Authorizing Illinois Bell Telephone Company to use public ways and other
public property with the operation and maintenance of a general telephone
business.


1757
 
9-7-99
 
Authorizing the acquisition of utility easements on certain real property
within the village for the construction of a sanitary interceptor sewer.


2031
 
10-6-03
 
Authorizing the acquisition of utility easements on certain real property
within the village for the construction of a sanitary interceptor sewer.


2730
 
7-18-11
 
Vacation of public utility and drainage easement for Lots 111 and 112 of
Lighthouse Pointe Subdivision.


2733
 
8-8-11
 
Vacating 10-foot public utility easement and 84-foot ingress/egress and
shared parking easement for Paratech, Inc. expansion located at 1025
Lambrecht Road.


 
 




 



TABLE VI:  FRANCHISES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




291
 
4-6-08
 
Granting a franchise to the Joliet and Southern Traction Company for railway
purposes over certain streets in the village.


292
 
9-9-12
 
Authorizing the Public Service Company of Northern Illinois to construct,
operate, and maintain an electric light and power system.


343
 
9-14-25
 
Granting to the Illinois Bell Telephone Company certain rights concerning the
conduction of a general telephone business for 25 years.


351
 
4-5-26
 
Authorizing Public Service Company of Northern Illinois to construct,
operate, and maintain a gas distributing system for 50 years.


486
 
11-17-58
 
Authorizing the Commonwealth Edison Company, a Public Service Company
division to construct, operate, and maintain an electric light and power
system for 50 years.


552
 
8-19-63
 
Amending Ordinance passed 7-3-50.


655
 
4-6-70
 
Amending Ordinance passed 7-3-50.


760
 
6-5-72
 
Authorizing Northern Illinois Gas Company to construct, operate, and maintain
a gas distributing system for 50 years.


950
 
6-6-77
 
Granting to the Illinois Bell Telephone Company certain rights concerning the
conduction of a general telephone business.


1089
 
3-21-83
 
Granting a franchise concerning the establishment, construction, operation,
and maintenance of a cable television system.


1129
 
2-4-85
 
Amending Ordinance 950.


1137
 
5-20-85
 
Amending Ordinance 1089.


1203
 
2-1-88
 
Amending Ordinance 1089 and 1137.


1693
 
4-6-98
 
Amending Ordinance 1089.


1706
 
7-6-98
 
Granting a franchise for a cable television system.


1730
 
2-16-99
 
Granting a franchise for a cable television system in the village.


2759
 
12-5-11
 
Granting a cable television franchise to Comcast of Illinois, VI, LLC.


 
 




 



TABLE VII:  REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




Res.
 
4-28-58
 
Acquisitioning certain lands for street purposes, being lots one, two, and
the north 13 feet of lot three in block one in Bowen’s Subdivision of
blocks 1, 12, and 13 in the village.


641
 
8-4-69
 
Authorizing lease with the Frankfort Community Park District such property as
the village now owns and uses as a public park, being blocks 17, 18, 19, 20
in Bowen’s Addition to the village, in the north half of section 28,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian; and lots 1,
2, and 15 in block four of Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s Lincoln Meadows
Unit One, a subdivision of the southeast quarter of section 21, township 35
north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


680
 
12-7-70
 
Authorizing lease with the Frankfort Community Park District of a certain
parcel of real estate for civic or park purposes, being that part of the
northwest fractional quarter of section 27 north and south of the Indian
Boundary Line, in Township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal
Meridian.


828
 
7-16-73
 
Authorizing lease with the Frankfort Community Park District a certain parcel
of real estate for civic or park purposes, being that part of the northwest
fractional quarter of section 27, north and south of the Indian Boundary
Line, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


895
 
8-4-75
 
Authorizing lease with the Frankfort Community Park District of the following
real estate for civic or park purposes.


(1)
 
Outlot A of unit one of Tanglewood Subdivision, being a subdivision of part
of lot 12 in the School Trustee’s Subdivision of section 16 and part of the
northwest quarter of section 21, all in township 35 north, range 12 east of
the third Principal Meridian;


(2)
 
Lot 99 in Tanglewood unit three being a subdivision of part of lot 13 in
School Trustee’s Subdivision of section 16 and also part of the northwest
quarter of section 21, all in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third
Principal Meridian.


977
 
5-1-78
 
Authorizing lease with the Frankfort Community Park District of a certain
parcel of real estate for civic or park purposes, being that part of the west
half of the southwest quarter of section 21, township 35 north, range 12 east
of the third Principal Meridian, commencing at the southwest corner of
section 21.


1267
 
7-3-89
 
Transferring certain real property for the convenience of the Frankfort Fire
Protection District, to wit: part of Lot 1 and vacated Elm Street beginning
at the intersection of the south right-of-way of Kansas Street.


1361
 
10-21-91
 
Authorizing the acquisition of certain properties for municipal purposes, to
wit: Parcel I, the north three acres of the northeast quarter of Lot 15;
Parcel II, the south 7 acres of west half of Lot 9; Parcel III, certain parts
of Lot 15 and 16 in School Trustee’s Subdivisions; said parcels in Section
16, Township 35 North, Range 12, east of the Third Principal Meridian.


1598
 
12-16-96
 
Authorizing the acquisition of certain property within the village (Frankfort
Boulevard).


1608
 
1-20-97
 
Authorizing the acquisition of certain property within the village (Elsner
Road Extended).


1659
 
10-20-97
 
Authorizing the acquisition of certain property within the village as
described in Exhibit A attached to Ord. 1659 for the purpose of establishing
the Frankfort Prairie Park.


1704
 
6-1-98
 
Rescinding Ordinance 1659 and authorizing the acquisition of certain property
within the village as described in Exhibit A attached to Ord. 1704 to
establish and construct a park and wet bottom pond commonly referred to as
Frankfort Prairie Park.


1741
 
5-3-99
 
Providing for the exchange of real estate property by the Village of
Frankfort and Fox Investments, Inc.


1770
 
12-20-99
 
Authorizing the conveyance of certain real property (Heritage Knolls Park
Site) to the Frankfort Park District.


1878
 
1-7-02
 
Authorizing the acquisition of certain property within the village (North
Avenue extended west from current terminus to Walnut Creek).


1989
 
7-7-03
 
Authorizing the acquisition of certain property within the village for
roadway construction and improvement.


2159
 
4-18-05
 
Authorizing the acquisition of certain real property (seven parcels) within
the village for roadway construction and improvement.


2175
 
7-18-05
 
Authorizing the acquisition of certain real property within the village for
roadway construction and improvement.


2320
 
9-18-06
 
Authorizing the acquisition of the Dobis Property for roadway construction
and improvement.


2321
 
9-18-06
 
Authorizing the acquisition of the Oreske Property for roadway construction
and improvement.


2848
 
7-8-13
 
Declaring the necessity or the convenience of the village, transferring
certain real property to the Prairie Creek Homeowners Association Phase 2.


3166
 
7-16-18
 
Authorizing sale of surplus real estate commonly known as part of 11 North
White Street and part of 7 North White Street.


3179
 
11-19-18
 
Authorizing execution of first amendment to purchase and sale agreement with
respect to Ord. 3166 real estate sale.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE VIII:  STREET NAME CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




614
 
3-3-69
 
Changing the name of Joliet Street to Kansas Street.


759
 
5-15-72
 
Changing the name of Dakota Court in Lincoln Meadows Unit Two (Connecticut
Hills), to Hawthorne Road.


946
 
5-16-77
 
Changing the name of Laporte Road to Sauk Trail.


973
 
12-5-77
 
Changing the name of a certain road known as Ohio Road to Sangmeister Road.


2873
 
10-7-13
 
Renaming W. Prairie Drive to W. Bull Rush Circle in the Bowen’s Crossing
Subdivision.


2995
 
10-19-15
 
Renaming the following streets in the East Point Business Park:  Mark Court
to Roma Court; Hannah Drive to Fey Drive; Bronson Drive to Commerce Parkway.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE IX:  VACATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




456
 
1-17-55
 
Vacating a portion of Pacific Street as laid out and platted in Lankeneau’s
Addition to the village.


458
 
5-2-55
 
Vacating the alley between Nebraska and Oregon Streets in block 9 in the
original village.


481
 
4-28-58
 
Vacating a portion of Pacific Street between Maple Street and Locust Street.


496
 
10-5-59
 
Vacating the public alley running north and south located in block three in
the original town, and that portion of the public alley running east and west
in block three which is located between the west line of lot 6 and the east
line of lot 3 in block 3 in the original town; and Clay’s Avenue as located
adjacent to lots 6 and 7 in Clay’s Subdivision of the village.


519
 
11-7-60
 
Vacating that part of the public alley located in block two in the original
town adjacent to lots 1 to 12 inclusive, and lots 13 and 16 in block two and
all of the alley between lots 13 and 14 on the west side, and lots 15 and 16
on the east side, all in block two.


532
 
1-15-62
 
Vacating that part of the public alley located in block 4 in the original
town, which alley extends in an east-west direction and which alley lies
south of and adjacent to lots 1 through 12, inclusive, and north of and
adjacent to lots 13 and 16 in block 4.


559
 
8-2-65
 
Vacating that part of the public alley located in block 3 in the original
town, which alley extends in an east-west direction and which is located
between the west line of lot 2 and the east line of lot 1 in block 3 in the
original town.


583
 
6-19-67
 
Vacating that part of the public street located west of and adjacent to block
9 and east of and adjacent to block 10 in Bowen’s Addition to the village,
south of the street formerly known as California Avenue and presently known
as Oregon Street, and north of Utah Street, all within the village.


652
 
3-2-70
 
Vacating that portion of Elm Street south of the street formerly known as
Illinois Street, now known as Utah Street, south to its intersection with the
vacated street known as Pacific Street, and more particularly known as that
portion of Elm Street east of block 11 and west of block 12 in Bowen’s
Addition to the village.


682
 
11-16-70
 
Vacating a portion of that street known as Elsner Road and an unnamed street
running between U.S. Route 45 and the vacated portion of Elsner Road, being
that part of the northeast quarter of section 29, and the northwest quarter
of section 28, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal
Meridian, and that part of the northwest quarter of section 28, township 35
north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


739
 
12-20-71
 
Vacating that part of Linden Road lying south of Lincoln Lane and north of
U.S. 30 in Arthur T. McIntosh’s Lincoln Meadows Unit No. 2, being a
subdivision of part of the north half of section 21, township 35 north, range
12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


808
 
2-19-73
 
Vacating that portion of Pacific Street from its intersection with the west
line of Locust Street to the center line of Hurry Avenue, also known as Hobby
Avenue, and Hurry Avenue, also known as Hobby Avenue, from its intersection
with the south line of Pacific Street to a line west of the south line of
block 16 of Bowen’s Addition to the village, in section 28, township 35
north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


894
 
8-4-75
 
Vacating that portion of the public alley running east and west in block 3
which lies west of the westerly line of lot six extended southerly and east
of the westerly line of lot nine extended southerly, in block three, in the
original town.


967
 
1-16-78
 
Vacating a portion of dedicated Franklin Avenue lying between 94th Avenue and
the westerly line of lot F in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s Kean Avenue
Estates extended southerly, in section 22, township 35 north, range 12 east
of the third Principal Meridian.


1102
 
11-7-83
 
Vacating that portion of Elm Street which lies east of the east line of lots
1 and 4 in block 4, which lies west of the west line of lots 2 and 3 in block
3, which lies south of the south right-of- way line of Kansas Street and
which lies north of the north right-of-way line of Nebraska Street, all in
Bowen’s Addition to the village in the west half of the northeast quarter
of section 28, in township 35 north, and in range 12 east of the third
Principal Meridian.


1124
 
9-17-84
 
Vacating that part of Smith Street lying westerly of and adjoining lots 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, and 12, and easterly of and adjoining lots 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, and
18, lying southerly of the most southerly right-of-way line of U.S. Route 30
and lying northwesterly of the most northwesterly right-of-way line of U.S.
Route 45 in Clay’s Subdivision of the north part of the east half of the
southeast quarter of section 21, township 35 north, range 12 east of the
third Principal Meridian.


1138
 
6-17-85
 
Vacating that property previously dedicated to the village situated between
the south line of lot 115 and the north line of lot 116 in Krusemark’s
Addition to the city, Unit No. 10, being a subdivision of the east half of
the northwest quarter of section 27, township 35 north, range 12 east of the
third Principal Meridian.


1226
 
7-18-88
 
Vacating that portion of Birchwood Road which lies west of the west line of
lot 12 in block 5, which lies east of the east line of lot 9, in block 6,
which lies north of the north right-of-way line of Illinois Road all in
Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s Lincoln Meadows Unit No. 2, a subdivision
of part of the north half of section 21, township 35 north and in range 12
east of the third Principal Meridian.


1229
 
8-15-88
 
Vacating that part of a right-of-way dedicated for public highway lying
westerly of the west right-of-way line of Route 45 and east of the west line
of the east half of the southwest quarter of section 21, township 35 north,
range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian.


1265
 
7-3-89
 
Vacating a certain part of Pleasant Hill Road situated within the boundaries
of the property known as Pleasant Hill Cemetery.


1266
 
7-3-89
 
Vacating a certain portion of Kansas Street within proposed Lot 1 of Kansas
Street Resubdivision and a certain portion of Kansas Street between the
westerly line of proposed Lot 1 of the proposed Kansas Street Resubdivision
and the easterly right- of-way line of Locust Street extended northerly.


1285
 
11-6-89
 
Vacating a certain portion of the right-of- way of Elm Street extended south
of the south right-of way line of Franklin Avenue in the Arthur T. McIntosh &
Company’s Lincoln Meadows Unit No. 1.


1422
 
7-6-93
 
Vacating the south 33 feet, commonly known as old Michigan Avenue right-of-
way, running parallel to lots 6, 7, 8, and 9 of Carpenters Subdivision being
part of the west ½ of the southwest ¼ of section 21, township 35 north and
range 12 east of the Third Principal Meridian.


1434
 
11-1-93
 
Vacating that part of Hamilton Avenue lying south of the south line of
Pleasant Hill Road in Brookside II Subdivision Phase 1, being a subdivision
of part of the east ½ of the southwest ¼ of section 21, township 35 north,
range 12 east of the Third Principal Meridian.


1521
 
6-5-95
 
Vacating the unoccupied right-of-way described as the old Michigan Avenue
right-of-way to the south of lots 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 in Carpenters Subdivision,
and the unoccupied right away described as the old Michigan Avenue
right-of-way west of the Maple Street right-of-way and south of lot 1 of
Kensigton Place.


1540
 
11-6-95
 
Vacating the public utility easement commonly described as the 20-foot
easement, located along the west line of lot 1, in Georgetown Square
Subdivision.


1543
 
11-6-95
 
Vacating the 20-foot easement commonly described as the 20-foot easement,
located between 9097 Charrington Drive and 9083 Charrington Drive.


1578
 
6-3-96
 
Vacating a 25-foot by 150-foot strip located between the easterly line of lot
5 and the westerly line of lot 6 of Weiland Farm PUD Unit 1.


1585
 
7-1-96
 
Vacating that dedicated 66 feet of right- of-way commonly known as Elm
Street, except the north 205 feet of said right-of-way known as California
Avenue (Oregon Street) and south of dedicated right-of-way known as Nebraska
Street.


1628
 
4-7-97
 
Vacating a portion of Hackberry Road described as the west 66.00 feet of the
east 570.16 feet of the north 249.84 feet and the west 145.84 feet of the
east 650.00 feet of the south 66.00 feet of the north 315.84 feet of the West
Half of the Southwest Quarter of Section 21, Township 35 North, Range 12 East
of the Third Principal Meridian.


1667
 
11-3-97
 
Vacating that part of 66 foot right-of- way commonly known as 84th Avenue
lying south of the southern right-of- way of U.S. Route 30 and north of the
southern boundary line of Section 23 except that portion 58.06 feet north of
said section line.  All lying in Section 23, Township 35, North Range 12
East of the Third Principal Meridian.


1723
 
12-7-98
 
Vacating territory beginning at the north 33 feet of the west 1961.77 feet of
the southeast quarter of Section 28 lying easterly of the southeasterly
right-of-way line of S.B.I. Route 51 (U.S. Route 45).


1810
 
7-3-00
 
Vacating certain crosswalks within the corporate limits of the village.


1859
 
5-21-01
 
Vacating a portion of Smith Street right-of-way located at the Southeast
Quarter of Section 21, Township 35 North, Range 12 East of the Third
Principal Meridian.


1931
 
9-16-02
 
Vacating a portion of right-of-way located at the original location of
Colorado Avenue, east of Route 45 and south of Abbey Woods.


2064
 
3-15-04
 
Vacating a portion of right-of-way located just west of West Bowden Street
and McDonald Lane.


2607
 
8-17-09
 
Vacating the original plat of subdivision for Crystal Brook of Frankfort
Phase I, located at the northwest corner of Harlem Avenue and Steger Road.


2680
 
11-1-10
 
Vacating the east 50 feet of part of Locust Street in Bowen’s Addition.


2872
 
10-7-13
 
Vacating a 20 foot no access easement located at Lot 146 in Stone Creek
Subdivision.


 
 




 



TABLE X:  ZONING CHANGES



Editor’s note: This table lists changes to the Zoning Map and variances to
the Zoning Code.



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




925
 
9-7-76
 
Rezoning property, being lots 12, 13, 14, 15, and 41 in Arthur T. McIntosh
and Company’s Kean Avenue Estates, a subdivision of part of the southwest
quarter of section 22 in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third
Principal Meridian.


931
 
2-7-77
 
Rezoning property, being that part of the west half of the southwest quarter
of section 21, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal
Meridian, from R-2 to R-4.


942
 
4-18-77
 
Rezoning property, being that part of the northeast quarter of section 21,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian, from E-R to
R-2.


944
 
5-16-77
 
Rezoning property, being the east 90 feet of the west 558.98 feet of that
part of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of section 27,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian, from E-R to
R-2.


948
 
6-6-77
 
Rezoning property, being the north 165 feet of the south 825 feet of the west
530 feet of the west half of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter
of section 22, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal
Meridian, from E-R to C-1.


949
 
6-6-77
 
Rezoning property, being that part of lot 2, in the subdivision of part of
the southwest quarter of section 22, in township 35 north, range 12 east of
the third Principal Meridian, from R-2 to C-5.


953
 
8-1-77
 
Rezoning property, being that part of the north half of section 27, township
35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian, from E-R to R-2.


963
 
10-17-77
 
Rezoning property, being that part of the southeast quarter of the northwest
quarter of section 27, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third
Principal Meridian, from E-R to R-2.


965
 
10-17-77
 
Rezoning property, being the west 330 feet of the south 660 feet of the east
half of the southwest quarter of section 27, township 35 north, range 12 east
of the third Principal Meridian; and the east 330 feet of the west 660 feet
of the south 660 feet of the east half of the southwest quarter of section
27, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian, from
E-R to I-2.


968
 
1-16-78
 
Rezoning property, being Cambridge Subdivision, a resubdivision of lots 38,
43, D, E, and F in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s Kean Avenue Estates, a
subdivision of part of the southwest quarter of section 22, in township 35
north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian, from E-R to R-2.


979
 
5-15-78
 
Rezoning property, being that part of the north half of section 27, township
35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian, beginning at the
southeast corner of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter of section
27, from E-R to R-2.


985
 
7-17-78
 
Rezoning property, being the northwest fractional quarter, north and south of
the Indian Boundary Line (except the east 40 acres), of section 33, township
35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian, from E-R to C-4.


986
 
8-7-78
 
Rezoning property, being the south quarter of the east half of lot nine in
School Trustees Subdivision of section 16, township 35 north, range 12 east
of the third Principal Meridian, from R-2 to C-1.


993
 
11-6-78
 
Rezoning property, being the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of
section 27, and also that part of the southeast quarter of the northwest
quarter of section 27 lying southerly of the southerly right-of-way of the
Elgin, Joliet, and Eastern Railroad, all in township 35 north, range 12 east
of the third Principal Meridian, from E-R to C-4.


995
 
11-20-78
 
Rezoning property, being the north 200 feet (except the south 150 feet) of
the south 1500 feet of the east 300 feet of the east half of the northeast
quarter of section 21, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third
Principal Meridian, and that part of the northeast quarter of section 21, in
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian, both from
E-R to C-4.


999
 
3-19-79
 
Rezoning property, being that portion of lot 2 of Sagers Industrial
Subdivision, being a subdivision of part of the northwest quarter of section
28, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian, from
I-1 to C-4.


1057
 
3-16-81
 
Rezoning property, being the south 180 feet of lot two in Sagers Industrial
Subdivision, being a subdivision of part of the northwest quarter of section
28, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian, from
C-4 and I-1 to C-2.


1075
 
3-15-82
 
Rezoning the following property, from R-3 to E-R:


(1)
 
Part of block 16, of Bowen’s Addition to the village, situated in the east
half of the northwest quarter of section 28 in township 35 north and in range
12 east of the third Principal Meridian;


(2)
 
That part of vacated Hurry Avenue (also known as Hobby), lying south of the
center line of Pacific Street and lying west and adjoining (1) above, and
part of vacated Pacific Street lying north and adjoining (1) above;


(3)
 
That part of block 16 described as beginning at the northeast corner of block
16 of Bowen’s addition to the village, situated in the east half of the
northwest quarter of section 28, in township 35 north and in range 12 east of
the third Principal Meridian;


(4)
 
The south half of vacated Pacific Street lying north of and adjoining (3)
above, except that part lying east of the west line of Locust Street.


1081
 
8-16-82
 
Rezoning property, being that part of the northeast quarter of section 21,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian, from E-R to
C-4.


1099
 
10-17-83
 
Rezoning property, being the east half of section 20, township 35 north,
range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian, lying north of the north
right-of-way line of Lincoln Highway, as dedicated, and lying south of the
south right-of-way line of Ironwood Drive, as dedicated, and also south of
the south line of lot eight and south of the south line of lot six, in
Bankers Subdivision of the west half of the northeast quarter of section 20,
from E-R to R-1.


1168
 
8-22-86
 
Rezoning property, being that part of the northwest quarter of section 22,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian, commencing
at the southwest corner of the northwest quarter of section 22, to R-4, with
the remaining as follows.


(1)
 
The west 750 feet (except the north 250 feet) to C-3.


(2)
 
The west 750 feet of the north 250 feet to C-3.


(3)
 
The east 350 feet of the west 1100 feet (except the north 250 feet) to C-3.


(4)
 
The east 600 feet of the west 1350 feet of the north 250 feet to C-3.


1172
 
10-6-86
 
Rezoning certain land, being that part of lots seven and eight, in Charles
Clay’s Subdivision of the north part of the east half of the southeast
quarter of section 21, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third
Principal Meridian, from R-2 to R-4.


1193
 
10-5-87
 
Rezoning property, being the north half of the southwest quarter of section
34, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian, from
E-R to I-1.


1197
 
11-2-87
 
Rezoning property, being part of the southeast quarter of section 20, in
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian, commonly
known as a tract of land south of Route U.S. 30 and west of Elsner Rd., from
E-R to R-2.


1202
 
1-18-88
 
Rezoning property, being that part of lots seven and eight in Charles
Clay’s Subdivision of the north part of the east half of the southeast
quarter of section 21, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third
Principal Meridian, from R-2 to C-1.


1204
 
2-16-88
 
Rezoning the following lands in the village:


(1)
 
The north half of the east half of the northeast quarter of section 36,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian, from E-R to
R-2;


(2)
 
The south 200 feet of the north 260 feet of the west 245 feet of the east 295
feet of the northeast quarter of section 36, township 35 north, range 12 east
of the third Principal Meridian, from E-R to C-2.


1205
 
3-7-88
 
Rezoning certain lands, being lots —1 through —21 inclusive in Brookside
Subdivision of part of the west half of the southwest quarter of section 21,
township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian, from R-3 to
R-2.


1215
 
5-16-88
 
Rezoning property, being lots 152 and 153, in Arthur T. McIntosh’s Second
Addition to Lincoln Estates, a subdivision of part of the east half of
section 23 in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal
Meridian, from E-R to C-3.


1217
 
6-6-88
 
Rezoning property, being that part of lots 5 through 7 and 9 through 23 in
Osgood’s Subdivision of the south part of the southwest quarter of section
15, township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian, from
E-R to C-1, C-1 PUD, R-1, and R-2.


1225
 
7-18-88
 
Rezoning the following property from E-R to R-2, R-4, and C-3 PUD.


(1)
 
Half of the southwest quarter beginning at the southeast corner of the east
half, from E-R to R-2.


(2)
 
That part of the west half of the southeast quarter and that part of the east
half of the southwest quarter of section 29, township 35 north, range 12 east
of the third Principal Meridian beginning at the southeast corner of the east
half of the southwest quarter, from E-R to R-2.


(3)
 
That part of the east half of the southwest quarter of section 29, township
35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian beginning at the
southeast corner of the east half, and that part of the west half of the
southeast quarter of section 29, township 35 north, range 12 east of the
third Principal Meridian beginning at the northwest corner of said southeast
quarter, from E-R to R-4.


(4)
 
That part of the west half of the southeast quarter of section 29, township
35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal Meridian beginning at the
southwest corner of the west half, from E- R to C-3 PUD.


1228
 
8-15-88
 
Rezoning property, being that part of the east half of the southwest quarter
of section 21, in township 35 north, range 12 east of the third Principal
Meridian, beginning at a point in the west line of the east half of the
southwest quarter, from E-R to R-2.


1260
 
4-3-89
 
Rezoning certain lands, being that part of the northwest quarter of the
southwest quarter of section 26, township 35 north, range 12 east of the
third Principal Meridian, from E-R to C-5.


1270
 
7-17-89
 
Rezoning a certain tract of land in Silvertree Subdivision from E-R
Residential to R-2 Single Family Residential.


1291
 
1-15-90
 
Rezoning certain property lying south of U.S. Route 30 in Township 35 North,
Range 12, east of the Third Principal Meridian, from E-R to AG.


1292
 
4-2-90
 
Rezoning a certain 160 acres of the northeast corner of the intersection of
Harlem Avenue and Steger Road from E-R to AG.


1293
 
4-2-90
 
Rezoning a certain portion of the northeast quarter of Section 36, Township
35 North, Range 12, east of the Third Principal Meridian, along with a
nonexclusive perpetual ingress-egress easement, from E-R to AG.


1294
 
4-2-90
 
Rezoning a certain part of the east half of the southwest quarter of Section
27, Township 35 North, Range 12, east of the Third Principal Meridian, from
E-R to AG.


1298
 
5-7-90
 
Rezoning 20615 S. La Grange Road from E-R to C-2.


1302
 
6-18-90
 
Rezoning a certain tract of land in the southeast quarter of Section 20,
Township 35 North, Range 12, east of the Third Principal Meridian, from E-R
to R-2 and R-4.


1304
 
6-18-90
 
Rezoning certain parts of the west half of the east half of the southwest
quarter of Section 24, Township 35 North, Range 12, east of the Third
Principal Meridian, from E-R to R-2 and from E-R to C-2 Commercial PUD.


1305
 
6-4-90
 
Rezoning a certain part of the west half of the northwest quarter of Section
27, Township 35 North, Range 12, east of the Third Principal Meridian, from
E-R to R-2; and granting a variance “Minimum Lot Width Requirements in the
R-2 District.”


1306
 
6-4-90
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of the R-2 district for the
north half of Lots 1 and 2, Block 2, in Smith’s Addition.


1308
 
7-2-90
 
Rezoning a certain part of the east half of the southwest quarter of Section
21, Township 35 North, Range 12, east of the Third Principal Meridian, from
E-R to C-5 Office/Research PUD.


1317
 
8-20-90
 
Rezoning Parcel “A,” certain parts of Lots 13 through 20; and Parcel
“B,” Lots 7 through 12 in the Charles Clayes Subdivision from C-2 and C-4
to C-2 with a special use for a PUD and package liquor sales.


1321
 
9-17-90
 
Rezoning Lots 6, 7, and 8 in Arthur T. McIntosh & Company’s Kean Avenue
Estates from E-R to C-4 PUD.


1322
 
9-4-90
 
Granting variances to certain requirements of C-2 district for property known
as 118 White Street.


1323
 
10-1-90
 
Granting variances to certain requirements of R-2 district for property known
as 223 Walnut Street.


1332
 
11-19-90
 
Granting variances to certain requirements of R-2 district for property known
as 18 West Bowen Street.


1335
 
12-3-90
 
Rezoning two parcels in Hamilton Farm, owned by Albert H. Krusemark, from E-R
to AG.


1336
 
12-3-90
 
Rezoning 22451 S. 80th Ave., owned by Thomas Hrach, from E-R to AG.


1338
 
2-4-91
 
Rezoning certain portions of Outlot B in Brookside II Subdivision, Phase 2,
from E-R to C-5 PUD.


1339
 
2-4-91
 
Rezoning certain property owned by Martin Kaffell at 6 N. Hickory from H-1
and R-2 to R-4.


1340
 
2-19-91
 
Rezoning Lot 8 in Arthur T. McIntosh & Company’s Prestwick Unit Number A-3
from E-R to R-1.


1341
 
2-19-91
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of R-2 district for property
known as 20701 Locust Street.


1348
 
5-6-91
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of R-2 district for property
known as 120 W. Nebraska Street.


1349
 
5-6-91
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of R-2 district for property
known as Patterson’s Maple Street Subdivision.


1354
 
9-3-91
 
Authorizing a variance to the minimum side yard requirement of R-2 district
for property known as 10759 Oakton Ct.


1355
 
9-3-91
 
Granting a variance to the minimum side yard requirement of the R-2 district
for property known as 172 Grant Street.


1359
 
9-16-91
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of R-2 district for property
known as 119 Walnut Street.


1363
 
12-2-91
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of R-2 district for property
known as 131 Kansas Street.


1364
 
12-2-91
 
Authorizing a variance to side yard setback requirements of R-2 district for
property known as 10563 Yankee Ridge Drive.


1368
 
1-6-92
 
Authorizing a special use permit for R-2 district property known as Peace
Community Church Preschool.


1373
 
4-6-92
 
Rezoning property known as 241 White Street, owned by Burlyn Eisenbrandt,
from R-2 to C-5; and granting variances to certain requirements of C-5
district.


1374
 
4-6-92
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of R-2 district for property
known as 144 South Hickory Street.


1377
 
4-20-92
 
Rezoning certain property in Weiland Farm from A-1 to R-2, R-4 PUD, C-1 PUD,
C-2 PUD, and C-5 PUD and A-1; authorizing variances to certain zoning
district requirements for same.


1378
 
5-4-92
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of E-R district for property
known as 562 C. Aberdeen Road.


1379
 
5-4-92
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of R-2 district for property
known as 127 Linden Drive.


1384
 
7-6-92
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as 106 W. Nebraska Street from R-2 to a
C-5.


1385
 
7-6-92
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of R-2 district for property
known as 32 Pacific Street.


1386
 
7-6-92
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of R-2 district for property
known as 253 S. Hickory Street.


1390
 
8-3-92
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of R-2 district for property
known as 127 Kansas Street.


1392
 
9-8-92
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as 408 S. Center Road from C-4 to I-1.


1393
 
10-5-92
 
Authorizing a variance to certain requirements of H-1 district for property
known as 1 North White Street.


1394
 
10-5-92
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of E-R district for property
known as 824 Highland.


1395
 
10-5-92
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of R-2 district for property
known as 139 Walnut Street.


1402
 
2-1-93
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the Water Tower Site and the
remaining portion of Unit III, Charrington Subdivision from C-1 PUD/C-2 PUD &
C-5 PUD to R-2.


1408
 
3-15-93
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as Hunter Woods Estates, First Addition
from A-2 to R-2 and E-R.


1409
 
3-25-93
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of H-1 for property known as 20
West Kansas Street.


1414
 
4-26-93
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of I-1 for property known as
225 Laraway Road.


1416
 
4-26-93
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as Lot 1 in David Wilson’s subdivision
from I-2 to C-3.


1417
 
4-26-93
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as 20 West Kansas from H-1 to H-1 with a
Special Use Permit for the sale of liquor.


1418
 
4-26-93
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as Outlet A, Brookside II from E-R to
C-5.


1420
 
5-17-93
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of R-2 district for property
known as 34 Smith Street.


1421
 
5-17-93
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of R-2 district for property
known as 233 South Hickory Street.


1423
 
7-19-93
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as Kensington II Subdivision from R-2
and R-4 to R-2.


1424
 
7-19-93
 
Authorizing a variance to reduce the front yard setback of property known as
515 Cottonwood Road.


1432
 
10-4-93
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as Mostar Ltd. from E-R to I-1.


1442
 
12-6-93
 
Authorizing a special use permit for outdoor storage and sales at Ace
Hardware, 326 N. LaGrange Road.


1444
 
12-20-93
 
Authorizing a variance to certain requirements of I-2 district for Vans
Material, Elsner Road.


1446
 
2-7-94
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as Hunter Woods Townhomes from E-R to
R-4.


1447
 
2-7-94
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of R-2 district for property
known as 139 S. Walnut Street.


1448
 
2-7-94
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as Terry’s Automotive, 20450 South
LaGrange Road, from C-3 to C-4.


1456
 
5-2-94
 
Authorizing a variance to certain requirements of R-2 for property known as
21139 Hunter Woods Drive.


1457
 
5-2-94
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of R-2 district for property
known as 132 S. Ash Street.


1458
 
5-2-94
 
Authorizing a variance to increase the size of an accessory structure for
property known as 1012 Prestwick Drive.


1460
 
6-6-94
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as Bruti Condominium Addition from E-R
to C-5.


1462
 
6-6-94
 
Authorizing a special use permit to allow a car rental agency in association
with an airport for South Suburban Aviation.


1464
 
6-20-94
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the Engelmann property from R-2 to
H-1 PUD.


1465
 
6-20-94
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as 500 North LaGrange Road from E-R to
C-1.


1470
 
7-18-94
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of I-1 district for property
known as 524 Center Road,


1471
 
8-1-94
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as Weber - Rt. 45 PUD from I-1 to
R-4/C-1 PUD.


1472
 
8-1-94
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of R-2 for lots 25, 32, 37, 40,
and 43 in Heritage Knolls Unit V.


1473
 
9-6-94
 
Authorizing a variance to reduce the minimum side yard of 328 Iowa Court.


1474
 
9-6-94
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of R-2 for property known as
lot 19 of 511 Linden Road.


1482
 
11-7-94
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as 352 S. LaGrange Road from I-2 to C-2.


1483
 
11-7-94
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of C-2 for property known as
352 S. LaGrange Road.


1486
 
12-5-94
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the Gas City property (McEnery
Subdivision) from I-2 to C-4.


1496
 
2-21-94
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the Frankfort Garden Center from E-R
to C-5.


1499
 
3-6-95
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the Amoco Oil Company property from
E-R to C-4.


1509
 
4-3-95
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the Semanic property from E-R to C-1.


1513
 
5-1-95
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the Old Mary Todds property from C-3
to C-4.


1514
 
5-1-95
 
Authorizing a variance to allow a five foot encroachment on a utility
easement for 35 Carpenter Street.


1518
 
5-15-95
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the Elsner Farm (Sutton Dale) from
E-R to R-2.


1520
 
6-5-95
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the east 6 acres of the Fleck Farm
from E-R to I-1.


1522
 
6-5-95
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as part of Kensington II from E-R to R-2.


1524
 
6-8-95
 
Authorizing variances to certain requirements of H-1 for property known as 20
West Kansas Street.


1528
 
8-7-95
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the Pascarella property from E-R to
C-3 PUD.


1531
 
8-7-95
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the Lawdale subdivision from E-R to
R-2.


1532
 
8-21-95
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the Gerardi Funeral Home, 9500 E.
Lincoln Highway, from C-3/R-2 to C-5 for Lot C, and to C-5 with a special use
for a funeral home and the residence of a proprietor for Lot A.


1541
 
11-6-95
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the Smit/Kalhammer property from R-4
to C-5.


1542
 
11-6-95
 
Granting special exception variances for certain property currently zoned C-4
(South End Boat Shop – 20000 S. LaGrange Road).


1544
 
11-20-95
 
Authorizing a variance for certain property currently zoned C-1 to reduce the
setback requirement.


1560
 
3-4-96
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the Hargens property from E-R to R-2
PUD and C-5 PUD.


1561
 
3-4-96
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the Royce Group property from C-4 to
C-5 with a special use for a drive-up window.


1566
 
4-1-96
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the Pascarella property from R-2 to
C-5 PUD.


1567
 
4-1-96
 
Granting a special use permit for the property commonly known as the Old
Junior High School, currently zoned R-2.


1568
 
4-1-96
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the Wirth property from E-R to C-5,
with a special use for a restaurant and two office/retail buildings.


1577
 
5-20-96
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the Beechen & Dill property from E-R
to R-2 PUD and R-4 PUD.


1579
 
6-3-96
 
Granting a special use permit for the property commonly known as the Franklin
Airport, currently zoned I-2.


1580
 
6-3-96
 
Authorizing a variance for certain property currently zoned R-2 to reduce the
side yard setback.


1582
 
6-17-96
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the 23-acre parcel east of Rt. 45 and
north of the EJ&E Railroad from I-1 to E-R PUD.


1584
 
7-1-96
 
Granting a special use permit for the property commonly known as Fire &
Spice, Inc., currently zoned H-1, to allow the sale of packaged liquor.


1588
 
8-19-96
 
Revocation of the special use permit granted in Ord. 1579 to the Frankfort
Airport.


1589
 
8-19-96
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the Hrach Farm, located east of 80th
Avenue, south of Laraway Road, from AG to R-2.


1592
 
9-16-96
 
Granting a special use permit for the property commonly known as Palm Bistro,
located at 21 S. White Street, currently zoned H-1, to allow the sale of
alcoholic beverages for on- premises consumption.


1593
 
10-7-96
 
Granting a zoning variance for certain property currently zoned R-2 (Lots 4,
7, & 8 - Lawndale Subdivision).


1594
 
10-21-96
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as Brookside Commons from C-2 to C-5 PUD
with a special use permit.


1605
 
12-16-96
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the property located at the northwest
corner of Owens and Stegers Roads, from E-R to R-2.


1610
 
2-18-97
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the Sangmeister property located at
the southeast corner of Laraway and Wolf Roads, from E-R to AG.


1613
 
2-18-97
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the property located at the southwest
corner of the intersection of Wolf Road and Laraway Road, from E-R to R-2 and
C-1 PUD.


1616
 
2-18-97
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the property located on the north
side of St. Francis Road, east of 88th Avenue, from E-R to E-R PUD.


1619
 
2-18-97
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the property located at the southeast
corner of Laraway and Pfeiffer Roads from E-R to C-5 (4.5 acres) and AG (15.5
acres).


1620
 
2-18-97
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as the property located at the south
side of Rt. 30, east of Pheasant Run Estates from R-4 to R-4 PUD.


1624
 
4-7-97
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as Hughes and Duggan Property, east side
of Route 45, south of LaPorte Road, from E-R to C-3 PUD for Tract A, R-4 PUD
for Tract B, C-3 PUD for Tract C, R-4 PUD for Tract D, Open Space for Tract
E, and R-2 PUD for Tract F.


1627
 
4-7-97
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as Golden Gate Nursery from E-R to C-3
PUD with a special use permit.


1632
 
5-5-97
 
Granting a special use permit for the property commonly known as E-Quip
Manufacturing, currently zoned I-2, to allow the outdoor storage of materials
for business purposes only.


1633
 
5-19-97
 
Granting a zoning variance for certain property currently zoned R-2
(Caschetta - 203 W. Nebraska).


1635
 
6-16-97
 
Rezoning the property commonly known as Sandalwood Subdivision from E-R to
R-2 for 154.31 acres and C-1 PUD for four acres.


1637
 
6-16-97
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property currently zoned I-2
(Carroll Distributing - 121 Industry Avenue).


1639
 
7-7-97
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property currently zoned C-5 PUD
(Liang’s Restaurant - Rt. 30 and Elsner Road).


1643
 
8-4-97
 
Rezoning of property (West of Rt.45, North of Lincoln-Way High School, East
and South of the Will County Forest Preserve District Property)to E-R PUD and
granting a special use permit for construction of a public utility.


1646
 
8-4-97
 
Rezoning of property (Walnut Creek Subdivision - St. Francis Road) to R-2
PUD, R-3 PUD and R-4 PUD.


1647
 
8-18-97
 
Rezoning of property (Trinity Farms Subdivision - 9436 Steger Road) to C-1
PUD and granting a special use permit to allow for sale of alcoholic
beverages for consumption on premises and granting a special use permit for
residence of proprietor, C-5 PUD for  lots 2 and 3, and I-1 PUD for lots 4 -
42.


1650
 
9-8-97
 
Rezoning of property (Swanson Tools/Bachman Imports - 211 E. Ontario) to I-1
PUD.


1651
 
9-8-97
 
Rezoning of property (Frankfort Business Park - southwest side of LaGrange
Road) to C-5 PUD and granting a special use permit to allow a drive-up
facility and the construction of a three story structure 42 feet in height at
the west end of the property.


1654
 
9-8-97
 
Rezoning of property (Hughes & Duggan Property - Rt. 45 - excluding Tract F,
Lot 6) to Tract A: C-3 PUD with a special use permit for a drive-through
facility on Outlot F and special use permit for a carry-out window limited to
non-restaurant use for Outlot 1D; Tract B: R-4 PUD; Tract C: R-2 PUD; Tract
D: C-4 PUD; Tract E: C-5 PUD.


1655
 
9-8-97
 
Rezoning of property (Hughes & Duggan Property - Rt. 45 - Tract F, Lot 6) to
C-5 PUD.


1663
 
10-20-97
 
Rezoning of property (Brosy - 9029 West Lincoln Highway) to C-2 PUD.


1666
 
11-3-97
 
Rezoning of property (Fortune Property - 8346 West Lincoln Highway) to C-1
PUD.


1670
 
11-3-97
 
Rezoning of property (Valley View Motel - 10957 West Lincoln Highway) to C-5
PUD.


1671
 
11-17-97
 
Granting a special use permit (Ambrosino’s - 20595 S. LaGrange Road) to
allow for sale of packaged liquor.  No alcoholic beverages will be allowed
to be served on the premises.


1682
 
1-20-98
 
Rezoning of property (Abbey Woods - Phase 2) from E-R to R-1, with a minimum
lot size of 20,000 square feet for 35 lots, and to


R-2, with a minimum lot size of 15,000 square feet for 26 lots.


1683
 
1-20-98
 
Rezoning of property (Auto Haus - 19915 S. LaGrange Road) from E-R to C-4
PUD, Automotive Service District.


1684
 
1-20-98
 
Rezoning of property (Folkers Property - Pfieffer Road)  from AG to E-R PUD.


1689
 
2-2-98
 
Rezoning of property (Gas City - Rt. 30 and Wolf Road) from E-R to C-4 PUD
with a special use permit to allow the sale of packaged liquor and to allow a
carry-out restaurant for Gas City Service Station.


1692
 
3-16-98
 
Rezoning of property (Newbrook Subdivision - 116th Avenue, North of Laraway
Road) from E-R to R-2.


1697
 
4-6-98
 
Rezoning of property (Weber Property - 108th Avenue) from E-R to R-2.


1700
 
4-6-98
 
Rezoning of property (Eul Property - 7800 West Lincoln Highway) from E-R to
C-4 PUD.


1701
 
4-6-98
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Dominick’s - Rt. 45 and
LaPorte Road) to allow sale of packaged liquors.  No alcoholic beverages
will be allowed to be served on the premises.


1705
 
6-15-98
 
Rezoning of property (Warfield - 175 Industry Avenue) from I-2 to I-2 PUD.


1707
 
7-6-98
 
Rezoning of property (Walgreen’s - 7209 East Lincoln Highway) from C-4 PUD
to C-2.


1710
 
8-3-98
 
Granting zoning variances (Panozzo - 221 Kansas Street).


1712
 
8-17-98
 
Granting special exception variances (Gateway Office Park - 20 South Route
45).


1715
 
10-5-98
 
Rezoning of property (Heritage Olympia Bank - Lot “E” - Hickory Creek
Market Place) from C-4 PUD to C-2.


1716
 
10-5-98
 
Granting zoning variances (Holomy - 41 White Street).


1718
 
11-2-98
 
Granting a zoning variance for D. Dale Sink and Nancy Sink Variance at 220
Pacific Street.


1719
 
11-2-98
 
Granting a zoning variance for Stanley Tylinski at 266 West Nebraska Street.


1720
 
11-2-98
 
Rezoning certain property (Laraway Center Business Park - Laraway and Center
Roads) from I-2 to C-5, with a special use permit for a planed unit
development with C-3 business service establishments and wholesale and
warehouse uses.


1722
 
12-7-98
 
Granting a special use permit to Borg Warner Automotive.


1727
 
12-21-98
 
Granting a special use permit to Tri-State Cut Stone.


1728
 
1-4-99
 
Rezoning certain property (West Property—SE corner of Route 30 and Wolf
Road) from E-R to C-3, with a special use permit for a planned development.


1735
 
3-15-99
 
Rezoning certain property (Rizzi—8215 West Lincoln Highway) from E-R to C-5
with a Special Use Permit for a planned development and outdoor sales and
storage of landscape and antique materials.


1740
 
4-19-99
 
Rezoning certain property (Die Bier Stube—42 Kansas Street) a zoning
variance and a special use permit to allow construction of a decorative fence
in the H-1 District.


1742
 
5-3-99
 
Granting a zoning variance for certain property (Bertic Variance—324 Oak
Street) to allow construction of a garage.


1743
 
6-7-99
 
Granting a zoning variance for certain property (Pichler Variance—609
Brookside) to allow construction of a gazebo.


1748
 
7-6-99
 
Rezoning certain property (Plank Trail Estates—7405 West Lincoln Highway)
from E-R to R-2, R-4, and C-2 with a special use permit for a planned
development.


1750
 
7-19-99
 
Rezoning certain property (Pascarella Property—420 N. LaGrange Road) from
C-1 to C-4 with a special use permit for a planned development for an
automobile sales and display area.


1751
 
7-19-99
 
Granting a special use permit (Pascarella Property—400 N. LaGrange Road)
for a planned unit development.


1752
 
7-19-99
 
Rezoning certain property (Row House Limited Property—32 Nebraska Street)
from C-1 to H-1 with a special use permit for a planned unit development.


1753
 
8-2-99
 
Rezoning certain property (Fox Investments, Inc.—1 North White Street) from
E-R to K-1 with a special use permit for a planned development for Parcels 1,
3 and 4 to allow for the continuation of home improvement business and
outdoor storage.


1756
 
9-7-99
 
Granting zoning variances for certain property (Goodwin Variances—132 S.
Ash Street) currently zoned R-2 Single Family Residence District.


1758
 
10-4-99
 
Granting a special exception variance for certain property (Carli Property—
Creamery— 459 Nebraska Street).


1760
 
10-4-99
 
Rezoning certain property (Sybaris—Rt. 30) from E-R to C-3.


1761
 
10-18-99
 
Granting a zoning variance for certain property (Drugas Variance—20649
Abbey Drive) to allow construction of a one-story ranch home.


1762
 
11-1-99
 
Granting a special exception variance for certain property (Eggert
Marine—140 S. LaGrange Road) to obtain relief for frontage loss through the
governmental taking of property.


1763
 
11-1-99
 
Granting a special use permit for a planned development (Burke Property—227
Laraway Road) to allow for more than one structure on a parcel.


1771
 
12-20-99
 
Rezoning certain property (Windy Hill Farm—Rt. 30 and Pfeiffer Road) from
AG to C-2, R-5, and R-2 with a special use permit for a planned development.


1772
 
12-20-99
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Hudson’s
Restaurant—19943 S. LaGrange Road) to allow for the sale of alcoholic
beverages.


1773
 
1-3-00
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Royce Group—10125
Laraway Road) to allow for the construction of two mini-warehouse facilities.


1775
 
1-18-00
 
Granting a zoning variance for certain property (Seefeldt Variance—1022
Hornbeam Court) to allow construction of a one story residence which
encroaches approximately four feet into the minimum 40 foot rear yard setback.


1776
 
1-18-00
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Nextel
Communications—Lease) to allow for the placement of an additional accessory
structure at 1025 Lambrecht Road.


1777
 
1-18-00
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Children’s World—SW
Corner of Rt. 30 and Locust Street) to allow a Children’s World Day Care
Center on Lot 1 in the President’s Row Subdivision.


1782
 
2-7-00
 
Rezoning certain property (Lakeview Estates Subdivision—southwest corner of
80th Avenue and Laraway Road), from E-R to R-2.


1783
 
2-7-00
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Metro Towing—9410
Corsair Road) to allow a towing service.


1784
 
3-6-00
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Grainery Tower—24 W.
Elwood Street) to allow for the construction of telecommunications antennae
on the Grainery tower in the Historic District.


1785
 
3-6-00
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (village property—100
Sangmeister Road, SBA Communications, lessee) for a planned unit development
to allow for the construction of a telecommunications tower and maintenance
shelter.


1790
 
3-20-00
 
Rezoning certain property (Stonebridge Valley Subdivision—Laraway Road,
west of 116th) from E-R to R-2.


1791
 
3-20-00
 
Rezoning certain property (Gas City—U.S. Route 45 and Laraway Road) from
E-R to C-4, with a special use permit for a planned development, carry-out
restaurant and packaged liquor sales.


1794
 
4-3-00
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Taco Bell—Outlot 2A,
Hickory Creek Market Place) to allow a drive-up window at the Taco Bell/KFC.


1797
 
4-17-00
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (tenant space E1—Hickory
Creek Market Place, Phase 1) to allow a drive-up window for a restaurant.


1799
 
5-1-00
 
Granting a zoning variance for certain property (Hogan variance—201 Kansas
Street) to accommodate a new three-car garage.


1801
 
5-15-00
 
Rezoning certain property (Huffstutler— 21239 S. 88th Avenue) from E-R to
R-2, with a special use permit for a planned unit development.


1802
 
5-15-00
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Tore’s
Restaurant—20500 LaGrange Road) to allow the sale of alcoholic beverages.


1803
 
5-15-00
 
Granting a zoning variance for certain property (Alleruzzo/Templin—669
Fairway Lane)  for the construction of a single-family home.


1804
 
5-15-00
 
Granting a special exception variance for  certain property
(McDonald’s—455 S. LaGrange Road), to obtain relief for lost frontage due
to the governmental taking of property along U.S. Route 45.


1806
 
6-5-00
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property ( Sanfratello Pizza
Factory—Lot 1C, Hickory Creek Market Place), to allow the sale of alcoholic
beverages.


1808
 
6-19-00
 
Granting a zoning variance for certain property (Vilutis—1135 Center Road)
to allow construction  of a loading dock.


1809
 
6-19-00
 
Rezoning certain property (Eggert Marine— 140 S. LaGrange Road) from E-R to
C-1 with a special use permit for a planned unit development, boat dealer and
outdoor storage.


1811
 
7-3-00
 
Rezoning certain property (LaPorte Meadow Subdivision—LaPorte Road and 88th
Avenue) from E-R to R-2.


1813
 
7-3-00
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Trinity Farms—9436 W.
Steger Road) to allow a tack shop.


1817
 
7-17-00
 
Granting a zoning variance for certain property (Blachford Corp.
Variance—401 Center Road) to allow construction of a one- story
manufacturing/raw material storage building.


1821
 
8-7-00
 
Granting a special exception variance for certain property (J. Clarke Realty
Property— 28 S. LaGrange Road) to obtain relief for lost frontage due to
the governmental taking of property along U.S. Route 45.


1822
 
9-5-00
 
Granting a special use permit for certain  property (Hytone Concrete—190
Industry Road) to allow outdoor storage in an I-2 district.


1823
 
9-5-00
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Gerardi Funeral Home—42
East Lincoln Highway) for a planned unit development.


1824
 
9-5-00
 
Granting a special exception variance for certain property (Gerardi—42 East
Lincoln Highway) to obtain relief for lost frontage due to the governmental
taking of property along U.S. Route 30.


1825
 
10-2-00
 
Granting a zoning variance for certain property (Zager—247 W. Nebraska
Street) to allow for the construction of a front porch addition.


1826
 
10-2-00
 
Rezoning certain property (McDonald’s— Route 30 and Harlem Avenue) from
C-2 to C-3, with a special use permit for a planned unit development and a
drive-up window.


1827
 
10-16-00
 
Granting a special exception variance for certain property (Gerardi Sign—42
East Lincoln Highway) to obtain relief for signage placed in the green space
due to the governmental taking of property along U.S. Route 30.


1829
 
11-6-00
 
Granting a zoning variance for certain property (Schomburg variance—209
Hickory Street) to allow construction of three porches.


1830
 
11-6-00
 
Granting a spacial use permit for certain property (Sackman Animal
Hospital—10850 W. Laraway Road) to allow an animal hospital.


1831
 
11-20-00
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (AT&T Communications—
Prestwick water tower) to allow the erection of an AT&T telecommunications
antenna atop the Prestwick water tower.


1838
 
12-18-00
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (St. Francis Woods—9201
St. Francis Road) for a planned unit development.


1839
 
12-18-00
 
Rezoning certain property (Autumn Fields Subdivision—Wolf and Laraway
Roads) from E-R to R-2 and C-1 with a special use permit for a planned unit
development.


1840
 
1-16-01
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Avanti Furniture—Elsner
Road and U.S. Route 30) for a planned unit development.


1841
 
1-16-01
 
Granting a special exception variance for certain property (Finnegan Special
Exception—237 LaGrange Road) to obtain relief for lost frontage due to the
governmental taking of property along U.S. Route 45.


1842
 
1-16-01
 
Repealing Ordinance No. 1806 and granting a special use permit for certain
property (Balagio’s Restaurant, Lot 1C—Hickory Creek Market Place) to
allow the sale of alcoholic beverages.


1843
 
1-16-01
 
Amending Ord. 1791, giving a correct legal description.  The ordinance
already lists a correct P.I.N. and address.


1845
 
2-5-01
 
Granting a zoning variance for certain property (Schaffer Variance—325
Sherlock Street) to allow construction of an exterior chimney.


1846
 
3-5-01
 
Granting a zoning variance for certain property (Frankfort School District
157C—10482 W. Nebraska Street) to allow construction of an addition to the
existing school.


1847
 
4-2-01
 
Granting a zoning variance for certain property (Bartkus—Utah and Oregon
Streets) to accommodate the subdivision of three lots into five.


1849
 
4-30-01
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Northwoods Saloon—south
side of St. Francis Road) to allow construction of the Northwoods Saloon and
sale of liquor at the restaurant.


1850
 
4-30-01
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Excel Building
Management/B&J Towing, 24 W. Sangmeister Road) to allow a towing service and
outdoor storage.


1856
 
5-21-01
 
Rezoning certain property (Flagstone Subdivision—Scheer Road) from E-R to
R-2.


1857
 
5-21-01
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Old Frankfort Way
Development— Phase I) to allow a fence with pillars for townhomes.


1858
 
5-21-01
 
Granting a zone variance for certain property (Frankfort Public
Library—U.S. Route 30 and Pfeiffer Road) to allow the construction of an
accessory structure for storage of landscape equipment.


1861
 
6-4-01
 
Rezoning certain property (Kurtz Memorial Chapel—U.S. Route 45 and Old
Frankfort Way) from R-2 to H-1 with a special use permit for a planned unit
development.


1865
 
7-16-01
 
Rezoning certain property (BP Amoco— southeast corner of U.S. Routes 30 and
45) from R-2 to C-4 with a special use permit for a planned unit development.


1866
 
7-16-01
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (BP Amoco— southeast
corner of U.S. Routes 30 and 45) to allow a carwash at the BP Amoco station.


1867
 
7-16-01
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (United Liquors—20551 S.
LaGrange Road) to allow sale of liquor.


1868
 
7-16-01
 
Granting a zoning variance for certain property (Wroblewski—626 Prestwick
Drive) to allow construction of a garage addition.


1869
 
8-20-01
 
Rezoning certain property (portions of White Street) from their current
classifications to H-1.


1874
 
10-15-01
 
Rezoning certain property (Plank Trail Estates Townhomes east—southeast
corner of U.S. Route 30 and Plank Trail Drive) from C-2 to R-4.


1882
 
2-4-02
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Lot 29 in Airport
Industrial Park) to allow for outdoor storage.


1883
 
2-19-02
 
Granting a variance for certain property (Lot 12 in Arthur T. McIntosh
Prestwick Unit Seven) to reduce the side yard setback.


1884
 
3-18-02
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (SBC/Ameritech—21032 S.
84th Avenue) to allow for a utility facility in an E-R district.


1885
 
3-18-02
 
Granting a variance for certain property (SBC/Ameritech—21032 S. 84th
Avenue) to reduce the front yard setback.


1889
 
4-15-02
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Savoia T’Go—10233
Lincoln Highway) to allow the sale of liquor for the restaurant.


1891
 
5-6-02
 
Granting a variance for certain property (24 Pacific Street) to reduce the
side yard accessory structure setback.


1892
 
5-6-02
 
Granting a variance for certain property (118 S. Maple Street) to reduce the
side and rear yard setbacks.


1893
 
5-6-02
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Aurelio’s—southwest
corner of Rt. 30 and Elm Street) to allow a drive-up service window, outdoor
seating and sale of alcoholic beverages.


1894
 
5-6-02
 
Granting a variance for certain property (Aurelio’s—southwest corner of
Rt. 30 and Elm Street) to reduce the required green space.


1895
 
5-20-02
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Brookside Commons West)
for a planned unit development.


1896
 
5-20-02
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Hegewisch Bank) to allow
a drive-up service window.


1901
 
6-17-02
 
Granting a variance for certain property (9216 Gulfstream Road) to allow two
curb cuts on Gulfstream Road.


1902
 
6-17-02
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (H and B enterprises) to
allow auto body service in the former Lucenta Tire building.


1904
 
8-1-02
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Pizza Hut) to allow a
carry-out restaurant in Outlot 1D of the Hickory Creek Market Place.


1905
 
7-1-02
 
Granting a variance for certain property (39 West Nebraska Street) to permit
a six foot solid wood fence to be constructed.


1906
 
7-15-02
 
Rezoning certain property (Abbey Woods Unit 3) from R-2 to R-1 and R-3.


1918
 
8-5-02
 
Rezoning from B-2 to B-4 and granting special use permits for certain
property (Prairie Crossings—Southeast corner of Wolf and Rt. 30) for a
drive-up service window.


1919
 
8-5-02
 
Rezoning certain property (Brookmeadow Estates subdivision) from E-R to R-2,
B-2 and B-4.


1920
 
8-5-02
 
Rezoning from E-R to R-2 and granting special use permits for certain
property (Settler’s Croft subdivision) for a planned unit development.


1921
 
8-5-02
 
Rezoning from E-R to B-2 and granting special use permits for certain
property (Bobbie Noonan—8717 West Lincoln Highway) for a daycare center on
the subject property.


1922
 
8-5-02
 
Rezoning certain property (Cobblestone Walk subdivision) from E-R to R-2.


1923
 
8-5-02
 
Granting a variance for certain property (231 Walnut Street) for a garage.


1926
 
8-19-02
 
Rezoning certain property (Ashington Meadows subdivision) from E-R to R-2.


1927
 
8-19-02
 
Granting a variance for certain property (656 Maple Court) to reduce side
yard setback.


1928
 
8-19-02
 
Granting a variance for certain property (9227 Gulfstream Road) to allow two
curb cuts for a lot.


1929
 
9-3-02
 
Granting a variance for certain property (3 East Nebraska Street) to allow
construction of a mixed-use addition to the existing structure.


1930
 
9-16-02
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Gates Development
Company—9217 Gulfstream Road) to allow outdoor storage.


1932
 
10-7-02
 
Granting a variance for certain property (897 Street Andrews Way) to allow
construction of a pool equipment shed.


1933
 
10-7-02
 
Granting a variance for certain property (130 Walnut Street) to allow
construction of a garage addition.


1934
 
10-7-02
 
Rezoning certain property (Laporte Meadows subdivision—Laporte Road and
88th Avenue) from E-R to R-2.


1935
 
10-21-02
 
Granting a variance for certain property (O’Malley—9308 Gulfstream Road)
to allow two curb cuts.


1936
 
10-21-02
 
Granting a variance for certain property (735 Vermont Road) to allow
construction of a sun room addition.


1939
 
11-18-02
 
Granting a variance for certain property (132 South Ash Street) to allow
construction of a new single-family residence.


1946
 
12-16-02
 
Granting a special use permit for certain  property (Berkeley Office Center)
for a  planned unit development.


1947
 
12-16-02
 
Granting a special use permit for certain  property (Dawn Plumbing, Inc.) to
allow for  outdoor storage.


1948
 
1-21-03
 
Granting variances for certain property (Le Foute Inc.—215 Kansas Street)
to allow construction of a new single-family residence.


1949
 
2-3-03
 
Granting a variance for certain property (The Country Living Group
LLC—21764 Morning Dove Lane) to allow construction of a fireplace for a new
single-family residence.


1954
 
3-3-03
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Church of the Latter Day
Saints—South Wolf Road) to allow construction of a church.


1955
 
3-3-03
 
Granting a variance for certain property (Church of the Latter Day
Saints—South Wolf Road) for the height of a church steeple.


1957
 
3-17-03
 
Granting a variance for certain property (11871 Coquille Drive) to allow
construction of a four-car garage.


1958
 
3-17-03
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (The Square at Old
Frankfort Way—northwest corner of White Street and Old Frankfort Way) to
allow for a Planned Unit Development.


1959
 
3-17-03
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Quantum Technical
Services, Inc.—9524 Gulfstream Road) to allow for outdoor storage.


1963
 
4-7-03
 
Rezoning certain property (Lighthouse Point Subdivision—St. Francis Road
west of 88th Avenue) from AG to R-2 and R-3.


1964
 
4-7-03
 
Rezoning and granting a special use permit for certain property (Candle Creek
Subdivision—St. Francis Road east of U.S. Route 45) from E-R to R-2.


1965
 
4-7-03
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Prairie Crossing Retail
Center—southeast corner of Wolf Road and U.S. Route 30) to allow for
outdoor seating.


1970
 
4-28-03
 
Rezoning certain property (Lakeview South Subdivision—northwest corner of
Steger Road and 80th Avenue) from E-R to R-2.


1971
 
4-28-03
 
Rezoning certain property (Misty Falls—southeast corner of Laraway Road and
116th Avenue) from E-R to R-2.


1972
 
5-19-03
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Savioa T’Go—10233
Lincoln Highway) to allow for liquor sales.


1974
 
6-2-03
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Gas City—11155 W.
Lincoln Highway) to allow for a car wash.


1975
 
6-2-03
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Great American
Storage—Vans Drive and 104th Avenue) to allow for a Planned Unit
Development.


1980
 
6-16-03
 
Rezoning certain property (Harper Business Park—south of Laraway Road west
of Pfeiffer Road) from E-R to I-1.


1981
 
6-16-03
 
Rezoning and granting a special use permit for certain property (northwest
and southwest corner of Route 45 and Lincolnway Lane) from ER to B-2.


1982
 
6-16-03
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (LaSalle Bank—southwest
corner of Lincolnway Lane and Route 45) to allow for a drive-up service
window.


1984
 
6-16-03
 
Rezoning certain property (northwest corner of Wolf and Laraway Roads) from
E-R to B-2.


1985
 
6-16-03
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Walgreens—northwest
corner of Wolf and Laraway Roads) to allow for a drive- up service window.


1986
 
6-16-03
 
Granting a variance for certain property (3 East Nebraska Street) to allow
construction of a mixed use addition to existing structure.


1987
 
6-16-03
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Anita Margarita
Restaurant—27 Ash Street) to allow for a full service restaurant.


1994
 
7-7-03
 
Rezoning and granting a special use permit for certain property (northeast 
corner of Route 45 and Colorado Avenue) from B-4 to B-2.


1995
 
7-7-03
 
Granting a variance for certain property (224 Pacific Street) to allow
construction of a two- car garage.


1996
 
7-7-03
 
Granting a variance for certain property (20639 Abbey Drive) to allow
construction of a swimming pool.


1997
 
7-7-03
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (First United
Bank—northwest corner of Laraway and Wolf Roads) to allow for a drive-up
window.


1998
 
7-7-03
 
Granting a variance for certain property (First United Bank—northwest
corner of Laraway and Wolf Roads) to allow a parking ratio variance.


2000
 
7-21-03
 
Granting a variance for certain property (109 Ash Street) to reduce the
number of parking spaces.


2001
 
7-21-03
 
Granting a variance for certain property (3 East Nebraska Street) to allow
construction of a mixed use addition to existing structure.


2002
 
7-21-03
 
Granting a variance for certain property (21271 Georgetown Road) to allow
construction of an asphalt recreational sports court.


2003
 
7-21-03
 
Granting variances for certain property (48 McDonald Lane) to allow
construction of a patio room.


2006
 
8-4-03
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Anita Margarita
Restaurant—27Ash Street) to allow for outdoor seating and liquor sales.


2007
 
8-4-03
 
Granting a variance for certain property (266 Sherlock) to allow construction
of a new residence.


2008
 
8-4-03
 
Granting a variance for certain property (21222 Plank Trail Drive) to allow
construction of a concrete sports court.


2009
 
8-18-03
 
Granting multiple special use permits for certain property (Wright-Harper
Building—Southeast corner of Oak and Kansas Streets).


2010
 
8-18-03
 
Granting multiple variances for certain property (Wright-Harper
Building—Southeast corner of Oak and Kansas Streets).


2013
 
9-2-03
 
Rezoning certain property (23234 South Harlem Avenue) from E-R to AG.


2016
 
9-2-03
 
Rezoning certain property (23564 South Harlem Avenue) from E-R to AG.


2019
 
9-2-03
 
Rezoning certain property (23504 South Harlem Avenue) from E-R to AG.


2022
 
9-2-03
 
Rezoning certain property (7438 West Stuenkel Road) from E-R to AG.


2025
 
9-15-03
 
Rezoning certain property (23234 South Harlem Avenue) from E-R to AG.


2028
 
9-15-03
 
Rezoning certain property (23204 South Harlem Avenue) from E-R to AG.


2029
 
9-15-03
 
Granting a variance for certain property (1014 Prestwick Drive) to allow the
expansion of a sunroom.


2032
 
10-6-03
 
Granting a variance for certain property (464 Meadow Avenue) to allow
non-masonry construction materials.


2033
 
10-6-03
 
Granting a variance for certain property (105 Ash Street).


2034
 
11-3-03
 
Granting a variance for certain property (114 Hickory Street).


2035
 
11-17-03
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Tuffy Auto Center—West
side of Route 45 north of the forest preserve and Hickory Creek) to allow for
an auto service and repair establishment.


2039
 
12-15-03
 
Granting multiple variances for certain property (340 South Walnut Ridge
Court) to allow for a new residence, pool house and sports court.


2040
 
12-15-03
 
Granting a variance for certain property (868 St. Andrews Way) to allow for a
construction of a new residence.


2041
 
12-15-03
 
Granting a variance for certain property (Suttondale Subdivision, Phase
2—Nebraska St. and Elsner Rd.).


2042
 
12-15-03
 
Granting a variance for certain property (Cardinal Lake Subdivision, Unit
3—108th Avenue, south of the Old Plank Road Trail) to reduce the side yard
requirements.


2044
 
1-20-04
 
Granting a variance for certain property (Candle Creek Subdivision—East of
Route 45, between St. Francis Road and La Porte Road) to reduce the total
side yard setback requirement.


2045
 
1-20-04
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (“The Square” at Old
Frankfort Way—Northwest corner of Old Frankfort Way and White Street) to
allow for additional outdoor seating on the east end of “The Square”
building parallel to White Street.


2046
 
1-20-04
 
Granting multiple variances for certain property (21748 Morning Dove Lane) to
allow for an accessory structure/use and a boche ball court.


2047
 
1-20-04
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (The Townhomes of Abbey
Woods—South of Colorado Avenue, east of the Hunt Club) for a planned unit
development.


2049
 
2-2-04
 
Rezoning and granting multiple variances for certain property (Clarke Office
Building— Southwest corner of Route 45 and Maple Street) from R-2 to B-4.


2050
 
2-2-04
 
Granting a special exception variance for certain property (Clarke Office
Building—Southwest corner of Route 45 and Maple Street) to obtain relief
for loss of green space along Route 45.


2055
 
2-17-04
 
Rezoning certain property (Vista of Frankfort Subdivision—Northeast corner
of Wolf Road and Steger Road) from E-R to R-2.


2056
 
2-17-04
 
Rezoning certain property (23050 S. La Grange Road) from E-R to AG.


2057
 
2-17-04
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Wendy’s
restaurant—310 - 362 N. La Grange Road) to allow for a drive-up service
window and extended hours of operation.


2060
 
3-2-04
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Garden Gate Crossing
Subdivision Unit 2—NWC and SWC of Lincoln-Way Lane and La Grange Road) to
allow for outdoor seating at the restaurant park.


2061
 
3-2-04
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Culver’s
restaurant—NWC and SWC of Lincoln-Way Lane and La Grange Road) to allow for
a drive-up service window.


2062
 
3-2-04
 
Granting special use permits for certain property (Buffalo Wild Wings—NWC
and SWC of Lincoln-Way Lane and La Grange Road) to allow for liquor sales and
extended hours of operation.


2063
 
3-2-04
 
Rezoning and granting special use permits for certain property (Amici Spa and
Salon—9029 Lincoln Highway) from B-2 to B-1.


2065
 
4-5-04
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Quizno’s Subs—336 S.
La Grange Road) to allow for a carry-out restaurant.


2069
 
5-3-04
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Frankfort Elementary
School District 157C—northwest corner of Laraway Road and 116th Avenue) to
allow for the construction of a new middle school.


2072
 
5-3-04
 
Rezoning certain property (23223 South Harlem Avenue) from E-R to AG.


2073
 
5-3-04
 
Granting a variance for certain property (21 S. White Street) to allow
construction of a porch addition.


2074
 
5-3-04
 
Granting two special use permits for certain property (21 S. White Street) to
allow for a restaurant and outdoor seating.


2075
 
5-3-04
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Frankfort Park
District’s “Main Park” property—Southwest corner of Nebraska Street
and Locust Street) to allow for the construction of a concession stand.


2080
 
5-17-04
 
Rezoning certain property (Five Oaks Subdivision—Southwest corner of Wolf
Road and Steger Road) from E-R to R-1.


2082
 
5-17-04
 
Granting a variance for certain property (Shimmering View Subdivision—East
of Route 45, between St. Francis Road and La Porte Road) to reduce the total
side yard setback requirements.


2083
 
5-17-04
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Prairie Crossings Retail
Center, Phase 2—Southeast corner of Wolf Road and U.S. Route 30) to allow
for carry-out restaurants.


2084
 
5-17-04
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Prairie Crossings Retail
Center, Phase 2—Southeast corner of Wolf Road and U.S. Route 30) to allow
for outdoor seating and a carry-out restaurant.


2086
 
6-7-04
 
Granting two variances for certain property (20523 Abbey Drive) to reduce
side yard setback requirements.


2087
 
6-7-04
 
Granting a front yard setback variance for certain property (Lighthouse
Pointe Outlot A, Phase 1—St. Francis Road and 88th Avenue) to allow
construction of a lighthouse entry feature.


2088
 
6-7-04
 
Granting two special use permits for certain property (Swinton’s
restaurant—19947 S. La Grange Road) to allow for liquor sales and extended
hours of operation.


2090
 
6-21-04
 
Rezoning and granting multiple variances for certain property (Heritage
Knolls Subdivision,  Unit 6B—Laraway Road, West of Route 45) from R-4 to
R-2.


2092
 
7-6-04
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Superior Towing—195
Industry Avenue) to allow for a towing service with indoor and outdoor
vehicle storage.


2096
 
7-19-04
 
Rezoning certain property (Majestic Pines of Frankfort Subdivision—South of
Laraway Road, east of Pfeiffer Road) from E-R to R-2.


2099
 
7-19-04
 
Rezoning certain property (Stonecreek Subdivision—East of Pfeiffer Road,
between Laraway Road and Steger Road) from E-R to R-2.


2102
 
7-19-04
 
Rezoning certain property (Dieter’s Subdivision—Between 92nd Avenue and
93rd Avenue, south of Franklin and north of Old Plank Road Trail) from E-R to
R-2.


2104
 
7-19-04
 
Amending Ordinance 1918, (Prairie Crossings Planned Unit
Development—Southeast corner of Wolf Road and Route 30) to allow business
hours after 11:00 p.m. be handled by a special event permit.


2105
 
7-19-04
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (SprintCom, Inc., Grainery
Tower—24 Elwood Street) to allow for the erection of SprintCom
telecommunications antennae.


2106
 
7-19-04
 
Granting variances for certain property (Panos Retail/Office Center—SWC of
Route 45 and Bankview Drive) to reduce the green space requirement and
increase the height requirement.


2107
 
7-19-04
 
Granting a variance for certain property (9511 Corsair Road) to permit two
points of access for a lot with less than 200 feet of road frontage.


2108
 
7-19-04
 
Granting a variance for certain property (22809 Mustang Road) to permit two
points of access for a lot with less than 200 feet of road frontage.


2109
 
7-19-04
 
Granting a variance for certain property (9232 Gulfstream Road) to permit two
points of access for a lot with less than 200 feet of road frontage.


2110
 
7-19-04
 
Granting a variance for certain property (9210 Gulfstream Road) to permit two
points of access for a lot with less than 200 feet of road frontage.


2111
 
7-19-04
 
Granting a variance for certain property (9508 Gulfstream Road) to permit two
points of access for a lot with less than 200 feet of road frontage.


2113
 
8-16-04
 
Granting a variance for certain property (112 Oak Street) to allow the
construction of a detached garage.


2114
 
9-7-04
 
Granting special use permits for certain property (Home Depot and
Staples—Northwest corner of Route 45 and St. Francis Road) for outdoor
sales and two satellite dishes.


2115
 
9-7-04
 
Granting variances for certain property (20499 Abbey Drive) to reduce the
side yard setback requirements.


2116
 
9-7-04
 
Granting a variance for certain property (22823 Mustang Road) to permit two
points of access for a lot with less than 200 feet of road frontage.


2118
 
9-20-04
 
Granting special use permits for certain property (Burris Equipment
Company—700 W. Laraway Road) to allow rental, sales, and service and an
above-ground fuel tank.


2121
 
10-4-04
 
Granting variances for certain property (Kirsch Dental Office—590 Bankview
Drive) to reduce the rear yard setback requirements.


2122
 
10-4-04
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Living Hope Lutheran
Church—Northeast corner of Pfeiffer Road and Windy Hill Drive) to allow
construction of a church.


2125
 
10-18-04
 
Granting variances for certain property (Hardwick Village Woodshop/
residence—110 Kansas Street) to reduce the side yard setback and the
driveway setback requirements, and increase the height requirement.


2126
 
10-18-04
 
Granting variances for certain property (115 Walnut Street) to reduce the
driveway setback requirement and allow a concrete patio.


2129
 
11-15-04
 
Granting a variance for certain property (255 Walnut Street) to allow for the
construction of a shed.


2130
 
11-15-04
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Lighthouse Pointe
Townhomes—St. Francis Road) to rezone from AG to R-4.


2135
 
12-20-04
 
Granting special use permits for certain property (Galway Tribes Irish
Restaurant and Pub—9680 Lincolnway Lane) to allow for liquor sales,
extended hours of operation, and outdoor seating.


2138
 
12-20-04
 
Rezoning and granting a special use permit for certain property (Charmaine
Subdivision—890 and 895 Ironwood Drive) from E-R to R-1.


2140
 
12-20-04
 
Rezoning and granting a special use permit for certain property (Trinity
Farms—9436 Steger Road) from E-R to I-1.


2143
 
12-20-04
 
Rezoning certain property (7119 W. Steger Road) from E-R to AG.


2146
 
12-20-04
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Wine Styles—20290 S. La
Grange Road) to allow liquor sales (wine only).


2147
 
12-20-04
 
Granting special use permits for certain property (Frankfort Commons—20160
- 20246 La Grange Road) to allow for outdoor seating, liquor sales, two
drive-up service windows, a carry-out restaurant and hours of operation.


2149
 
1-18-05
 
Granting a variance for certain property (372 Redbud Court) to allow side
yard setback of 10 feet.


2152
 
2-22-05
 
Granting a variance for certain property (22823 Mustang road) for outdoor
storage of roofing materials and trailers.


2153
 
2-22-05
 
Granting  a variance and special use permit for certain property (9311
Corsair Road) for two points of access and outdoor storage.


2154
 
2-22-05
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (22809 Mustang road) for
outdoor storage of construction equipment and materials.


2155
 
2-22-05
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (9232 Gulfstream Road) for
outdoor storage of construction equipment and materials.


2156
 
2-22-05
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (9302 Gulfstream Road) for
outdoor storage of construction equipment and materials.


2157
 
4-4-05
 
Granting a variance for certain property (234 Kansas Street) to locate a dog
run in the side yard.


2158
 
4-4-05
 
Granting a variance for certain property (Lot 2, Bank One Frankfort
Subdivision) for 30-foot 7.5-inch rear yard setback.


2160
 
5-16-05
 
Rezoning and granting two variances for certain property (8518 Sauk Trail)
from E-R to R-2 and from required first-floor building materials.


2161
 
5-16-05
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Lot 2 of Vansville
Subdivision) to construct four industrial buildings.


2162
 
5-16-05
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (21-25 Old Frankfort Way)
to allow for outdoor seating adjacent to south side of building.


2163
 
5-16-05
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (The Square at Old
Frankfort Way) to construct a mixed-use development with offices and
residential condos.


2166
 
6-6-05
 
Granting two variances for certain property (947B Shetland Drive) from first
floor building requirements and to construct an addition on the residential
property.


2171
 
6-20-05
 
Granting multiple variances for certain property (439 Ohio Road) for side
yard setback, first floor building requirements and to construct a sunroom
addition on the residential property.


2173
 
7-5-05
 
Granting multiple variances for certain property (145 Locust Street) for
required lot width, lot area, side yard setback and front yard setback.


2177
 
7-18-05
 
Granting special use permits for certain property (Enrico’s/Walgreen’s
Retail Center) for a PUD, drive-up service window and hours of operation.


2178
 
7-18-05
 
Rezoning certain property (7031 W. Steger Road) from E-R to AG.


2181
 
8-1-05
 
Rezoning certain property (St. Francis Estates Subdivision) from E-R to R-2.


2184
 
8-15-05
 
Rezoning certain property (Sara Springs Subdivision) from E-R to R-2.


2185
 
8-15-05
 
Granting multiple variances for certain property (707 Colony Lane) for lot
size, lot depth and lot width, driveway setback and turning radius for a
driveway.


2186
 
8-15-05
 
Granting a variance for certain property (254 Sherlock Street) from the first
floor building materials requirements to construct a single- family residence.


2187
 
8-5-05
 
Granting a variance for certain property (301 Sherlock Street) from the first
floor building materials requirements to construct a single- family residence.


2190
 
8-15-05
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Harper Business Park, Lot
1) to allow for limited retail sales in association with a warehouse use.


2197
 
9-6-05
 
Rezoning certain property (Jackson Creek Subdivision) from E-R to R-2.


2198
 
9-6-05
 
Rezoning and granting a variance for certain property (Foklers’ Estates
Duplexes) from R-2 to R-3 and for a driveway setback.


2202
 
9-19-05
 
Rezoning certain property (Bernilda Wille property) from E-R to AG.


2205
 
9-19-05
 
Rezoning certain property (22723 Scheer Road) from E-R to R-2.


2207
 
9-19-05
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (22310 S. LaGrange Road)
to allow a car wash at the Gas City fuel center.


2208
 
9-19-05
 
Granting a variance for certain property (22310 S. LaGrange Road) to allow
for reduced required greenspace.


2209
 
9-19-05
 
Granting multiple variances for certain property (204 Hickory Street) for
rear yard setback and accessory structure size variance.


2210
 
9-19-05
 
Granting multiple variances for certain property (141 Ash Street) for corner
side yard setback, rear yard setback, lot coverage and for required first
floor building materials.


2212
 
9-19-05
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (10284 Van’s Drive) for
a PUD to construct an additional storage building with office space.


2214
 
10-3-05
 
Rezoning certain property (Crystal Brook Subdivision) from AG to R-2.


2215
 
10-3-05
 
Granting a special use permit for certain properties serving alcohol (Mary
Todd’s Diner, Northwoods, Parmesans, Chef Klaus, Courtyard Bistro and Old
Plank Road Tavern) to allow outdoor seating.


2216
 
10-3-05
 
Granting a special use permit for certain properties serving no alcohol
(Treat Street, Frankfort Select Meats, The Creamery, Rosie’s Diner, The
Black Kow and Starbucks) to allow outdoor seating.


2217
 
10-3-05
 
Rezoning certain property (Lighthouse Pointe Phase 5) from AG to R-4.


2218
 
10-3-05
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Lighthouse Pointe Phase
5) for an independent living facility.


2219
 
10-3-05
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Phases 4 and 5 of
Lighthouse Pointe) for a PUD.


2220
 
10-3-05
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (326 S. LaGrange Road) to
allow a carry-out restaurant.


2221
 
10-3-05
 
Granting two variances for certain property (228 Oak Street) for a rear yard
setback for an existing garage and a proposed garage addition.


2225
 
10-17-05
 
Granting two variances for certain property (262 Kansas Street) for a front
yard setback and of the required first floor building materials.


2226
 
10-17-05
 
Rezoning and granting a special use permit for certain property (219 White
Street) from R-2 to H-1 and for a PUD.


2227
 
10-17-05
 
Granting multiple variances for certain property (154 S. Maple Street) for
corner side yard setback, front yard setback, lot coverage and required first
floor building materials.


2228
 
10-17-05
 
Granting multiple variances for certain property (112 Oak Street) for side
yard setback, height and lot coverage.


2229
 
10-17-05
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (20517 LaGrange Road) to
allow for the operation of a day care center.


2233
 
11-7-05
 
Rezoning certain property (Country Crossing North Subdivision, Phase 1 and 2)
from E-R to R-2.


2236
 
11-7-05
 
Rezoning certain property (Country Crossing South Subdivision) from E-R to
R-2.


2237
 
11-7-05
 
Granting multiple variances for certain property (255 Oak Street) for side
yard setback, lot coverage and first floor building materials requirement.


2238
 
11-7-05
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (9508 and 9510 Gulfstream
Road) to allow for indoor recreation and entertainment.


2239
 
11-21-05
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property (Brookside Commons West,
Lot 2) to allow for certain retail sales.


2241
 
11-21-05
 
Granting multiple variances for certain property (9503 Gulfstream Road) to
permit two points of access and to reduce required green space setback
requirement.


2242
 
11-21-05
 
Granting two special use permits for certain property (131 Lincoln Highway)
for a PUD and automobile sales.


2266
 
2-21-06
 
Granting three variances and a special use permit for outdoor storage for
property located at 9219 Corsair Road.


2267
 
2-21-06
 
Granting a variance for two points of access and a special use permit for
outdoor storage for property located at 9305 Corsair Road.


2268
 
3-6-06
 
Granting a special use permit to allow outdoor storage of portable executive
washroom trailers on property located at 225 S. La Grange Road.


2269
 
3-6-06
 
Granting two special use permits for a drive- up service window and extended
hours of operation for the Steak ‘n Shake in Hickory Creek Market Place.


2270
 
3-20-06
 
Granting a variance of the first floor building requirement for property
located at 145 Locust St.


2271
 
3-20-06
 
Granting a special use permit to allow for indoor recreation and
entertainment for property located at 9227 Gulfstream Rd., Unit B.


2279
 
4-3-06
 
Granting variances of the side yard setback, lot width, lot area, lot
coverage and required first floor building materials requirements for certain
property (130 Evergreen Drive).


2281
 
4-24-06
 
Granting variances of the lot area, lot depth, side yard setback, front yard
setback and required first floor building materials requirement for property
located at 861 Highland Road.


2282
 
4-24-06
 
Granting a lot coverage variance from 20 to 22.9 to construct a single-family
home on residential property located at 21752 Shilling Court.


2283
 
4-24-06
 
Granting a sign variance for property located at 215 Linden Drive.


2284
 
5-1-06
 
Rezoning certain property located at the southwest corner of Harlem Avenue
and Sauk Trail from E-R to R-1.


2290
 
6-5-06
 
Rezoning certain property located at 24561 S. Harlem Avenue from E-R to AG.


2291
 
6-5-06
 
Granting variances of the side yard setback and required first floor building
materials requirements for property located at 825 Butternut Court.


2296
 
6-19-06
 
Granting a variance for the size of an accessory structure for property
located at 22309 Jeanette Court.


2299
 
6-19-06
 
Rezoning property located at Bowen’s Crossing, southwest corner of 93rd and
Franklin Avenues from E-R to R-4.


2302
 
7-3-06
 
Granting a variance of the first floor building requirement for property
located on Lot 34, Cobblestone Walk Subdivision.


2303
 
7-17-06
 
Granting a variance to permit two points of access for property located at
9325 Gulfstream Road.


2304
 
7-17-06
 
Granting a special use permit to allow for a point-of-sale auto shop to
include indoor storage of vehicles at 9227 Gulfstream Road, Unit E.


2305
 
7-17-06
 
Granting a variance of the first floor building requirement for property
located at 20492 Abbey Drive, Lot 1.


2306
 
8-7-06
 
Granting two variances for height and area of an accessory structure for
property located at 256 Walnut Street.


2307
 
8-7-06
 
Granting two special use permits to allow for indoor recreation and
entertainment and limited retail sales on the property located at 9227
Gulfstream Road, Unit A.


2308
 
8-7-06
 
Granting a sign variance for property located at 19917 La Grange Road.


2314
 
8-21-06
 
Granting a special use permit for a PUD to Manitoqua Ministries located at
8122 Sauk Trail.


2316
 
9-5-06
 
Approving a major PUD change for Prairie Creek Townhomes, Phase 2.


2317
 
9-5-06
 
Granting two special use permits to allow for a PUD and a drive-up service
window for property located in the northwest corner of U.S. Route 45 and
Laraway Road.


2322
 
9-18-06
 
Approving a major PUD change for the Lighthouse Pointe Development, Phase 5.


2323
 
10-2-06
 
Granting a variance of the first floor building requirement to construct a
home on Lot 20 in Folkers’ Estate subdivision.


2324
 
10-2-06
 
Approving a major PUD change for Lots 2 and 3 of the Abbey Woods Commercial
North Subdivision, known as Brighton Corporate Park.


2328
 
10-16-06
 
Rezoning certain property located at the northeast corner of Pfeiffer and
Steger Roads from E-R to R-2.


2329
 
10-16-06
 
Approving a major PUD change for Outlot 2A, Hickory Creek Market Place, Phase
2.


2330
 
11-6-06
 
Granting a height zoning variance for property located at 22615 Hunters Trail.


2331
 
11-6-06
 
Granting a lot coverage variance from 25 to 26.8 for property located at
10510 Shilling Road.


2332
 
11-6-06
 
Granting a fence height variance for property located at 809 Overlook Drive.


2333
 
11-6-06
 
Granting variances of the lot area, lot depth, gross floor area, side yard
setback, rear yard setback and first floor building materials requirements
for property located at 566 Aberdeen Road.


2336
 
11-20-06
 
Granting variances for lot area and two points of access for property located
at 22727 Mustang Road.


2337
 
11-20-06
 
Granting a side yard setback variance for property located at 24 W.
Sangmeister Road.


2338
 
11-20-06
 
Approving a major PUD change for the President’s Row Development.


2343
 
12-18-06
 
Granting two special use permits to allow for indoor recreation and
entertainment and limited retail sales on the property located at 10315 Vans
Drive, Units B-E.


2350
 
1-8-07
 
Rezoning certain property located at the northwest corner of Stuenkel Road
and 88th Avenue from E-R to R-1.


2351
 
1-8-07
 
Granting a special use permit for a PUD for the Waterstone Subdivision
Development.


2352
 
1-8-07
 
Granting a front yard setback variance for property located at 333 W.
Nebraska Street.


2354
 
1-22-07
 
Granting variances for lot area, lot depth, lot width and first floor
building materials requirements for the property located at 538 Hobby Avenue.


2355
 
1-22-07
 
Granting variances for lot area, lot depth, lot width, side yard setback and
first floor building material requirements for the property located at 441 N.
Locust Street.


2356
 
1-22-07
 
Granting a special use permit for a PUD for the Old Plank Trail Community
Bank.


2357
 
1-22-07
 
Granting a special use permit for a drive-up service window facility for the
Old Plank Trail Community Bank PUD.


2361
 
2-5-07
 
Granting a variance for first floor building materials for the property
located at 147 Locust Street.


2371
 
3-5-07
 
Granting a special use permit for indoor recreation and entertainment or the
property located at 716 - 722 Center Road.


2372
 
3-5-07
 
Granting two special use permits for a full service restaurant and liquor
sales for the property located at 20 Kansas Street.


2378
 
4-2-07
 
Rezoning property located at the northwest corner of Stuenkel Road and 88th
Avenue from E-R to R-1.


2379
 
4-2-07
 
Granting a special use permit for a PUD for the Waterstone Subdivision
Development.


2380
 
4-2-07
 
Repealing Ord. 2119 and granting two special use permits for liquor sales and
extended hours for the property located at 330 W. Lincoln Highway.


2381
 
4-2-07
 
Granting a sign variance for the property located at 9645 Lincoln-Way Lane.


2383
 
4-2-07
 
Granting variances for rear yard setback, interior side yard setback and
height requirements for the property located at 28 Kansas Street.


2387
 
4-30-07
 
Granting a side yard setback variance for the property located at 22749
Citation Road.


2388
 
4-30-07
 
Granting a special use permit for liquor sales for the property located at
113 Kansas Street.


2389
 
5-14-07
 
Rezoning the west 500 feet of the southwest corner of Steger Road and 88th
Avenue from E-R to AG.


2390
 
5-14-07
 
Granting variances for lot depth, side yard setback and first floor building
materials for the property located at 600 N. Locust Street.


2391
 
6-4-07
 
Granting a parking variance for the property located at 22749 Citation Road.


2396
 
7-2-07
 
Granting a special use permit for outdoor seating for the property located at
19917 S. La Grange Road.


2397
 
7-2-07
 
Granting variances for lot area, lot depth, front yard setback, accessory
structure setback, driveway setback and first floor building materials for
the property located at 130 Hickory Street.


2399
 
7-16-07
 
Rezoning property located at the northwest corner of U.S. Route 30 and
Frankfort Square Road from E-R to B-2.


2400
 
7-16-07
 
Granting a special use permit for a PUD for the property located at the
northwest corner of U.S. Route 30 and Frankfort Square Road.


2401
 
7-16-07
 
Granting a special use permit for a drive-up service facility for the
property located at the northwest corner of U.S. Route 30 and Frankfort
Square Road.


2402
 
7-16-07
 
Granting a variance for lot coverage for the property located at 20674
Holland Harbor Drive.


2404
 
8-6-07
 
Granting two special use permits for liquor sales and extended hours of
operation for the property located at 21000 S. Frankfort Square Road.


2405
 
8-6-07
 
Granting a special use permit for outdoor seating for the property located at
21000 S. Frankfort Square Road.


2409
 
9-4-07
 
Rezoning property located at 21125 S. 94th Avenue from E-R to B-4.


2410
 
9-4-07
 
Granting variances for lot width, lot depth, rear yard setback, corner side
yard setback, and first floor building materials for the property located at
427 Michigan Road.


2411
 
9-4-07
 
Granting a special use permit for indoor religious use for the property
located at 8775 S. Laraway Road.


2412
 
9-4-07
 
Granting a height variance for the property located at 22520 North Pebble
Lake Court.


2418
 
10-1-07
 
Granting variances for lot depth, lot width, lot area, side yard setback,
driveway setback, and first floor building materials for the property located
at 47 White Street.


2419
 
10-15-07
 
Approving a major PUD change for the property located at the northeast corner
of La Grange and St. Francis Roads.


2420
 
10-15-07
 
Granting two special use permits for drive-up service window and outdoor
seating for the property located at the northeast corner of La Grange and St.
Francis Roads.


2421
 
11-5-07
 
Granting a special use permit for an elementary school for the property
located at 10480 W. Nebraska Street.


2422
 
11-5-07
 
Granting a rear yard setback variance for the property located at 10480 W.
Nebraska Street.


2423
 
11-5-07
 
Granting a special use permit for an elementary school for the property
located at 22265 S. 80th Avenue.


2424
 
11-5-07
 
Granting a special use permit for outdoor storage for Ruane Industrial Center
- Bronson Drive.


2425
 
11-5-07
 
Granting a height variance for the property located at Ruane Industrial
Center - Bronson Drive.


2426
 
11-5-07
 
Granting a building materials variance for property located at 545 Aberdeen
Road.


2433
 
12-17-07
 
Granting a special use permit for the property located at 9645 Lincoln-Way
Lane.


2439
 
1-22-08
 
Approving PUD change for Prairie Crossings Retail Center located at 11125 W.
Lincoln Highway.


2443
 
2-19-08
 
Granting a special use permit for an indoor cultural use for the property
located at 11 S. White Street.


2444
 
2-19-08
 
Granting a height variance for the property located at 20538 Abbey Drive.


2446
 
3-3-08
 
Repealing Ords. 2404 and 2405 which granted a special use permit for a
Choppers Chop House Restaurant at the property located at 21000 S. Frankfort
Square Road.


2449
 
3-17-08
 
Rezoning the property located at the northeast corner of Center and Steger
Roads from E-R to I-1.


2450
 
4-7-08
 
Approving PUD change for the property located at 20533 La Grange Road.


2451
 
4-7-08
 
Granting a special use permit for a drive-up service facility for the
property located at 20533 La Grange Road.


2452
 
4-7-08
 
Approving PUD change for the property located at 9473 W. St. Francis Road.


2453
 
4-7-08
 
Granting two special use permits for liquor sales and extended hours of
operation for the property located at 21000 S. Frankfort Square Road.


2454
 
4-7-08
 
Granting a special use permit for outdoor seating for the property located at
21000 S. Frankfort Square Road, Units M-Q.


2455
 
4-7-08
 
Granting a luminaire height variance for the eastern baseball field located
within Jackson Creek Park.


2456
 
4-7-08
 
Granting a luminaire height variance for two ball fields within Commissioners
Park.


2457
 
4-7-08
 
Granting two setback variances for the property located at 33 W. Lincoln
Highway.


2459
 
4-28-08
 
Rezoning the property located at the southwest corner of Old Frankfort Way
and U.S. Route 45 from R-2 to H-1.


2460
 
4-28-08
 
Granting a special use permit for a PUD for the property known as Folker’s
Estates Subdivision, Outlot C.


2461
 
4-28-08
 
Granting setback variances to the property located at 322 Nebraska Street.


2462
 
5-5-08
 
Granting lot area, lot depth and setback variances for the property located
at 1019 Prestwick Drive.


2463
 
5-19-08
 
Granting a special use permit for a massage establishment for property
located at 9645 Lincoln-Way Lane, Suites 110 and 111.


2464
 
5-19-08
 
Granting lot area, lot width, lot depth and setback variances for the
property located at 105 Pfaff Drive.


2465
 
5-19-08
 
Granting variances for two and three points of access for the property
located at 22772 Challenger Road.


2466
 
5-19-08
 
Granting a special use permit for outdoor storage for the property located at
22772 Challenger Road.


2467
 
5-19-08
 
Granting variances for two and three points of access for the property
located at 22775 Challenger Road.


2468
 
5-19-08
 
Granting a special use permit for outdoor storage for the property located at
22775 Challenger Road.


2469
 
5-19-08
 
Granting a special use permit for automobile repair for the property located
at 22775 Challenger Road.


2470
 
5-19-08
 
Granting a variance for three points of access for the property located at
22774 Citation Road.


2471
 
5-19-08
 
Granting a special use permit for outdoor storage for the property located at
22774 Citation Road.


2472
 
5-19-08
 
Granting lot area, lot width, lot depth and setback variances for the
property located at 612 Prestwick Drive.


2475
 
6-2-08
 
Granting variances for lot width and setback for the property located at 262
Mulberry Road.


2477
 
6-2-08
 
Granting a PUD change to the property located at 32 W. Nebraska Street.


2482
 
6-16-08
 
Granting a special use permit for a message establishment for the property
located at Frankfort Plaza Shopping Center, Units 87-91.


2483
 
6-16-08
 
Granting variances for lot area, lot width, lot depth and setback for the
property located at 42 McDonald Lane.


2484
 
6-16-08
 
Granting a fence height variance for the property located at 250 Walnut
Street.


2485
 
6-16-08
 
Granting variances for lot area, lot width, lot depth, lot coverage, and
setback for the property located at 557 Birchwood Road.


2490
 
7-21-08
 
Approving a PUD change for the property located at 20533 La Grange Road.


2491
 
7-21-08
 
Granting a special use permit for liquor sales for the property located at
20535 La Grange Road, Unit O.


2492
 
7-21-08
 
Granting a special use permit for extended hours of operation for the
property located at 20535 La Grange Road, Unit O.


2493
 
7-21-08
 
Granting a special use permit for outdoor seating for the property located at
20535 La Grange Road, Unit O.


2494
 
8-4-08
 
Granting setback variances to the property located at 147 Kansas Street.


2496
 
8-4-08
 
Granting variances for lot depth, lot area, setback and first floor building
materials for the property located at 235 Walnut Street.


2503
 
8-18-08
 
Rezoning the property located at the southeast corner of Wolf Road and the EJ
& E Railroad tracks from E-R to R-2.


2504
 
8-18-08
 
Granting a special use permit for an indoor cultural use for the property
located at the southeast corner of Wolf Road at the EJ & J Railroad tracks.


2505
 
8-18-08
 
Granting a setback variance for the property located at the southeast corner
of Wolf Road at the EJ & J Railroad tracks.


2506
 
8-18-08
 
Granting a special use permit for auto body repair service for the property
located at 10321 Vans Drive, Unit C.


2507
 
8-18-08
 
Granting variances for setback, first floor building materials, and lot depth
for the property located at 552 Birchwood Road.


2508
 
9-2-08
 
Granting variances for setback, lot coverage and first floor building
materials for the property located at 215 Kansas Street.


2509
 
9-2-08
 
Granting a special use permit for operation of a barber shop for the property
located at 9473 W. St Francis Road, Suite 104.


2510
 
9-2-08
 
Granting variances for setback, first floor building materials and height for
the property located at 42 East Bowen Street.


2511
 
9-2-08
 
Granting variances for setback, lot coverage and height for the property
located at 137 Kansas Street.


2514
 
9-15-08
 
Granting variances for setback, lot coverage and first floor building
materials for the property located at 144 W. Nebraska Street.


2515
 
9-15-08
 
Granting variances for setback, height,  first floor building materials and
lot coverage for the property located at 211 W. Nebraska Street.


2517
 
9-22-08
 
Repealing Ord. 1849 which granted a special use permit for Northwoods Saloon
Restaurant located at 9545 St. Francis Road.


2518
 
9-22-08
 
Granting special use permits for liquor sales and extended hours for the
Fireplace Restaurant located at 9545 St. Francis Road.


2519
 
10-6-08
 
Granting a special use permit for a carry-out restaurant for the property
located at 9326 Corsair Road.


2520
 
10-6-08
 
Granting a special use permit for an animal kennel for the property located
at 9204 Gulfstream Road.


2521
 
10-6-08
 
Granting variances for setback, height and first flood building materials for
the property located at 246 S. Center Road.


2526
 
10-20-08
 
Granting a sign and zoning variance for the property located at 9201 W. St.
Francis Road.


2527
 
11-3-08
 
Granting a special use permit for a PUD for the Bronson Square Development.


2528
 
11-3-08
 
Rezoning Lots 1 and 2 of the property known as Bronson Square Development
from B-4 to B-2.


2529
 
11-3-08
 
Granting a special use permit for outdoor seating for the property located at
Bronson Square Development.


2530
 
11-3-08
 
Granting a special use permit for a drive-up service window for a bank
building for the property located at Bronson Square Development.


2531
 
11-3-08
 
Granting a special use permit for drive-up service window for retail building
“A” for the property located at Bronson Square Development.


2536
 
11-17-08
 
Rezoning the property located at 21337 and 21325 93rd Avenue from E-R to R-2.


2537
 
11-17-08
 
Granting variances for two points of access and setback for the property
located at 22771 Citation Road.


2538
 
11-17-08
 
Granting variances for impervious lot coverage and setback for the property
located at 22550 Nature Creek Circle.


2539
 
11-17-08
 
Granting variances for first floor building materials, lot width, lot depth
and lot area for the property located at 616 Lincoln Lane.


2540
 
11-17-08
 
Granting variances for construction of shed for the property located at 151
Evergreen Drive.


2548
 
12-1-08
 
Granting a special use permit for a PUD for the Cooper Estates development.


2549
 
12-1-08
 
Granting a special use permit for extended hours of operation for the
property located at 9326 Corsair Road.


2552
 
12-15-08
 
Granting a variance for accessory structure area for the property located at
23248 Jackson Branch Drive.


2553
 
12-15-08
 
Granting a first floor building materials variance for the property located
at 21434 S. 92nd Avenue.


2554
 
12-15-08
 
Granting setback variances for the property located at 157 Evergreen Drive.


2557
 
1-20-09
 
Granting a special use permit for a massage establishment to the Belly
Factory, a maternity boutique located within the Mannheim Square Center at
20500 South LaGrange Road, Unit No. 5.


2558
 
1-20-09
 
Granting a special use permit for a landscape company to Sila Maintenance,
Inc., located at 10317 Vans Drive, Units C, D and E.


2559
 
1-20-09
 
Granting a special use permit for outdoor storage to Sila Maintenance, Inc.,
located at 10317 Vans Drive, Units C, D and E.


2560
 
1-20-09
 
Granting a special use permit for extended hours of operation to Sila
Maintenance, Inc., located at 10317 Vans Drive, Units C, D and E.


2561
 
1-20-09
 
Granting a special use permit for a PUD for the Silver Cross Hospital
property and development, 161 acres generally located along the north side of
U.S. Route 30 and east of 94th Avenue.


2562
 
1-20-09
 
Rezoning Lot 1 of the final plat of Subdivision Unit 1, Silver Cross Medical
Center, part of the 161-acre Silver Cross PUD, located at the northwest
corner of U.S. Route 30 and 93rd Avenue, from E-R to B-2.


2563
 
1-20-09
 
Granting a special use permit for extended hours of operation to Lot 1 of the
final plat of Subdivision Unit 1, Silver Cross Medical Center.


2566
 
2-17-09
 
Approving a major change for the Cappel Commons PUD to permit a daycare
center with extended hours of operation.


2567
 
2-17-09
 
Granting a special use permit to the Cappel Commons PUD for a daycare center.


2568
 
2-17-09
 
Granting a special use permit to the Cappel Commons PUD for extended hours of
operation for a daycare center.


2571
 
3-16-09
 
Granting a luminaire height variance from 50 feet to 60 feet for the west
softball field within Jackson Creek Park, located east of Wolf Road, between
Laraway and Steger Roads.


2572
 
3-16-09
 
Granting a luminaire height variance from 50 feet to 60 feet for the existing
north soccer field within Commissioners Park, located at the southwest corner
of Sauk Trail and 80th Avenue.


2573
 
3-16-09
 
Granting an accessory structure area variance and a lot coverage variance to
the Morgan residence located at 20195 LaPorte Meadows Drive.


2574
 
3-16-09
 
Approving a major PUD change to allow the demolition of the existing wood
frame storage/concession stand building, and the construction of a new 
600-square foot storage facility at the Frankfort Park District's Main Park
property, located at 400 West Nebraska Street.


2575
 
3-16-09
 
Granting a special use permit to allow for indoor recreation and
entertainment at the Five Tools Baseball Academy, located at 9270 Corsair
Road, Units 2,3,10,11 and 12,


2576
 
3-16-09
 
Granting a special use permit to Crown Center of Frankfort LLC for a
carry-out restaurant, Smooth Joe's Gourmet Sandwiches & Coffee House, at 9645
LaGrange Road, Suite 107.


2580
 
4-6-09
 
Rezoning certain Frankfort Fire Station No. 4 property, located at the
northeast corner of Steger Road and 80th Avenue, from E-R to R-1.


2581
 
4-6-09
 
Granting a special use permit for an indoor civic use to Frankfort Fire
Station No. 4 property.


2582
 
4-6-09
 
Granting a special use permit for an 80-foot communications tower to
Frankfort Fire Station No. 4 property.


2589
 
5-18-09
 
Granting a zoning variance to permit two points of access and a side yard
setback variance at the Fey & Graefen Industrial Park, located a 9164
Gulfstream Road.


2590
 
5-18-09
 
Amending Ord. No. 2134 to grant a special use permit to Dependable Auto
Shippers, Inc., and L.A. Sites, Inc., to allow for outdoor storage of
construction vehicles and equipment at 10125 Laraway Road.


2591
 
5-18-09
 
Granting a special use permit to the Music Connection to allow for indoor
recreation and entertainment to operate a 3,000 square foot music school on
property located at 227 East Laraway Road, Unit A.


2597
 
6-15-09
 
Granting multiple zoning variances to accommodate raising the existing
residence and constructing a new single-family residence on the property
located at 46 North White Street, the Blum residence.


2600
 
7-20-09
 
Granting an interior side yard setback zoning variance to the Frankfort
Bowling Alley located at 15 Ash Street.


2601
 
7-20-09
 
Granting two special use permits for indoor recreation and entertainment and
extended hours of operation to the Frankfort Bowling Alley.


2602
 
7-20-09
 
Granting a special use permit for liquor sales to the Frankfort Bowling Alley.


2603
 
7-20-09
 
Granting a special use permit to operate a carryout Chinese restaurant within
the Frankfort Crossings Shopping Center, located at 312 North LaGrange Road.


2608
 
8-17-09
 
Granting two accessory structure zoning variances (setback and area) to
Tornatore and Barrile residence located at 10516 Yankee Ridge Drive.


2609
 
8-17-09
 
Granting multiple zoning variances (lot depth, accessory structure setback
and building materials, fence height) to the Richard Plummer residence
located at 230 Pfaff Drive.


2610
 
8-17-09
 
Approving a major PUD change for the installation of wall signage on the
southern facades of the outlot retail buildings located on Lots 1 and 2 of
the Prairie Crossings Re- subdivision along U.S. Route 30.


2611
 
9-8-09
 
Granting multiple zoning variances (lot width, parking, interior side yard
setback, rear yard accessory structure setback) to Munizzo's Gelateria/
Espresso Bar located at 3 North Oak Street.


2612
 
9-8-09
 
Granting two special use permits (carryout restaurant and outdoor seating) to
Munizzo's Gelateria/ Espresso Bar.


2613
 
9-8-09
 
Granting an accessory structure area variance to Roseland Homes, Inc., to
permit the construction of a 24' x 26' outdoor sports court at 20025 Aine
Drive.


2614
 
9-21-09
 
Granting an accessory structure area variance to permit the construction of a
17' x 17' outdoor cabana in the rear yard of the Fiorella residence located
at 22560 Home Court.


2615
 
10-5-09
 
Granting two special use permits (to allow for liquor sales in connection
with a full-service restaurant, and to allow for extended hours of operation
until 1:00 a.m. daily) to Tommy Nevin's Pub located at 9680 Lincoln-Way Lane.


2616
 
10-5-09
 
Granting a fence height zoning variance to the John Newell residence located
at 915 North Butternut Circle.


2619
 
10-19-09
 
Granting a special use permit for auto repair and service to One Shot Kustoms
located at 9232 Gulfstream Road, Unit A.


2620
 
10-19-09
 
Granting two special use permits (to allow for liquor sales in connection
with a full-service restaurant, and to for allow extended hours of operation
until 1:00 a.m. daily) to Jameson's Pub located at 9545 St. Francis Road.


2621
 
11-2-09
 
Granting a fence height variance to the Alan K. Ludolph residence located at
142 Pfaff Drive.


2625
 
11-16-09
 
Granting two special use permits for a carryout restaurant and outdoor
seating to the Chipotle Mexican Grill located at 11129 West Lincoln Highway.


2627
 
11-16-09
 
Granting a building materials variance to the Viehweg Residence located at
788 Oakwood Drive.


2628
 
11-16-09
 
Granting a front yard setback zoning variance to the Glenn and Lori Smith
residence located at 21605 Williamsburg Court.


2638
 
2-16-10
 
Granting a special use permit for a carry-out restaurant to Subway
Restaurant, 603 North La Grange Road (Frankfort Town Center).


2639
 
3-2-10
 
Amending Ord. 2519, which granted a special use permit, to permit
installation of an indoor customer seating area for the Great American Bagel
Carry-Out Restaurant, 9326 Corsair Road.


2640
 
3-2-10
 
Authorizing three special use permits for liquor sales, extended hours of
operation, and outdoor seating for Entreé Ale House and Eatery, 695 North La
Grange Road.


2642
 
3-15-10
 
Granting a special use permit for liquor sales to Wine Styles, 20214 South La
Grange Road (Frankfort Commons Shopping Center).  (Repealed by Ord. 2657. 
See below.)


2645
 
4-12-10
 
Authorizing two special use permits for liquor sales and extended hours of
operation for Ivory Rose Restaurant/ Piano Bar, 17 Old Frankfort Way. 
(Repealed by Ord. 2688.  See below.)


2646
 
4-12-10
 
Granting multiple zoning variances to 253 South Hickory Street.


2650
 
4-26-10
 
Granting a special use permit for indoor recreation and entertainment to the
Turning Pointe School of Dance, 9645 Lincoln-Way Lane (Units 104 and 105).


2651
 
5-3-10
 
Granting a pavement setback variance to the Great American Bagel Carry-Out
Restaurant, 9326 Corsair Road.


2652
 
5-17-10
 
Granting a special use permit for indoor recreation and entertainment to the
Dance Company, 332-334 North La Grange Road (Frankfort Crossings Shopping
Center).


2653
 
5-17-10
 
Granting a special use permit for a full service restaurant with liquor sales
to the Big Tuna Restaurant, 19951 South La Grange Road (Hickory Creek Market
Place).


2654
 
6-7-10
 
Granting a lot coverage variance to 749 Birchwood Road.


2655
 
6-21-10
 
Granting a special exception to Bobbie Noonan Child Care, 8717 West Lincoln
Highway.


2656
 
6-21-10
 
Granting two accessory structure setback variances to 212 Hickory Street.


2657
 
6-21-10
 
Repealing Ord. 2642 (see above) and granting a special use permit for liquor
sales to Wine Styles, 20214 South La Grange Road (Frankfort Commons Shopping
Center).


2659
 
7-6-10
 
Granting an interior side yard setback variance to 105 Pfaff Drive.


2660
 
7-6-10
 
Granting a special use permit for a full service restaurant with liquor sales
to Simply Smokin’ BBQ & Grill, 10211 West Lincoln Highway (Brookside
Commons Office Centre).


2664
 
7-19-10
 
Granting a special use permit for a Planned Unit Development (PUD) for the
Lincoln-Way Area Special Education District Number 843 (southeast corner of
Willow Street and Colorado Avenue).


2665
 
7-19-10
 
Granting a special use permit for indoor institutional use to the Lincoln-
Way Area Special Education District Number 843 (southeast corner of Willow
Street and Colorado Avenue).


2666
 
7-19-10
 
Granting an accessory structure setback variance to 147 White Street.


2667
 
7-19-10
 
Granting a special exception to Lot 157 Walnut Ridge Court, Butternut Creek
Woods subdivision.


2670
 
8-16-10
 
Granting an accessory structure setback variance to 44 West Bowen Street.


2671
 
8-16-10
 
Granting multiple variances to 322 West Nebraska Street.


2672
 
9-7-10
 
Granting two setback variances to 33 West Lincoln Highway.


2674
 
9-20-10
 
Granting a driveway setback variance to 42 East Brown Street.


2675
 
9-20-10
 
Granting a front yard setback variance to 21407 English Drive.


2679
 
10-18-10
 
Approving a major Planned Unit Development (PUD) change for the Frankfort
Commons Development (Providence Bank - Lot 4 - 20220 S. La Grange Road).


2688
 
12-20-10
 
Repealing Ord. 2645 (see above) and authorizing two special use permits for
liquor sales and extended hours of operation for Stray Bar Restaurant/
Tavern, 17 Old Frankfort Way.


2692
 
2-7-11
 
Granting a special use permit for a full service restaurant with liquor sales
for Durbin's Pizza located at 14 Elwood Street.


2699
 
2-22-11
 
Granting an accessory structure height variance to Christensen residence
located at 230 S. Center Road.


2706
 
3-21-11
 
Granting multiple variances to Winters residence located at 210 Walnut Street.


2707
 
4-4-11
 
Granting a special exception variance to Elm Street Associates located at
9875 W. Lincoln Highway.


2708
 
4-4-11
 
Granting a special use permit for outdoor storage to American All State Scrap
located at 275 E. Industry Avenue.


2711
 
4-18-11
 
Rezoning a portion of the Heritage Bank Subdivision (Lot 2) and Hickory Creek
Northwoods Subdivision (Lot 1) from B-4 Office District to B-2 Community
Business District.


2712
 
4-18-11
 
Granting a special use permit for a planned unit development for Lot 2 of
Heritage Bank Subdivision and Lot 1 of Hickory Creek Northwoods Subdivision.


2713
 
4-18-11
 
Granting a special use permit for auto repair and service to property located
at the southeast corner of U.S. Route 45 and St. Francis Road.


2714
 
4-18-11
 
Granting a fence height variance for Ernst residence located at 8898 Liatris
Drive.


2715
 
4-18-11
 
Granting an accessory structure height variance for the Hogan residence
located at 201 Kansas Street.


2716
 
4-18-11
 
Granting a special use permit for limited retail sales to The Furniture Rack
located at 9324 Gulfstream Road.


2719
 
5-16-11
 
Granting a special use permit for accessory liquor sales to Chipotle Mexican
Grill located at 11129 W. Lincoln Highway.


2720
 
5-16-11
 
Granting a special use permit for a full service restaurant with liquor sales
and a special use permit for outdoor seating to Fajitas Mexican Restaurant
located at 19941 - 423 La Grange Road.


2721
 
5-16-11
 
Granting a fence height variance for the Vaziri residence located at 10809
Swallow Tail Lane.


2723
 
6-6-11
 
Approving a major planned unit development change for Phillips Chevrolet
located at 9700 W. Lincoln Highway.


2724
 
6-6-11
 
Granting a special use permit for outdoor seating for Stray Bar
Restaurant/Tavern located at 17 Old Frankfort Way.


2725
 
6-20-11
 
Granting multiple variances for the Gutschenritter residence located at 142
Walnut Street.


2734
 
8-8-11
 
Granting an interior side yard setback variance for Patatech Inc. expansion
located at 1025 Lambrecht Road.


2735
 
8-8-11
 
Approving a major planned unit development change for Lot 2 of Garden Gate
Crossing Subdivision, Unit 3.


2736
 
8-8-11
 
Granting a special use permit for auto repair and service for Southside
Collision located at 22813 Challenger Road, Unit 1A.


2737
 
8-22-11
 
Granting a lot coverage variance for Austin Builders, Inc. located at 22957
Devonshire Lane.


2738
 
8-22-11
 
Granting an accessory structure setback variance for the Charles Ovando
residence located at 10803 Cardinal Lake Drive.


2739
 
8-22-11
 
Granting an accessory structure area variance to the Matthew O'Hagan
residence located at 21838 Yellow Finch Lane.


2740
 
9-6-11
 
Granting a side yard setback variance for Williamson property located at 247
W. Nebraska Street.


2741
 
9-19-11
 
Granting a special use permit for a carry-out restaurant for Papa John's
Pizza located at 21114 S. La Grange Road in Frankfort Crossings.


2744
 
10-3-11
 
Granting a special use permit for Let It Rip Sports located at 9535 W.
Laraway Road.


2748
 
10-17-11
 
Rezoning Robert D. Watson property located at 23262 S. 88th Avenue from ER
Estate Residential to AG Agricultural District.


2749
 
10-17-11
 
Granting three special use permits for extended hours and outdoor seating to
The Wild Rover Restaurant located at 20535 S. La Grange Road.


2750
 
10-17-11
 
Granting a special use permit for a full service restaurant with liquor sales
to The Smokey Barque Restaurant located at 20 W. Kansas Street.


2752
 
11-7-11
 
Granting a corner side yard setback variance for Ronald Hughes residence
located at 800 Overlook Drive.


2764
 
1-23-12
 
Granting two special use permits (for restaurant/tavern and extended hours of
operation) to Pete Mitchell’s Bar & Grill located at 21000 South Frankfort
Square Road, Units M-Q.


2767
 
3-6-12
 
Granting two variances (side yard setback and first floor building materials)
to the Robert and Rachel Ridge residence, 144 Sycamore Lane.


2776
 
6-4-12
 
Approving a major planned unit development change to include the construction
of Mariano’s Fresh Market grocery store on the 8.08-acre
Enrico’s/Walgreens development located at 21001 South La Grange Road.


2777
 
6-4-12
 
Granting two special use permits (for liquor sales and extended hours of
operation) to Mariano’s Fresh Market grocery store located at 21001 South
La Grange Road.


2781
 
6-4-12
 
Granting a variance of the required landscape front yard setback requirement
and a special use for outdoor storage to the GFW Maintenance property located
at 358 Center Road.


2782
 
6-4-12
 
Granting a side yard setback variance and a lot coverage variance to the
John  and Janice Sabey residence, 137 Oregon Street.


2783
 
6-18-12
 
Granting a special use permit for indoor recreation and entertainment to the
Roma Sports Club located at 9325 Gulfstream Road.


2784
 
6-18-12
 
Granting two special use permits (for a carry-out restaurant and outdoor
seating) to Meatheads Burger & Fries located in the Prairie Crossings
Shopping Center at 11143 West Lincoln Highway.


2785
 
6-18-12
 
Granting a special use permit for a massage establishment to the Massage Envy
Spa located in the Prairie Crossings Shopping Center at 11057 and 11061 West
Lincoln Highway.


2786
 
6-18-12
 
Granting an accessory structure setback variance to the James and Nancy Ceh
residence, 311 North Locust Street.


2787
 
6-18-12
 
Granting an accessory structure setback variance to the Bruce and Eileen
Watson residence, 380 East Nebraska Street.


2788
 
6-18-12
 
Granting three variances (front yard setback, corner side setback, and lot
coverage) to the Robert Leonard, Sr., residence, 200 West Nebraska Street.


2791
 
7-23-12
 
Granting a side yard setback variance to the Michael and Marla Walker
residence, 887 Glenbarr Lane.


2794
 
8-6-12
 
Granting a major planned unit development change for its re-development
project (driveway expansion, building addition and other facade enhancements)
to the Currie Motors property located at 9423 West Lincoln Highway.


2795
 
8-6-12
 
Rezoning the properties located at 317 and 325 North 95th Avenue from R-2
Single Family Residential to B-2 Community Business District.


2796
 
8-6-12
 
Granting a special permit for automobile sales to the properties located at
317 and 325 North 95th Avenue.


2798
 
8-20-12
 
Granting a special use permit for a full service restaurant with liquor sales
and a special use permit for outdoor seating to Little Joe’s Pizza, located
in the Crown Centre shopping plaza at 9645 Lincoln Highway, Suite 107.


2799
 
8-20-12
 
Granting three variances (accessory structure setback, accessory structure
height, and driveway setback) to permit construction of a detached garage and
associated driveway to the Timothy Heywood residence, 250 Center Road.


2802
 
9-4-12
 
Amending Ord. 2688 (see above) to permit extended hours of operation to the
Stray Bar restaurant/tavern located at 17 Old Frankfort Way.


2804
 
10-1-12
 
Granting a building materials variance to the Ralph Eisenbrandt residence,
318 North Maple Street.


2805
 
10-1-12
 
Granting a building materials variance to the David T. Loy residence, 610
Vail Drive.


2806
 
10-1-12
 
Granting a special use permit for indoor recreation and entertainment to the
National Rhino Sports Academy located at 9426 West Corsair Road.


2807
 
10-1-12
 
Granting a special use permit for accessory liquor sales (beer and wine) to
the K & S Quick Mart located at 21022 South La Grange Road. (Repealed by Ord.
2815.  See below.)


2811
 
10-15-12
 
Granting a building materials variance to the Kosta and Janice Katsaounis
residence, 601 North Locust Street.


2812
 
11-5-12
 
Granting a building materials variance to the Fordon and Associates, LLC,
property located at 9935 Folkers Drive.


2813
 
11-5-12
 
Granting a building materials variance to the George D. Radcliffe residence,
401 Hackberry Road.


2815
 
11-19-12
 
Repealing Ord. 2807 (see above).


2816
 
11-19-12
 
Granting multiple variances (accessory structure setbacks, driveway setback,
and accessory structure height) to Robert Leonard, Sr., residence, 200 West
Nebraska Street.


2817
 
11-19-12
 
Granting a lot coverage variance to Matthew Harper for property located at
9885 Folkers Drive.


2818
 
11-19-12
 
Granting a special use permit for indoor recreation and entertainment to
Frankfort Martial Arts & Family Fitness located at 752 Center Road.


2823
 
12-17-12
 
Granting a special use permit for a full service restaurant with liquor
sales, and a special use permit for outdoor seating to the Dancing Marlin
restaurant located on 20590 South La Grange Road.


2829
 
1-22-13
 
Granting a special use permit for accessory liquor sales to Walgreens Store
No. 09326 located at 9554 W. Lincoln Highway.


2833
 
3-18-13
 
Granting a special use permit for indoor recreation and entertainment to Slym
Gym located at 754 Center Road, within Laraway Center Business Park.


2834
 
4-8-13
 
Granting a special use permit for recreational vehicle sales and service to
Timber View R.V. Center, Inc. located at 21730 S. La Grange Road.


2835
 
4-8-13
 
Rezoning the properties located at 309 N. 95th Avenue and the vacant parcel
immediately south thereof from R-2 Single Family Residential District to B-2
Community Business District.


2836
 
4-8-13
 
Approving a major Planned Unit Development change for the Currie Motors
vehicle storage parking lot expansion project located at 9423 W. Lincoln
Highway.


2837
 
4-8-13
 
Granting a special use permit for automobile sales to the properties located
at 309 N. 95th Avenue and the vacant parcel immediately south thereof.


2838
 
4-29-13
 
Granting a special use permit for indoor recreation and entertainment to
Kwon’s Martial Arts located at 20280-20290 S. La Grange Road within Tuffy
Auto Development.


2841
 
6-3-13
 
Approving a major Planned Unit Development change for the
Enrico’s/Walgreens development, for Mariano’s Fresh Market located at
21001 S. La Grange Road.


2842
 
6-3-13
 
Granting special use permits for a carry-out restaurant, outdoor seating, and
accessory liquor sales to Noodles and Company Restaurant located at 21075 S.
La Grange Road.


2843
 
6-3-13
 
Granting special use permits for a carry-out restaurant and outdoor seating
to Jersey Mike’s Restaurant located at 21055 S. La Grange Road.


2844
 
6-3-13
 
Granting multiple variances to the Ronald and Cindy Stark residence located
at 15 N. Maple Street.


2845
 
6-3-13
 
Granting a fence design and fence height variance to the Gallatin residence
located at 99 E. Bowen Street.


2846
 
6-17-13
 
Granting a special exception for the Sybaris Club located at 7500 W. Lincoln
Highway.


2847
 
6-17-13
 
Granting an accessory structure setback variance to the Terry and Corrie Lee
residence located at 323 Oregon Street.


2851
 
7-22-13
 
Granting a side yard setback variance to the Ray and Terri Rossi residence
located at 938 Shetland Drive.


2852
 
7-22-13
 
Granting a building materials variance to the Carminda Aldeza residence
located at 8936 Charrington Drive.


2857
 
8-19-13
 
Granting multiple variances to the John and Trisha Rachoy residence located
at 217 S. Maple street.


2860
 
8-19-13
 
Rezoning the C. Ted Nelson residence located at 23953 S. Harlem Avenue from
Estate Residential to AG Agricultural.


2861
 
9-3-13
 
Granting multiple variances to Historic Creations LLC located at 23 W. Bowen
Street.


2862
 
9-3-13
 
Granting a special use permit for accessory liquor sales to White Street Cafe
located at 11 S. White Street.


2863
 
9-3-13
 
Granting three special use permits to Little Joe’s Pizza Restaurant located
at 20805 S. La Grange Road.


2867
 
9-16-13
 
Granting a driveway setback variance to the property located at 217 S. Maple
Street.


2868
 
9-16-13
 
Granting a special use permit for indoor recreation and entertainment to
Cross Fit Redefy, Inc. located at 9227 Gulfstream Road, Unit D.


2871
 
10-7-13
 
Granting a special use permit for the operation of an animal clinic to the
Frankfort Animal Clinic located at 20601 S. La Grange Road within Alsip Home
and Nursery.


2877
 
11-4-13
 
Granting an accessory structure area variance to the George and Sophia
Borrelli residence located at 23180 Sunburst Point.


2878
 
11-18-13
 
Granting two variances to the Steven and Jacqueline Hoffman residence located
at 11875 Topanga Canyon.


2884
 
12-16-13
 
Granting multiple variances to the James and Karla Knecht residence located
at 99 S. White Street.


2885
 
12-16-13
 
Granting multiple special use permits to Anytime Fitness located at 21134 S.
La Grange Road, Frankfort Crossing Ctr.


2891
 
1-21-14
 
Granting two special use permits for property located at 10351 W. Laraway
Road.


2895
 
2-3-14
 
Granting multiple variances for property owned by Sam Shuman and Richard
Wagner, located at 254 Oregon Street.


2898
 
4-7-14
 
Granting multiple variances for property owned by 40 Kansas LLC, located at
28 W. Kansas Street.


2899
 
4-7-14
 
Granting a first floor building materials variance to property owned by Peter
Vlamis, located at 204 Pacific Street.


2901
 
4-28-14
 
Granting a special use permit for large equipment sales and service to
property owned by Russo Power Equipment, located at 21660 and 21700 S. La
Grange Road.


2902
 
4-28-14
 
Granting a special use permit for outdoor storage to property owned by Russo
Power Equipment, located at 21660 and 21700 S. La Grange Road.


2903
 
5-5-14
 
Granting a special use permit for a massage establishment to Aura Bella Salon
and Spa, located at 20491 S. La Grange Roade, Unit A.


2905
 
5-5-14
 
Granting a special use permit for massage services to Choppers Salon, located
at 13 Old Frankfort Way.


2906
 
5-19-14
 
Granting an accessory structure setback variance for the Leonard and Ilene Le
Rose residence, located at 10401 W. Nebraska Street.


2907
 
5-19-14
 
Granting a building materials variance for the Patrick Hannigan residence,
located at 701 Birchwood Road.


2908
 
6-2-14
 
Granting an accessory structure area variance for the Scott and Michelle
Pomykalski residence, located at 22635 Oakfield Drive.


2909
 
6-23-14
 
Granting a special use permit for indoor recreation and entertainment to
Frankfort Mixed Martial Arts, located at 21800 S. La Grange Road, Unit A.


2925
 
7-7-14
 
Rezoning 26.762 acres located at the southwest corner of U.S. Route 45 and
Steger Road from Estate Residential (E-R) to Office District (B-4).


2926
 
7-7-14
 
Granting a special use permit for a planned development unit to the Riverside
Medical Center property located at the southwest corner of U.S. Route 45 and
Steger Road.


2927
 
7-7-14
 
Granting multiple special use permits to Build-A-Bun Sandwiches, for property
located at 6 Elwood Street.


2928
 
7-7-14
 
Rezoning certain property located at 21125 S. 94th Avenue from Office
District (B-4) to Single Family Residential District (R-2).


2931
 
7-21-14
 
Granting multiple zoning variances to the Frankfort Public Library District
for property located at 21119 S. Pfeiffer Road.


2935
 
8-18-14
 
Granting a rear yard setback variance for property located at 20493 Magnolia
Court.


2937
 
9-2-14
 
Granting a special use permit to Frankfort Family Auto Repair for property
located at 22359 S. Center Road.


2938
 
9-2-14
 
Rezoning approximately 1.25 acres of village-owned property located at the
northwest corner of Elwood and White Streets.


2941
 
9-15-14
 
Granting multiple special use permits to Roma Sports Club for property
located at 9125 Mark Court, East Point Industrial Park.


2942
 
9-15-14
 
Granting a height variance to Roma Sports Club for property located at 9125
Mark Court, East Point Industrial Park.


2945
 
10-6-14
 
Granting a special use permit for a drive-thru facility to Panera Bread for
property located at 11069 W. Lincoln Highway, within the Prairie Crossings
Shopping Center.


2947
 
11-3-14
 
Granting a special use permit for a full service restaurant with liquor sales
to El Pueblito Restaurant, for property located at 9645 Lincoln Way Lane,
suite 105/107 within the Crown Centre development.


2950
 
11-17-14
 
Granting a special use permit for a planned unit development to the Market
Street West Retail Development located at 20950 S. La Grange Road.


2951
 
11-17-14
 
Granting two special use permits to Buona Beef Restaurant for property
located at 20950 S. La Grange Road.


2952
 
11-17-14
 
Granting a special use permit for a drive-thru facility to property located
at 20950 S. La Grange Road, building “C” of the Market Street West
Development.


2965
 
3-16-15
 
Granting a special use permit for internet-based sales to TK Motor Sports,
located at 10315 Vans Drive, Suite A.


2966
 
3-16-15
 
Rezoning certain property located at 8808 Sauk Trail from Estate Residential
District (ER) to Agricultural District (AG).


2967
 
3-16-15
 
Granting a lot area zoning variance to the property located at 8808 Sauk
Trail.


2968
 
3-16-15
 
Granting a special use permit for outdoor storage to Ridge Landscape
Services, for property located at 8808 Sauk Trail.


2972
 
6-1-15
 
Granting multiple zoning variances for property owned by Thomas and Beth
Rapcan, located at 11 W. Sauk Trail.


2973
 
6-1-15
 
Granting a special use permit for outdoor storage to Rogers Towing, for
property located at 161 Ontario Street.


2974
 
6-15-15
 
Granting a special use permit to Verizon Wireless, for property located at
8847 W. Lincoln Highway.


2975
 
6-15-15
 
Granting a special use permit for indoor recreation and entertainment to
Classical martial Arts Academy, located at 21000 S. Frankfort Square Road,
Units I and J.


2977
 
7-6-15
 
Approving a major planned unit development (PUD) change for the Cooper
Estates development to permit construction of an additional single family
residence on property located at 21456 S. 92nd Avenue.


2979
 
8-17-15
 
Granting a special use permit to Verizon Wireless for property located at
21814 S. Elsner Road.


2980
 
9-8-15
 
Granting special use permits to Fat Rosie’s Taco & Tequila Bar for property
located at 28 W. Kansas Street.


2983
 
9-21-15
 
Granting an accessory structure variance to the property located at 7949 Big
Buck Trail.


2984
 
9-21-15
 
Granting a lot coverage variance for certain property located at 9733 Dewey
Circle, Folker’s Estate subdivision.


2985
 
9-21-15
 
Granting multiple zoning variances for certain property located at 141 Oak
Street.


2986
 
10-5-15
 
Rezoning a portion of the Frankfort Commons II development property located
at the southeast corner of U.S. Route 45 and St. Francis Road from E-R Estate
Residential to B-2 Community Business.


2987
 
10-5-15
 
Approving a major planned unit development (PUD) change for the Frankfort
Commons II development located at the southeast corner of St. Francis Road
and La Grange Road.


2988
 
10-5-15
 
Granting a special use permit for a full service restaurant with liquor sales
to certain property located at 9975 W. Lincoln Highway


2989
 
10-5-15
 
Granting a building materials variance to certain property located at 595
Vail Drive.


2990
 
10-5-15
 
Granting a special use permit for a full service restaurant with liquor sales
to certain property located at 10211 W. Lincoln Highway, Brookside Commons
Office Centre.


2991
 
10-5-15
 
Granting a special use permit for outdoor seating to certain property located
at 10211 W. Lincoln Highway, Brookside Commons Office Centre.


2992
 
10-5-15
 
Approving a major planned unit development (PUD) change for the Brookside
Commons Office Centre development, located at 10211 W. Lincoln Highway.


2996
 
10-19-15
 
Granting a special use permit for a daycare center to certain property
located at 9473 W. St. Francis Road.


2997
 
10-19-15
 
Granting a major planned unit development (PUD) change to the Berkley Office
Center development (Kiddie Academy, 9473 W. St. Francis Road).


2998
 
10-19-15
 
Granting a side yard setback variance for certain property located at 9325
Gulfstream Road.


2999
 
10-19-15
 
Granting a front yard setback zoning variance for property located at 559
Aberdeen Road.


3004
 
12-7-15
 
Granting a special use permit for auto sales to certain property located at
195 Industry Avenue.


3007
 
12-21-15
 
Granting multiple zoning variances for certain property located at 125 Ash
Street.


3009
 
2-1-16
 
Granting a special use permit for massage services for certain property
located at 28 Kansas Street, Unit 2A.


3010
 
2-1-16
 
Granting special use permits for indoor recreation and entertainment and
extended hours of operation to certain property located at 21000 S. LaGrange
Road.


3012
 
2-16-16
 
Granting a building materials variance to certain property located at 337
Sherlock Street.


3013
 
3-8-16
 
Granting a major planned unit development (PUD) change to the Hickory Creek
Market Place Shopping Center, 19965 S. LaGrange Road.


3014
 
3-8-16
 
Granting three special use permits for indoor recreation and entertainment,
extended hours of operation, and accessory liquor sales to certain property
located at 19965 S. LaGrange Road.


3019
 
4-4-16
 
Approving a major planned unit development (PUD) change for the Garden Gate
Crossing Subdivision (Crown Centre, Phase II - Lot 2 of Garden Gate
Subdivision, Unit 3).


3020
 
4-4-16
 
Granting a special use permit for a carry-out restaurant to certain property
located at Crown Centre, Phase II - Lot 2 of the Garden Gate Subdivision,
Unit 3.


3021
 
4-4-16
 
Granting special use permits for a restaurant/tavern and extended hours of
operation to certain property located at 20535 South LaGrange Road.


3022
 
4-4-16
 
Granting an accessory structure setback variance from ten feet to five feet
for certain property located at 249 Willow Street.


3026
 
4-25-16
 
Granting an accessory structure setback variance from ten feet to five feet
for certain property located at 459 W. Nebraska Street.


3027
 
4-25-16
 
Granting a special use permit for massage services to certain property
located at 24 Ash Street.


3031
 
5-16-16
 
Granting special use permits for indoor recreation and entertainment and
extended hours of operation to certain property located at 2081-2085 S.
LaGrange Road.


3032
 
6-6-16
 
Granting multiple zoning variances for certain property located at 119 Maple
Street.


3033
 
6-6-16
 
Granting special use permits for a full service restaurant with liquor sales
and extended hours of operation to certain property located at 9500 W.
Lincoln Highway.


3034
 
6-6-16
 
Granting a rear yard setback variance to certain property located at 891
Ayrshire Court.


3038
 
7-5-16
 
Granting a side yard setback and lot coverage variance to certain property
located at 244 W. Nebraska Street.


3042
 
7-18-16
 
Granting a minimum lot area zoning variance to property located at 9021 Fey
Drive.


3043
 
7-18-16
 
Granting two zoning variances for property located at 8997 fey Drive.


3044
 
7-18-16
 
Granting two zoning variances for property located at 9021 Fey Drive.


3045
 
8-1-16
 
Granting a zoning variance to property located at 580 Bankview Drive.


3046
 
8-1-16
 
Granting a zoning variance to property located at 34 Smith Street.


3047
 
8-1-16
 
Granting multiple zoning variances to property located at 223 Walnut Street.


3050
 
8-15-16
 
Granting a special use permit for the operation of an animal clinic to
property located at 712 Center Road.


3051
 
8-15-16
 
Granting a special use permit for a carry-out restaurant to property located
at 20857 S. LaGrange Road.


3052
 
8-15-16
 
Granting a special use permit for massage services to property located at
20500 S. LaGrange Road, Suite 200.


3054
 
9-6-16
 
Rezoning certain property locate at 31655 S. 108th Avenue from E-R Estate
Residential to R-2 Single Family Residential.


3055
 
9-16-16
 
Rezoning a portion of the Hickory Creek Northwoods Subdivision, 20400 S.
LaGrange Road, from B-4 and E-R to B-2.


3057
 
9-19-16
 
Granting a driveway setback variance to property located at 140 S. Maple
Street.


3058
 
10-3-16
 
Approving a major planned unit development (PUD) change for the Garden Gate
Crossing Subdivision (Crown Centre, Phase II - Lot 2 of the Garden Gate
Subdivision, Unit 3).


3059
 
10-3-16
 
Granting a special use permit for a full service restaurant with liquor sales
to property located at 41 Old Frankfort Way.


3060
 
10-3-16
 
Granting two zoning variances for property located at 527 Aberdeen Road.


3061
 
10-3-16
 
Granting a zoning variance to property located at 22809 Mustang Road, Unit A.


3065
 
10-17-16
 
Granting a building materials variance to property located at 338 Sherlock
Street.


3066
 
10-17-16
 
Granting a special use permit for massage services to property located at 111
Ash Street.


3068
 
11-7-16
 
Approving a major planned unit development (PUD) change for the Frankfort
Crossing Development (Outlot 2 - 9701 W. Lincoln Highway).


3069
 
11-7-16
 
Granting three special use permits to property located at 9701 W. Lincoln
Highway.


3075
 
12-19-16
 
Granting a building materials variance to property located at 231 Oak Street.


3078
 
2-21-17
 
Granting multiple zoning variances to certain property located at 202 Ash
Street, Lot 1.


3079
 
2-21-17
 
Granting multiple zoning variances to certain property located at 202 Ash
Street, Lot 2.


3080
 
2-21-17
 
Granting multiple zoning variances to certain property located at 202 Ash
Street, Lot 3.


3081
 
3-6-17
 
Granting a special user permit to certain property located at 9324 Gulfstream
Road, Unit B.


3082
 
3-6-17
 
Granting a variance of the required landscaped front yard for certain
property located at 8997 to 9069 Fey Drive.


3084
 
3-20-17
 
Granting a special use permit for accessory liquor sales to certain property
located at 20950 S. Lagrange Road.


3087
 
4-24-17
 
Granting a special use permit for certain property located at 22829 S.
Mustang Road, Unit B.


3089
 
5-1-17
 
Granting a special use permit for massage services to certain property at
20500 S. Lagrange Road, Unit 2.


3090
 
6-5-17
 
Granting a fence design and fence height variance to certain property located
at 95007 W. Lincoln Highway.


3091
 
6-5-17
 
Rezoning certain property located at 12 Smith Street, from F-1 to R-4.


3092
 
6-5-17
 
Granting a special use permit for a Planned Unit Development for Blacksmith
Corner.


3097
 
6-19-17
 
Granting a special use permit for outdoor seating to certain property located
at 20811 S. Lagrange Road.


3098
 
6-19-17
 
Approving a major planned unit development change for Starbucks - 20811 S.
Lagrange Road.


3102
 
8-7-17
 
Granting a special use permit for massage services at 20881 S. Lagrange Road.


3103
 
8-7-17
 
Granting a special use permit for outdoor seating to certain property located
at 19985 S. Lagrange Road.


3106
 
8-7-17
 
Rezoning property located at 445 W. Colorado avenue from E-R to R-2.


3108
 
8-21-17
 
Granting a driveway setback variance to property located at 125 Ash Street.


3109
 
9-5-17
 
Granting a side yard setback variance to property located at 133 Linden Drive.


3112
 
9-18-17
 
Granting an accessory structure area variance to certain property located at
22604 Limestone Court.


3113
 
9-18-17
 
Granting a building materials variance to property located at 423 Nevada
Court B.


3114
 
9-18-17
 
Granting a first floor building materials variance to certain property
located at 126 Center Road.


3115
 
9-18-17
 
Granting a special use permit for indoor institutional use to property
located at 9545 W. Lincoln Highway.


3116
 
9-18-17
 
Rezoning certain properties containing more than 581 acres of multiple
parcels from E-R to A-G.


3119
 
10-16-17
 
Granting an accessory structure area variance to property located at 22191
Chamomile Drive.


3120
 
10-16-17
 
Granting a special use permit for a massage establishment to property located
at 32 W. Nebraska Street, Unit 1A.


3127
 
1-16-18
 
Granting a special use permit for indoor recreation and entertainment to
property located at 750 Center Road.


3130
 
2-5-18
 
Granting a special use permit for automobile sales to property located at
1008 Lambrecht Road.


3131
 
2-5-18
 
Granting a fence height variance to certain property located at 20450
LaGrange Road.


3133
 
2-20-18
 
Granting multiple variances for front and side yard setbacks, lot area
coverage, and first floor building materials to property located at 140
Walnut Street.


3134
 
3-5-18
 
Rezoning certain property located at the southeast corner of LaGrange Road
and Old Frankfort Way from H-1 to R-4.


3135
 
3-5-18
 
Granting special use permit for a PUD to certain property located at the
southeast corner of LaGrange Road and Old Frankfort Way.


3138
 
4-2-18
 
Granting front yard setback variance to property located at 122 Walnut Street.


3139
 
4-2-18
 
Granting rear yard setback variance to property located at 122 Walnut Street.


3140
 
4-2-18
 
Granting corner side yard setback to property located at 122 Walnut Street.


3141
 
4-2-18
 
Granting building materials variance to property located at 122 Walnut Street.


3142
 
4-2-18
 
Granting lot coverage variance to property located at 122 Walnut Street.


3146
 
5-7-18
 
Approving major PUD change to property located at 9701 W. Lincoln Highway.


3147
 
5-7-18
 
Granting special use permits for carry-out restaurant, drive-up service
window, and outdoor seating to property located at 9701 W. Lincoln Highway.


3148
 
5-7-18
 
Granting special use permit for towing service to property located at 10351
W. Laraway Road.


3149
 
5-7-18
 
Granting building materials and accessory structure height variances to
property located at 320 S. 95th Avenue.


3150
 
5-7-18
 
Granting accessory structure height and setback variances to property located
at 258 Nebraska Street.


3151
 
5-7-18
 
Granting side yard setback variance to property located at 1014 N. Butternut
Circle.


3152
 
5-7-18
 
Granting special use permit for message establishment to property located at
20950 S. Frankfort Square Road, Unit 4A.


3153
 
5-7-18
 
Granting special use permit for indoor recreation and entertainment to
property located at 9216 Gulfstream Road, Unit A.


3154
 
5-7-18
 
Rezoning from I-1 to I-2 and granting required landscaped front yard and
loading area in front yard variances to property located at East Point
Industrial Park, Lots 26, 27, 28.


3158
 
5-21-18
 
Granting screening of rooftop equipment variance to property located at 9450
W. Laraway Road.


3161
 
7-2-18
 
Granting two points of access and side yard setback variances to property
located at 9310 Corsair Road.


3163
 
7-16-18
 
Granting special use permit for limited retail sales in association with
warehouse use to property located at 9401 W. Laraway Road.


3164
 
7-16-18
 
Approving major PUD change for Frankfort Commons Shopping Center located at
20230 S. LaGrange Road.


3165
 
7-16-18
 
Granting special use permit for massage establishment to property located at
20280- 20290 S. LaGrange Road.


3168
 
9-4-18
 
Approving major PUD change to Warfield PUD located at 1018 Lambrecht Road and
175 Industry Avenue.


3169
 
9-4-18
 
Approving front yard setback and corner side yard setback variances to
property located at 122 Walnut Street.


3170
 
9-4-18
 
Rezoning certain property located at 11 and 19 N. White Street from R-2 to
H-1.


3171
 
9-4-18
 
Granting special use permit for PUD to property located at 7, 11, and 19 N.
White Street.


3172
 
9-4-18
 
Granting special use permits for full service restaurant with liquor sales,
extended hours of operation, and outdoor seating to property located at 7 N.
White Street.


3173
 
9-4-18
 
Granting special use permit for outdoor seating to property located at 11 N.
White Street.


3175
 
10-1-18
 
Approving rear yard and first floor building materials variances to property
located at 1005 Prestwick Drive.


3176
 
10-1-18
 
Granting special use permit for outdoor storage to property located at Lots 4
and 5 in East Point Industrial Park.


3177
 
11-5-18
 
Approving building materials variance to property located at 139 N. White
Street.


3178
 
11-5-18
 
Granting special use permit for PUD to property located at northwest corner
of Harlem Avenue and Steger Road.


3181
 
11-19-18
 
Granting special use permit for message establishment to property located at
21195 S. LaGrange Road, Suite 1A.


3182
 
11-19-18
 
Granting special use permits for automobile repair and service and automobile
sales to property located at 10317 Vans Drive.


3185
 
12-17-18
 
Granting special use permit for carry-out restaurant to property located at
19 Ash Street, north unit.


 
 




 



TABLE XI:  STREET ADDITIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


1711
 
8-17-98
 
Providing for the addition of Wolf Road between the northerly edge of C.H. 74
(Laraway Road) and extending northerly to U.S. Route 30 to the municipal
street system.


1769
 
12-6-99
 
Assuming jurisdiction of Wolf Road between the northerly edge of C.H. 74
(Laraway Road) and extending northerly to U.S. Route 30 in its entirety.


2856
 
8-19-13
 
Providing for the transfer of jurisdictional control of Center Road in its
entirety, from Laraway Road southerly to Steger Road, from the County of Will
to the village.


 
 
 
 
 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Illinois Compiled Statutes





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES



 

ILCS Cite
 
Code Section




Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.01
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.02
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.03
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.04
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.05
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.07
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.08
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.09
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.10
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.11
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.12
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.15
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.16
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.17
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.20
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.24
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.28
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 1.29
 
10.02


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 2
 
10.04


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 3
 
10.06


Ch. 5, Act 70, § 4
 
10.06


Ch. 5, Act 85, § 2
 
10.06


Ch. 5, Act 140, §§ 1 et seq.
 
34.03


Ch. 5, Act 430, §§ 1-1 et seq.
 
34.05


Ch. 5, Act 430, § 5-15
 
34.05


Ch. 5, Act 430, §§ 10-10 - 10-40
 
34.05


Ch. 5, Act 430, § 50-5
 
34.05


Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5
 
34.05


Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5(a)
 
34.05


Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5(c)
 
34.05


Ch. 10, Act 5, §§ 10-2 et seq.
 
32.063


Ch. 20, Act 1605, §§ 1 et seq.
 
135.02


Ch. 35, Act 200, § 18-182
 
51.026, 51.116


Ch. 35, Act 200, § 18-185
 
51.026


Ch. 35, Act 636, §§ 5-1 et seq.
 
33.020


Ch. 40, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq.
 
34.18


Ch. 50, Act 45, §§1 et seq.
 
118.05, 118.06


Ch. 50, Act 705, §§ 1 et seq.
 
32.121


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1
 
10.99, 70.04, 152.001


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 1-2-1.1
 
10.99


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-3-14
 
33.040


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1
 
33.003


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.1
 
33.007


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.2
 
33.007


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.3
 
33.007


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1.4
 
33.007


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2
 
33.060, 33.061


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-2(d)
 
33.061


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-5
 
33.002


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-6
 
33.001, 33.004


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-7
 
33.006


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-8
 
33.005


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 9-2-1 et seq.
 
32.002


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 10-2.1-1 et seq.
 
32.069


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-12-12
 
152.001


Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 11-15.1-1 et seq.
 
35.01


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-30-8
 
152.001


Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-31-2
 
152.001


Ch. 76, Act 55, §§ 1 et seq.
 
72.01


Ch. 205, Act 510, §§ 0.01 et seq.
 
120.01


Ch. 205, Act 510, § 7(A)
 
120.04


Ch. 210, Act 45, §§ 1-101 et seq.
 
117.01


Ch. 220, Act 5, §21-201(v)
 
52.02


Ch. 220, Act 5, §21-301(c)
 
118.02, 118.03


Ch. 220, Act 5, §21-401
 
52.02, 118.01


Ch. 220, Act 5, §21-401(b)(6)
 
118.02


Ch. 220, Act 5, §21-801
 
118.01


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b)
 
118.01


Ch. 220, Act 5, §21-801(c)(1)(vi)
 
118.01


Ch. 220, Act 5, §21-801(d)
 
118.01


Ch. 220, Act 5, §22-501
 
118.20


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 22-501(r)(l)
 
118.99


Ch. 220, Act 5, § 22-501(s)
 
118.22


Ch. 220, Act 50 §§11 et seq.
 
52.33


Ch. 220, Act 65, § 4
 
52.11


Ch. 225, Act 312, § 10
 
150.30


Ch. 225, Act 320, §§0.01 et seq.
 
150.22


Ch. 225, Act 325, §§1 et seq.
 
152.002


Ch. 225, Act 330, §§1 et seq.
 
152.002


Ch. 225, Act 460, §§ 1 et seq.
 
72.01, 115.27


Ch. 225, Act 460, § 1
 
115.25


Ch. 230, Act 10, §§ 1 et seq.
 
135.02


Ch. 230, Act 15, §§ 0.01 et seq.
 
135.02


Ch. 230, Act 20, §§ 1 et seq.
 
135.02


Ch. 230, Act 25, §§ 1 et seq.
 
135.02


Ch. 230, Act 30, §§ 1 et seq.
 
115.40, 115.42, 135.02


Ch. 230, Act 40, §27
 
135.05


Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.
 
113.25, 113.92


Ch. 235, Act 5, § 1-2
 
113.90


Ch. 235, Act 5, § 4-4
 
113.25


Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-15
 
113.18


Ch. 235, Act 5, § 7-5
 
113.25


Ch. 415, Act 5, §§1 et seq.
 
153.32


Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.160
 
153.32


Ch. 415, Act 5, §22.2(j)(6)(E)(iii)
 
153.32


Ch. 415, Act 5, §22.2(j)(6)(E)(v)
 
153.32


Ch. 415, Act 5, §22.2(j)(6)(E)(vi)
 
153.32


Ch. 430, Act 65, § 1.1
 
137.01


Ch. 430, Act 66, §§ 1 et seq.
 
137.05


Ch. 430, Act 66, § 5
 
137.01


Ch. 605, Act 5, §§1-101 et seq.
 
52.02


Ch. 615, Act 5, §§5 et seq.
 
152.002, 152.054


Ch. 615, Act 5, § 18(g)
 
152.001


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 1-100 et seq.
 
74.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-116
 
70.04


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-117.7
 
74.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-146
 
70.04


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.3
 
74.01


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-101
 
70.04


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-303
 
70.04


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-204
 
70.04


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501
 
70.04


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-503
 
70.04


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-505
 
70.04


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-601.5
 
70.04


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-709
 
74.02


Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 13 et seq.
 
70.04


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-102
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VIII


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-103
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VIII


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-107
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VIII


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-111
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VIII


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-111(g)
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VIII


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-113(a)
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VIII


Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-113(b)
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VIII


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-6
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-20
 
134.30 - 134.34


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 12-2
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 12-4.2
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 12-4.3
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 12-4.6
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 5, §16-1
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 5, §16-3
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 5, §18-1
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 5, §18-2
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 5, §19-1
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 5, §19-3
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 5, §20-1
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 5, §20-1.1
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 5, §20-2
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 5, §21-1
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 5, §§24-1 et seq.
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 5, §25-1
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 26-1
 
132.08


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1
 
135.02


Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-2(b)
 
135.06


Ch. 720, Act 5, §§36-1 et seq.
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 550, §§1 et seq.
 
136.07, 136.20, 136.21


Ch. 720, Act 550, §4
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 550, §5
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 550, §5.1
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 550, §5.2
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 550, §8
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 570, §§1 et seq.
 
136.07, 136.20, 136.21


Ch. 720, Act 570, §401
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 570, §402
 
70.04


Ch. 720, Act 600, §3.6
 
70.04


Ch. 725, Act 150, §§1 et seq.
 
70.04


Ch. 730, Act 150, §§1 et seq.
 
117.07


Ch. 735, Act 5, § 15-1508(b)
 
94.16


Ch. 735, Act 5, § 15-1508(b-10)
 
94.16


Ch. 740, Act 115, §§ 1 et seq.
 
131.20


Ch. 765, Act 205, § 2
 
152.101


Ch. 805, Act 110, § 0.01
 
115.25


Ch. 805, Act 110, § 35
 
115.25


Ch. 815, Act 5, § 3
 
135.02


Ch. 815, Act 5, § 8
 
135.02


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




291
 
4-6-08
 
T.S.O., Table VI


292
 
9-9-12
 
T.S.O., Table VI


295
 
5-4-14
 
T.S.O., Table II


343
 
9-14-25
 
T.S.O., Table VI


351
 
4-5-26
 
T.S.O., Table VI


434
 
6-5-50
 
31.01


456
 
1-17-55
 
T.S.O., Table IX


458
 
5-2-55
 
T.S.O., Table IX


462
 
9-19-55
 
T.S.O., Table II


463
 
10-3-55
 
92.04


466
 
7-16-56
 
T.S.O., Table II


467
 
7-16-56
 
T.S.O., Table II


472
 
4-1-57
 
T.S.O., Table II


479
 
10-7-57
 
T.S.O., Table II


480
 
10-21-57
 
T.S.O., Table II


481
 
4-28-58
 
T.S.O., Table IX


485
 
9-15-58
 
T.S.O., Table II


486
 
11-17-58
 
T.S.O., Table VI


491
 
7-20-59
 
T.S.O., Table II


492
 
7-20-59
 
T.S.O., Table II


496
 
10-5-59
 
T.S.O., Table IX


497
 
11-2-59
 
T.S.O., Table II


498
 
11-2-59
 
T.S.O., Table II


504
 
1-18-60
 
T.S.O., Table II


505
 
2-15-60
 
T.S.O., Table II


506
 
2-15-60
 
T.S.O., Table II


507
 
2-15-60
 
T.S.O., Table II


508
 
2-15-60
 
T.S.O., Table II


510
 
5-16-60
 
T.S.O., Table II


517
 
10-3-60
 
T.S.O., Table II


519
 
11-7-60
 
T.S.O., Table IX


520
 
11-7-60
 
T.S.O., Table II


526
 
8-7-61
 
T.S.O., Table II


532
 
1-15-62
 
T.S.O., Table IX


537
 
11-19-62
 
T.S.O., Table II


552
 
8-19-63
 
T.S.O., Table VI


559
 
8-2-65
 
T.S.O., Table IX


561
 
9-7-65
 
33.004


563
 
11-1-65
 
T.S.O., Table II


569
 
1-17-66
 
31.01


571
 
4-4-66
 
90.01 - 90.06, 90.99


573
 
5-16-66
 
T.S.O., Table II


579
 
11-7-66
 
T.S.O., Table II


580
 
4-17-67
 
T.S.O., Table II


582
 
6-5-67
 
T.S.O., Table II


583
 
6-19-67
 
T.S.O., Table IX


592
 
7-17-67
 
T.S.O., Table II


593
 
11-20-67
 
T.S.O., Table II


594
 
12-4-67
 
T.S.O., Table II


595
 
11-20-67
 
T.S.O., Table II


596
 
12-4-67
 
T.S.O., Table II


597
 
12-4-67
 
T.S.O., Table II


598
 
12-4-67
 
T.S.O., Table II


600
 
2-19-68
 
T.S.O., Table II


601
 
4-1-68
 
T.S.O., Table II


608
 
9-9-68
 
T.S.O., Table II


610
 
1-20-69
 
T.S.O., Table II


614
 
3-3-69
 
T.S.O., Table VIII


618
 
4-7-69
 
T.S.O., Table II


626
 
8-18-69
 
T.S.O., Table II


628
 
8-18-69
 
33.003


629
 
8-18-69
 
33.002


633
 
10-6-69
 
92.01, 92.06, 92.07, 92.10, 92-13 - 92.15, 92.20


637
 
10-20-69
 
T.S.O., Table II


640
 
11-3-69
 
T.S.O., Table II


641
 
8-4-69
 
T.S.O., Table VII


646
 
2-16-70
 
T.S.O., Table II


647
 
2-16-70
 
T.S.O., Table II


652
 
3-2-70
 
T.S.O., Table IX


653
 
3-2-70
 
T.S.O., Table V


654
 
4-6-70
 
T.S.O., Table II


655
 
4-6-70
 
T.S.O., Table VI


658
 
5-4-70
 
T.S.O., Table II


659
 
5-4-70
 
T.S.O., Table II


661
 
6-1-70
 
95.01 - 95.09, 95.99


673
 
10-19-70
 
T.S.O., Table IV


674
 
10-19-70
 
T.S.O., Table II


675
 
10-19-70
 
T.S.O., Table II


680
 
12-7-70
 
T.S.O., Table VII


681
 
12-7-70
 
T.S.O., Table II


682
 
11-16-70
 
T.S.O., Table IX


683
 
12-7-70
 
T.S.O., Table I


686
 
2-1-71
 
T.S.O., Table II


687
 
2-1-71
 
T.S.O., Table IV


688
 
2-15-71
 
T.S.O., Table II


693
 
3-1-71
 
T.S.O., Table II


697
 
4-19-71
 
T.S.O., Table II


698
 
2-15-71
 
T.S.O., Table II


703
 
6-7-71
 
T.S.O., Table II


704
 
6-7-71
 
T.S.O., Table II


705
 
6-7-71
 
T.S.O., Table II


706
 
6-7-71
 
T.S.O., Table II


707
 
6-7-71
 
T.S.O., Table II


708
 
6-7-71
 
T.S.O., Table II


709
 
6-7-71
 
T.S.O., Table II


710
 
6-7-71
 
T.S.O., Table II


711
 
6-7-71
 
T.S.O., Table II


716
 
6-7-71
 
T.S.O., Table II


717
 
6-7-71
 
T.S.O., Table II


733
 
11-15-71
 
T.S.O., Table II


735
 
12-6-71
 
T.S.O., Table II


737
 
12-6-71
 
T.S.O., Table II


739
 
12-20-71
 
T.S.O., Table IX


740
 
1-3-72
 
T.S.O., Table II


742
 
1-3-72
 
T.S.O., Table II


743
 
1-3-72
 
T.S.O., Table II


744
 
1-3-72
 
T.S.O., Table II


745
 
1-3-72
 
T.S.O., Table II


746
 
1-3-72
 
T.S.O., Table II


747
 
1-3-72
 
T.S.O., Table II


748
 
2-7-72
 
T.S.O., Table II


749
 
2-7-72
 
T.S.O., Table I


750
 
2-7-72
 
T.S.O., Table II


754
 
2-7-72
 
T.S.O., Table II


758
 
3-20-72
 
T.S.O., Table II


759
 
5-15-72
 
T.S.O., Table VIII


760
 
6-5-72
 
T.S.O., Table VI


771
 
7-24-72
 
T.S.O., Table II


772
 
7-24-72
 
T.S.O., Table II


775
 
8-7-72
 
T.S.O., Table II


776
 
8-7-72
 
T.S.O., Table II


778
 
9-11-72
 
T.S.O., Table II


779
 
9-11-72
 
T.S.O., Table II


780
 
9-11-72
 
T.S.O., Table II


781
 
9-11-72
 
T.S.O., Table II


782
 
9-11-72
 
T.S.O., Table II


785
 
11-20-72
 
91.01 - 91.05, 91.20 - 91.25, 91.30 - 91.36, 91.99


795
 
12-4-72
 
T.S.O., Table II


796
 
12-4-72
 
T.S.O., Table II


798
 
12-18-72
 
T.S.O., Table II


808
 
2-19-73
 
T.S.O., Table IX


812
 
3-19-73
 
34.01


813
 
4-16-73
 
T.S.O., Table II


815
 
5-7-73
 
T.S.O., Table II


822
 
6-4-73
 
T.S.O., Table II


824
 
6-18-73
 
T.S.O., Table II


825
 
7-2-73
 
T.S.O., Table II


826
 
7-2-73
 
T.S.O., Table II


828
 
7-16-73
 
T.S.O., Table VII


838
 
10-1-73
 
T.S.O., Table II


843
 
11-19-73
 
T.S.O., Table II


845
 
12-17-73
 
T.S.O., Table II


846
 
12-17-73
 
T.S.O., Table II


847
 
12-17-73
 
T.S.O., Table II


853
 
2-4-74
 
35.01 - 35.05


858
 
3-4-74
 
T.S.O., Table II


859
 
3-18-74
 
T.S.O., Table II


860
 
4-1-74
 
T.S.O., Table II


862
 
4-15-74
 
130.01 - 130.03, 130.99, 131.01, 131.02, 131.30, 131.31, 131.99, 132.01 -
132.05, 132.20, 132.22, 133.01, 133.02, 133.99, 134.15 - 134.18, 134.30,
134.36, 134.37, 134.99, 135.01 - 135.04, 135.99, 136.01 - 136.04, 136.99,
137.02 - 137.05, 137.99


868
 
7-1-74
 
150.03, 150.99


869
 
7-15-74
 
50.01 - 50.06, 50.99


876
 
10-7-74
 
113.03


877
 
11-21-74
 
T.S.O., Table II


878
 
10-21-74
 
33.001


880
 
2-3-75
 
72.01 - 72.03, 72.99


883
 
4-21-75
 
T.S.O., Table II


887
 
6-16-75
 
T.S.O., Table II


892
 
7-21-75
 
92.13


894
 
8-4-75
 
T.S.O., Table IX


895
 
8-4-75
 
T.S.O., Table VII


896
 
8-4-75
 
150.70


900
 
10-6-75
 
T.S.O., Table II


901
 
11-3-75
 
T.S.O., Table II


902
 
11-17-75
 
T.S.O., Table II


903
 
12-1-75
 
T.S.O., Table II


908
 
2-16-76
 
32.015 - 32.027


916
 
6-21-76
 
95.20 - 95.31, 95.99


921
 
8-2-76
 
155.01


925
 
9-7-76
 
T.S.O., Table X


926
 
9-20-76
 
T.S.O., Table II


931
 
2-7-77
 
T.S.O., Table X


941
 
4-18-77
 
T.S.O., Table II


942
 
4-18-77
 
T.S.O., Table X


943
 
5-2-77
 
T.S.O., Table II


944
 
5-16-77
 
T.S.O., Table X


945
 
5-16-77
 
T.S.O., Table II


946
 
5-16-77
 
T.S.O., Table VIII


947
 
6-6-77
 
T.S.O., Table II


948
 
6-6-77
 
T.S.O., Table X


949
 
6-6-77
 
T.S.O., Table X


950
 
6-6-77
 
T.S.O., Table VI


953
 
8-1-77
 
T.S.O., Table X


958
 
9-19-77
 
T.S.O., Table II


963
 
10-17-77
 
T.S.O., Table X


964
 
10-17-77
 
T.S.O., Table II


965
 
10-17-77
 
T.S.O., Table X


966
 
1-16-78
 
T.S.O., Table II


967
 
1-16-78
 
T.S.O., Table IX


968
 
1-16-78
 
T.S.O., Table X


973
 
12-5-77
 
T.S.O., Table VIII


977
 
5-1-78
 
T.S.O., Table VII


978
 
5-15-78
 
T.S.O., Table II


979
 
5-15-78
 
T.S.O., Table X


984
 
7-17-78
 
T.S.O., Table II


985
 
7-17-78
 
T.S.O., Table X


986
 
8-7-78
 
T.S.O., Table X


992
 
11-6-78
 
T.S.O., Table II


993
 
11-6-78
 
T.S.O., Table X


994
 
11-20-78
 
T.S.O., Table II


995
 
11-20-78
 
T.S.O., Table X


999
 
3-19-79
 
T.S.O., Table X


1010
 
10-18-82
 
131.15 - 131.20


1031
 
12-3-79
 
T.S.O., Table IV


1034
 
2-4-80
 
T.S.O., Table II


1036
 
2-18-80
 
93.01 - 93.04, 93.99


1049
 
11-17-80
 
T.S.O., Table II


1054
 
2-16-80
 
11.01


1055
 
2-16-81
 
32.040


1057
 
3-16-81
 
T.S.O., Table X


1060
 
4-6-81
 
31.10


1065
 
9-21-81
 
32.001, 32.002


1068
 
11-2-81
 
111.01 - 111.15, 111.99


1069
 
1-4-82
 
33.006


1070
 
1-4-82
 
33.005


1071
 
1-4-82
 
T.S.O., Table IV


1074
 
2-1-82
 
T.S.O., Table IV


1075
 
3-15-82
 
T.S.O., Table X


1080
 
8-16-82
 
T.S.O., Table II


1081
 
8-16-82
 
T.S.O., Table X


1083
 
8-16-82
 
150.02


1085
 
10-18-82
 
132.20, 132.21


1089
 
3-21-83
 
T.S.O., Table VI


1097
 
9-19-83
 
91.01, 91.05, 91.99


1098
 
10-3-83
 
T.S.O., Table II


1099
 
10-17-83
 
T.S.O., Table X


1102
 
11-7-83
 
T.S.O., Table IX


1103
 
1-3-84
 
94.10 - 94.14


1105
 
12-5-83
 
113.01, 113.02, 113.15 - 113.26, 113.35 - 113.44, 113.55 - 113.60, 113.75 -
113.79, 113.90 - 113.92, 113.98, 113.99


1112
 
3-19-84
 
114.01 - 114.12, 114.99


—
 
5-11-84
 
T.S.O., Table V


1124
 
9-17-84
 
T.S.O., Table IX


1126
 
11-19-84
 
150.01


1129
 
2-4-85
 
T.S.O., Table VI


1130
 
3-4-85
 
T.S.O., Table II


1137
 
5-20-85
 
T.S.O., Table VI


1138
 
6-17-85
 
T.S.O., Table IX


1141
 
8-19-85
 
113.20


1142
 
8-19-85
 
T.S.O., Table IV


1155
 
4-7-86
 
T.S.O., Table II


1156
 
4-7-86
 
T.S.O., Table IV


1157
 
6-2-86
 
T.S.O., Table IV


1162
 
8-18-86
 
T.S.O., Table II


1167
 
8-25-86
 
T.S.O., Table II


1168
 
8-22-86
 
T.S.O., Table X


1170
 
10-6-86
 
150.04


1172
 
10-6-86
 
T.S.O., Table X


1177
 
4-6-87
 
113.20, 113.56, 113.61 - 113.63, 113.99


1187
 
9-9-87
 
T.S.O., Table II


1188
 
9-9-87
 
T.S.O., Table II


1189
 
9-9-87
 
T.S.O., Table II


1191
 
9-21-87
 
112.01 - 112.04, 112.99


1192
 
10-5-87
 
T.S.O., Table II


1193
 
10-5-87
 
T.S.O., Table X


1194
 
10-5-87
 
T.S.O., Table II


1196
 
11-2-87
 
T.S.O., Table II


1197
 
11-2-87
 
T.S.O., Table X


1198
 
11-23-87
 
150.50 - 150.58, 150.99


1199
 
12-7-87
 
T.S.O., Table II


1200
 
12-7-87
 
T.S.O., Table II


1202
 
1-18-88
 
T.S.O., Table X


1203
 
2-1-88
 
T.S.O., Table VI


1204
 
2-16-88
 
T.S.O., Table X


1205
 
3-7-88
 
T.S.O., Table X


1207
 
3-7-88
 
T.S.O., Table II


1213
 
5-2-88
 
T.S.O., Table II


1214
 
5-16-88
 
T.S.O., Table II


1215
 
5-16-88
 
T.S.O., Table X


1217
 
6-6-88
 
T.S.O., Table X


1220
 
6-20-88
 
97.01, 97.20 - 97.25, 97.35, 97.45 - 97.49, 97.60, 97.61, 97.99


1221
 
6-20-88
 
T.S.O., Table IV


1222
 
6-20-88
 
51.040 - 51.043


1224
 
7-18-88
 
T.S.O., Table II


1225
 
7-18-88
 
T.S.O., Table X


1226
 
7-18-88
 
T.S.O., Table IX


1227
 
8-15-88
 
T.S.O., Table II


1228
 
8-15-88
 
T.S.O., Table X


1229
 
8-15-88
 
T.S.O., Table IX


1232
 
9-6-88
 
51.050 - 51.056


1233
 
9-6-88
 
T.S.O., Table II


1234
 
9-6-88
 
T.S.O., Table II


1235
 
9-6-88
 
T.S.O., Table II


1236
 
9-6-88
 
T.S.O., Table II


1237
 
9-6-88
 
T.S.O., Table II


1238
 
9-6-88
 
T.S.O., Table II


1239
 
9-6-88
 
T.S.O., Table II


1240
 
9-6-88
 
T.S.O., Table II


1241
 
9-6-88
 
T.S.O., Table II


1242
 
9-6-88
 
T.S.O., Table II


1244
 
10-17-88
 
T.S.O., Table II


1245
 
10-17-88
 
T.S.O., Table II


1246
 
10-17-88
 
T.S.O., Table II


1247
 
10-17-88
 
T.S.O., Table II


1249
 
12-5-98
 
98.01, 98.20 - 98.25, 98.35, 98.45 - 98.51, 98.60, 98.61, 98.99


1253
 
1-30-89
 
32.040


1254
 
3-6-89
 
113.56, 113.61 - 113.63, 113.99


1256
 
4-3-89
 
T.S.O., Table II


1259
 
4-3-89
 
T.S.O., Table II


1260
 
4-3-89
 
T.S.O., Table X


1261
 
5-15-89
 
113.18, 113.20


1263
 
6-19-89
 
113.60


1264
 
6-19-89
 
96.15 - 96.17, 96.99


1265
 
7-3-89
 
T.S.O., Table IX


1266
 
7-3-89
 
T.S.O., Table IX


1267
 
7-3-89
 
T.S.O., Table VII


1270
 
7-17-89
 
T.S.O., Table X


1272
 
9-5-89
 
96.01, 96.99


1276
 
9-29-89
 
T.S.O., Table II


1277
 
9-29-89
 
T.S.O., Table II


1278
 
9-29-89
 
T.S.O., Table II


1279
 
9-29-89
 
T.S.O., Table II


1280
 
9-29-89
 
T.S.O., Table II


1281
 
9-29-89
 
T.S.O., Table II


1282
 
9-29-89
 
T.S.O., Table II


1283
 
10-16-89
 
T.S.O., Table II


1285
 
11-6-89
 
T.S.O., Table IX


1288
 
12-28-89
 
T.S.O., Table II


1290
 
1-2-90
 
110.01 - 110.09, 110.99


1291
 
1-15-90
 
T.S.O., Table X


1292
 
4-2-90
 
T.S.O., Table X


1293
 
4-2-90
 
T.S.O., Table X


1294
 
4-2-90
 
T.S.O., Table X


1298
 
5-7-90
 
T.S.O., Table X


1300
 
6-18-90
 
50.15 - 50.18, 50.99


1301
 
6-18-90
 
T.S.O., Table II


1302
 
6-18-90
 
T.S.O., Table X


1303
 
6-18-90
 
T.S.O., Table II


1304
 
6-18-90
 
T.S.O., Table X


1305
 
6-4-90
 
T.S.O., Table X


1306
 
6-4-90
 
T.S.O., Table X


1308
 
7-2-90
 
T.S.O., Table X


1311
 
7-16-90
 
51.001 - 51.003, 51.015 - 51.019, 51.025 - 51.033, 51.999


1312
 
7-16-90
 
51.060 - 51.065, 51.075, 51.076, 51.085 - 51.092, 51.100 - 51.107, 51.115 -
51.125, 51.999


1313
 
7-16-90
 
51.135 - 51.138


1314
 
8-6-90
 
155.01


1317
 
8-20-90
 
T.S.O., Table X


1319
 
9-17-90
 
150.40


1320
 
9-17-90
 
T.S.O., Table II


1321
 
9-17-90
 
T.S.O., Table X


1322
 
9-4-90
 
T.S.O., Table X


1323
 
10-1-90
 
T.S.O., Table X


1326
 
10-15-90
 
96.02


1328
 
10-15-90
 
51.066


1330
 
11-5-90
 
51.028


1331
 
11-5-90
 
51.119


1332
 
11-19-90
 
T.S.O., Table X


1335
 
12-3-90
 
T.S.O., Table X


1336
 
12-3-90
 
T.S.O., Table X


1338
 
2-4-91
 
T.S.O., Table X


1339
 
2-4-91
 
T.S.O., Table X


1340
 
2-19-91
 
T.S.O., Table X


1341
 
2-19-91
 
T.S.O., Table X


1342
 
3-4-91
 
34.15 - 34.21


1343
 
4-1-91
 
32.060 - 32.069


1344
 
4-15-91
 
T.S.O., Table II


1347
 
4-29-91
 
150.40


1348
 
5-6-91
 
T.S.O., Table X


1349
 
5-6-91
 
T.S.O., Table X


1354
 
9-3-91
 
T.S.O., Table X


1355
 
9-3-91
 
T.S.O., Table X


1356
 
9-3-91
 
150.53, 150.54


1359
 
9-16-91
 
T.S.O., Table X


1361
 
10-21-91
 
T.S.O., Table VII


1362
 
10-21-91
 
T.S.O., Table IV


1363
 
12-2-91
 
T.S.O., Table X


1364
 
12-2-91
 
T.S.O., Table X


1368
 
1-6-92
 
T.S.O., Table X


1369
 
1-20-92
 
34.02


1370
 
1-20-92
 
T.S.O., Table IV


1371
 
3-16-92
 
50.25 - 50.31, 50.99


1373
 
4-6-92
 
T.S.O., Table X


1374
 
4-6-92
 
T.S.O., Table X


1375
 
4-20-90
 
T.S.O., Table II


1376
 
4-20-90
 
T.S.O., Table II


1377
 
4-20-92
 
T.S.O., Table X


1378
 
5-4-92
 
T.S.O., Table X


1379
 
5-4-92
 
T.S.O., Table X


1380
 
5-18-92
 
T.S.O., Table IV


1381
 
6-15-92
 
113.18


1382
 
6-15-92
 
50.40, 50.99


1384
 
7-6-92
 
T.S.O., Table X


1385
 
7-6-92
 
T.S.O., Table X


1386
 
7-6-92
 
T.S.O., Table X


1388
 
8-3-92
 
T.S.O., Table V


1389
 
8-3-92
 
T.S.O., Table V


1390
 
8-3-92
 
T.S.O., Table X


1391
 
9-8-92
 
T.S.O., Table II


1392
 
9-8-92
 
T.S.O., Table X


1393
 
10-5-92
 
T.S.O., Table X


1394
 
10-5-92
 
T.S.O., Table X


1395
 
10-5-92
 
T.S.O., Table X


1396
 
10-19-92
 
51.018, 51.999


1397
 
12-8-92
 
31.11


1402
 
2-1-93
 
T.S.O., Table X


1406
 
3-15-93
 
T.S.O., Table II


1407
 
3-15-93
 
T.S.O., Table II


1408
 
3-15-93
 
T.S.O., Table X


1409
 
3-25-93
 
T.S.O., Table X


1412
 
4-19-93
 
115.01 - 115.13, 115.25 - 115.32, 115.99


1414
 
4-26-93
 
T.S.O., Table X


1416
 
4-26-93
 
T.S.O., Table X


1417
 
4-26-93
 
T.S.O., Table X


1418
 
4-26-93
 
T.S.O., Table X


1420
 
5-17-93
 
T.S.O., Table X


1421
 
5-17-93
 
T.S.O., Table X


1422
 
7-6-93
 
T.S.O., Table IX


1423
 
7-19-93
 
T.S.O., Table X


1424
 
7-19-93
 
T.S.O., Table X


1428
 
8-16-93
 
31.11


1429
 
9-7-93
 
113.02, 113.18, 113.20


1430
 
10-4-93
 
T.S.O., Table II


1431
 
10-4-93
 
T.S.O., Table II


1432
 
10-4-93
 
T.S.O., Table X


1433
 
11-1-93
 
111.07


1434
 
11-1-93
 
T.S.O., Table IX


1442
 
12-6-93
 
T.S.O., Table X


1444
 
12-20-93
 
T.S.O., Table X


1446
 
2-7-94
 
T.S.O., Table X


1447
 
2-7-94
 
T.S.O., Table X


1448
 
2-7-94
 
T.S.O., Table X


1449
 
3-7-94
 
150.40


1451
 
3-21-94
 
T.S.O., Table III


1452
 
4-4-94
 
T.S.O., Table III


1454
 
4-18-94
 
154.01, 154.02, 154.10 - 154.16, 154.30 - 154.33, 154.40 - 154.48,  154.99


1455
 
5-2-94
 
154.01, 154.02, 154.10 - 154.16, 154.30 - 154.33, 154.40 - 154.48,  154.99


1456
 
5-2-94
 
T.S.O., Table X


1457
 
5-2-94
 
T.S.O., Table X


1458
 
5-2-94
 
T.S.O., Table X


1460
 
6-6-94
 
T.S.O., Table X


1462
 
6-6-94
 
T.S.O., Table X


1463
 
6-20-94
 
94.01


1464
 
6-20-94
 
T.S.O., Table X


1465
 
6-20-94
 
T.S.O., Table X


1469
 
7-18-94
 
150.75, 150.76


1470
 
7-18-94
 
T.S.O., Table X


1471
 
8-1-94
 
T.S.O., Table X


1472
 
8-1-94
 
T.S.O., Table X


1473
 
9-6-94
 
T.S.O., Table X


1474
 
9-6-94
 
T.S.O., Table X


1476
 
9-19-94
 
51.026


1478
 
10-17-94
 
150.20 - 150.27, 150.99


1479
 
11-7-94
 
31.11


1481
 
11-7-94
 
51.135, 51.137, 51.138


1482
 
11-7-94
 
T.S.O., Table X


1483
 
11-7-94
 
T.S.O., Table X


1485
 
12-5-94
 
116.01 - 116.04, 116.99


1486
 
12-5-94
 
T.S.O., Table X


1493
 
2-21-95
 
T.S.O., Table II


1494
 
2-21-95
 
T.S.O., Table II


1495
 
2-21-95
 
T.S.O., Table II


1496
 
2-21-94
 
T.S.O., Table X


1497
 
3-6-95
 
T.S.O., Table II


1498
 
3-6-95
 
T.S.O., Table II


1499
 
3-6-95
 
T.S.O., Table X


1500
 
3-6-95
 
153.01, 153.02


1502
 
3-20-95
 
110.03, 110.04


1505
 
4-3-95
 
50.07


1506
 
4-3-95
 
51.018


1507
 
4-3-95
 
T.S.O., Table II


1508
 
4-3-95
 
T.S.O., Table II


1509
 
4-3-95
 
T.S.O., Table X


1510
 
5-1-95
 
131.31


1513
 
5-1-95
 
T.S.O., Table X


1514
 
5-1-95
 
T.S.O., Table X


1516
 
5-5-95
 
T.S.O., Table II


1517
 
5-5-95
 
T.S.O., Table II


1518
 
5-15-95
 
T.S.O., Table X


1520
 
6-5-95
 
T.S.O., Table X


1521
 
6-5-95
 
T.S.O., Table IX


1522
 
6-5-95
 
T.S.O., Table X


1523
 
6-8-95
 
T.S.O., Table II


1524
 
6-8-95
 
T.S.O., Table X


1528
 
8-7-95
 
T.S.O., Table X


1529
 
8-7-95
 
T.S.O., Table II


1530
 
8-7-95
 
T.S.O., Table II


1531
 
8-7-95
 
T.S.O., Table X


1532
 
8-21-95
 
T.S.O., Table X


1533
 
9-5-95
 
T.S.O., Table II


1534
 
9-5-95
 
T.S.O., Table II


1535
 
9-18-95
 
150.05, 150.99


1536
 
10-2-95
 
94.25, 94.99


1539
 
11-6-95
 
T.S.O., Table IV


1540
 
11-6-95
 
T.S.O., Table IX


1541
 
11-6-95
 
T.S.O., Table X


1542
 
11-6-95
 
T.S.O., Table X


1543
 
11-6-95
 
T.S.O., Table IX


1544
 
11-20-95
 
T.S.O., Table X


1545
 
12-4-95
 
115.26 - 115.28, 115.30


1550
 
11-8-95
 
T.S.O., Table III


1551
 
1-22-96
 
T.S.O., Table IV


1552
 
1-22-96
 
T.S.O., Table III


1553
 
1-22-96
 
T.S.O., Table III


1554
 
1-22-96
 
T.S.O., Table III


1555
 
1-22-96
 
T.S.O., Table III


1556
 
2-20-96
 
157.01


1557
 
3-4-96
 
150.20, 150.21


1558
 
3-4-96
 
T.S.O., Table II


1559
 
3-4-96
 
T.S.O., Table II


1560
 
3-4-96
 
T.S.O., Table X


1561
 
3-4-96
 
T.S.O., Table X


1562
 
3-18-96
 
154.60 - 154.63, 154.99


1563
 
3-18-96
 
T.S.O., Table III


1564
 
4-1-96
 
150.53


1565
 
4-1-96
 
158.01 - 158.07, 158.15, 158.25 - 158.31, 158.45, 158.46, 158.99


1566
 
4-1-96
 
T.S.O., Table X


1567
 
4-1-96
 
T.S.O., Table X


1568
 
4-1-96
 
T.S.O., Table X


1569
 
4-15-96
 
113.20


1570
 
5-6-96
 
51.002, 51.026, 51.060, 51.101, 51.103, 51.116


1573
 
5-6-96
 
T.S.O., Table X


1575
 
5-20-96
 
T.S.O., Table II


1576
 
5-20-96
 
T.S.O., Table II


1577
 
5-20-96
 
T.S.O., Table X


1578
 
6-3-96
 
T.S.O., Table IX


1579
 
6-3-96
 
T.S.O., Table X


1580
 
6-3-96
 
T.S.O., Table X


1581
 
6-17-96
 
94.10, 94.11, 94.13, 94.14, 94.99


1582
 
6-17-96
 
T.S.O., Table X


1584
 
7-1-96
 
T.S.O., Table X


1585
 
7-1-96
 
T.S.O., Table IX


1588
 
8-19-96
 
T.S.O., Table X


1589
 
8-19-96
 
T.S.O., Table X


1592
 
9-16-96
 
T.S.O., Table X


1593
 
10-7-96
 
T.S.O., Table X


1594
 
10-21-96
 
T.S.O., Table X


1595
 
11-4-96
 
150.20, 150.21, 150.22, 150.23, 150.24, 150.25, 150.26, 150.27, 150.28


1597
 
11-18-96
 
T.S.O., Table II


1598
 
12-16-96
 
T.S.O., Table VII


1600
 
12-16-96
 
T.S.O., Table III


1601
 
12-16-96
 
T.S.O., Table III


1602
 
12-16-96
 
T.S.O., Table III


1605
 
12-16-96
 
T.S.O., Table X


1606
 
12-16-96
 
T.S.O., Table II


1608
 
1-20-97
 
T.S.O., Table VII


1609
 
2-18-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1610
 
2-18-97
 
T.S.O., Table X


1612
 
2-18-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1613
 
2-18-97
 
T.S.O., Table X


1614
 
2-18-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1615
 
2-18-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1616
 
2-18-97
 
T.S.O., Table X


1617
 
2-18-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1618
 
2-18-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1619
 
2-18-97
 
T.S.O., Table X


1620
 
2-18-97
 
T.S.O., Table X


1621
 
3-17-97
 
T.S.O., Table IV


1622
 
3-17-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1623
 
4-7-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1624
 
4-7-97
 
T.S.O., Table X


1625
 
4-7-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1626
 
4-7-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1627
 
4-7-97
 
T.S.O., Table X


1628
 
4-7-97
 
T.S.O., Table IX


1629
 
4-21-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1630
 
4-21-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1632
 
5-5-97
 
T.S.O., Table X


1633
 
5-19-97
 
T.S.O., Table X


1634
 
6-2-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1634A
 
6-16-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1635
 
6-16-97
 
T.S.O., Table X


1636
 
6-16-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1637
 
6-16-97
 
T.S.O., Table X


1638
 
7-7-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1639
 
7-7-97
 
T.S.O., Table X


1640
 
7-7-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1641
 
7-21-97
 
36.01 - 36.14


1643
 
8-4-97
 
T.S.O., Table X


1644
 
8-4-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1645
 
8-4-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1646
 
8-4-97
 
T.S.O., Table X


1647
 
8-18-97
 
T.S.O., Table X


1648
 
9-8-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1649
 
9-8-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1650
 
9-8-97
 
T.S.O., Table X


1651
 
9-8-97
 
T.S.O., Table X


1652
 
9-8-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1653
 
9-8-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1654
 
9-8-97
 
T.S.O., Table X


1655
 
9-8-97
 
T.S.O., Table X


1659
 
10-20-97
 
T.S.O., Table VII


1661
 
10-20-97
 
51.066


1662
 
10-20-97
 
96.02


1663
 
10-20-97
 
T.S.O., Table X


1664
 
11-3-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1665
 
11-3-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1666
 
11-3-97
 
T.S.O., Table X


1667
 
11-3-97
 
T.S.O., Table IX


1668
 
11-3-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1669
 
11-3-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1670
 
11-3-97
 
T.S.O., Table X


1671
 
11-17-97
 
T.S.O., Table X


1675
 
12-15-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1676
 
12-15-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1677
 
12-15-97
 
T.S.O., Table II


1678
 
1-5-98
 
T.S.O., Table II


1679
 
1-5-98
 
T.S.O., Table II


1680
 
1-20-98
 
51.026, 51.116, 51.135


1681
 
1-20-98
 
Rescinded by Ord. 1694


1682
 
1-20-98
 
T.S.O., Table X


1683
 
1-20-98
 
T.S.O., Table X


1684
 
1-20-98
 
T.S.O., Table X


1685
 
1-20-98
 
153.22, 153.24


1686
 
2-2-98
 
Ch. 70, Schs. I - IV


1687
 
2-2-98
 
T.S.O., Table II


1688
 
2-2-98
 
T.S.O., Table II


1689
 
2-2-98
 
T.S.O., Table X


1690
 
3-16-98
 
T.S.O., Table II


1691
 
2-16-98
 
T.S.O., Table II


1692
 
3-16-98
 
T.S.O., Table X


1693
 
4-6-98
 
T.S.O., Table VI


1694
 
4-6-98
 
Rescinding Ords. 990, 1641 (Ch. 36) and 1681


1695
 
4-6-98
 
T.S.O., Table II


1696
 
4-6-98
 
T.S.O., Table II


1697
 
4-6-98
 
T.S.O., Table X


1698
 
4-6-98
 
T.S.O., Table II


1699
 
4-6-98
 
T.S.O., Table II


1700
 
4-6-98
 
T.S.O., Table II


1701
 
4-6-98
 
T.S.O., Table X


1702
 
6-1-98
 
92.02, 92.03, 92.05, 92.06, 92.08, 92.11, 92.12


1703
 
6-1-98
 
113.18, 113.20, 113.41, 113.56, 113.62, 113.79, 113.81, 113.93


1704
 
6-1-98
 
T.S.O., Table VII


1705
 
6-15-98
 
T.S.O., Table X


1706
 
7-6-98
 
T.S.O., Table VI


1707
 
7-6-98
 
T.S.O., Table X


1708
 
7-20-98
 
Ch. 70, Sch. I


1710
 
8-3-98
 
T.S.O., Table X


1711
 
8-17-98
 
T.S.O., Table XI


1712
 
8-17-98
 
T.S.O., Table X


1713
 
9-8-98
 
Ch. 70, Sch. V; Ch. 71, Sch. I


1714
 
9-8-98
 
T.S.O., Table II


1715
 
10-5-98
 
T.S.O., Table X


1716
 
10-5-98
 
T.S.O., Table X


1717
 
10-5-98
 
T.S.O., Table II


1718
 
11-2-98
 
T.S.O., Table X


1719
 
11-2-98
 
T.S.O., Table X


1720
 
11-2-98
 
T.S.O., Table X


1721
 
12-21-98
 
155.01


1722
 
12-7-98
 
T.S.O., Table X


1723
 
12-7-98
 
T.S.O., Table IX


1727
 
12-21-98
 
T.S.O., Table X


1728
 
1-4-99
 
T.S.O., Table X


1729
 
1-4-99
 
155.01


1730
 
2-16-99
 
T.S.O., Table VI


1732
 
3-1-99
 
T.S.O., Table II


1733
 
3-15-99
 
T.S.O., Table II


1734
 
3-15-99
 
T.S.O., Table II


1735
 
3-15-99
 
T.S.O., Table X


1736
 
4-5-98
 
131.32, 131.99, 132.01, 132.06, 132.07, 132.23, 132.99, 136.05, 136.06,
136.07, 136.99


1737
 
4-5-99
 
T.S.O., Table IV


1738
 
4-5-99
 
T.S.O., Table IV


1739
 
4-19-99
 
72.99


1740
 
4-19-99
 
T.S.O., Table X


1741
 
5-3-99
 
T.S.O., Table VII


1742
 
5-3-99
 
T.S.O., Table X


1743
 
6-7-99
 
T.S.O., Table X


1744
 
6-7-99
 
Ch. 70, Sch. III


1746
 
7-6-99
 
T.S.O., Table II


1747
 
7-6-99
 
T.S.O., Table II


1748
 
7-6-99
 
T.S.O., Table X


1750
 
7-19-99
 
T.S.O., Table X


1751
 
7-19-99
 
T.S.O., Table X


1752
 
7-19-99
 
T.S.O., Table X


1753
 
8-2-99
 
T.S.O., Table X


1754
 
8-2-99
 
T.S.O., Table II


1756
 
9-7-99
 
T.S.O., Table X


1757
 
9-7-99
 
T.S.O., Table V


1758
 
10-4-99
 
T.S.O., Table X


1759
 
10-4-99
 
T.S.O., Table II


1760
 
10-4-99
 
T.S.O., Table X


1761
 
10-18-99
 
T.S.O., Table X


1762
 
11-1-99
 
T.S.O., Table X


1763
 
11-1-99
 
T.S.O., Table X


1767
 
12-6-99
 
Ch. 70, Sch. I


1768
 
12-6-99
 
T.S.O., Table IV


1769
 
12-6-99
 
T.S.O., Table XI


1770
 
12-20-99
 
T.S.O., Table VII


1771
 
12-20-99
 
T.S.O., Table X


1772
 
12-20-99
 
T.S.O., Table X


1773
 
1-3-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1774
 
1-8-00
 
Ch. 70, Schs. I, II, III


1775
 
1-18-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1776
 
1-18-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1777
 
1-18-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1780
 
2-7-00
 
T.S.O., Table  II


1781
 
2-7-00
 
T.S.O., Table II


1782
 
2-7-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1783
 
2-7-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1784
 
3-6-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1785
 
3-6-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1786
 
3-20-00
 
T.S.O., Table II


1787
 
3-20-00
 
T.S.O., Table II


1788
 
3-20-00
 
T.S.O., Table II


1789
 
3-20-00
 
T.S.O., Table II


1790
 
3-20-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1791
 
3-20-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1792
 
4-3-00
 
35.06


1793
 
4-3-00
 
51.019


1794
 
4-3-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1795
 
4-17-00
 
73.01 - 73.08


1797
 
4-17-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1799
 
5-1-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1800
 
5-15-00
 
T.S.O., Table II


1801
 
5-15-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1802
 
5-15-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1803
 
5-15-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1804
 
5-15-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1805
 
5-15-00
 
113.20


1806
 
6-5-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1807
 
6-19-00
 
T.S.O., Table IV


1808
 
6-19-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1809
 
6-19-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1810
 
7-3-00
 
T.S.O., Table IX


1811
 
7-3-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1813
 
7-3-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1815
 
7-17-00
 
94.25


1816
 
7-17-00
 
115.14


1817
 
7-17-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1818
 
8-7-00
 
159.01 - 159.05, 159.15 - 159.23, 159.35


1819
 
8-7-00
 
32.068


1820
 
8-7-00
 
155.01


1821
 
8-7-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1822
 
9-5-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1823
 
9-5-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1824
 
9-5-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1825
 
10-2-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1826
 
10-2-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1827
 
10-16-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1829
 
11-6-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1830
 
11-6-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1831
 
11-20-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1834
 
12-18-00
 
T.S.O., Table II


1835
 
12-18-00
 
T.S.O., Table II


1836
 
12-18-00
 
T.S.O., Table II


1837
 
12-18-00
 
T.S.O., Table II


1838
 
12-18-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1839
 
12-18-00
 
T.S.O., Table X


1840
 
1-16-01
 
T.S.O., Table X


1841
 
1-16-01
 
T.S.O., Table X


1842
 
1-16-01
 
T.S.O., Table X


1843
 
1-16-01
 
T.S.O., Table X


1845
 
2-5-01
 
T.S.O., Table X


1846
 
3-5-01
 
T.S.O., Table X


1847
 
4-2-01
 
T.S.O., Table X


1849
 
4-30-01
 
T.S.O., Table X


1850
 
4-30-01
 
T.S.O., Table X


1852
 
5-7-01
 
Ch. 70, Schs. I, II


1853
 
5-21-01
 
T.S.O., Table II


1854
 
5-21-01
 
T.S.O., Table II


1856
 
5-21-01
 
T.S.O., Table X


1857
 
5-21-01
 
T.S.O., Table X


1858
 
5-21-01
 
T.S.O., Table X


1859
 
5-21-01
 
T.S.O., Table IX


1860
 
6-4-01
 
51.026, 51.116


1861
 
6-4-01
 
T.S.O., Table X


1865
 
7-16-01
 
T.S.O., Table X


1866
 
7-16-01
 
T.S.O., Table X


1867
 
7-16-01
 
T.S.O., Table X


1868
 
7-16-01
 
T.S.O., Table X


1869
 
8-20-01
 
T.S.O., Table X


1870
 
9-4-01
 
150.41


1871
 
9-4-01
 
Ch. 70, Schs. I - III, V


1872
 
9-17-01
 
156.01


1874
 
10-15-01
 
T.S.O., Table X


1877
 
1-7-02
 
150.20 - 150.29


1878
 
1-7-02
 
T.S.O., Table VII


1879
 
1-7-02
 
72.04, 72.05


1880
 
1-22-02
 
Ch. 70, Sch. V


1881
 
2-4-02
 
T.S.O., Table III


1882
 
2-4-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1883
 
2-19-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1884
 
3-18-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1885
 
3-18-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1886
 
4-15-02
 
Chapter 70, Schs. I, II


1887
 
4-15-01
 
156.01


1888
 
4-15-02
 
156.01


1889
 
4-15-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1890
 
5-6-02
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I


1891
 
5-6-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1892
 
5-6-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1893
 
5-6-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1894
 
5-6-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1895
 
5-20-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1896
 
5-20-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1898
 
6-3-02
 
51.135


1899
 
6-3-02
 
111.07


1900
 
6-17-02
 
113.20, 113.81


1901
 
6-17-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1902
 
6-17-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1904
 
8-1-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1905
 
7-1-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1906
 
7-15-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1909
 
8-5-02
 
T.S.O., Table II


1911
 
8-5-02
 
T.S.O., Table II


1913
 
8-5-02
 
T.S.O., Table II


1915
 
8-30-02
 
T.S.O., Table II


1917
 
8-5-02
 
T.S.O., Table II


1918
 
8-5-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1919
 
8-5-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1920
 
8-5-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1921
 
8-5-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1922
 
8-5-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1923
 
8-5-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1925
 
8-19-02
 
T.S.O., Table II


1926
 
8-19-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1927
 
8-19-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1928
 
8-19-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1929
 
9-3-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1930
 
9-16-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1931
 
9-16-02
 
T.S.O., Table IX


1932
 
10-7-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1933
 
10-7-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1934
 
10-7-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1935
 
10-21-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1936
 
10-21-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1938
 
11-4-02
 
T.S.O., Table II


1939
 
11-18-02
 
T.S.O., Table X


1941
 
12-2-02
 
T.S.O., Table III


1942
 
12-2-02
 
T.S.O., Table III


1943
 
12-2-02
 
50.99, 51.999, 72.99, 90.99, 91.99, 92.99, 93.99, 94.99, 95.99, 96.15, 96.99,
97.99, 98.99, 110.99, 111.99, 112.99, 113.99, 114.99, 115.99, 116.99, 130.99,
131.99, 132.99, 133.99, 134.99, 135.99, 136.99, 137.99, 150.99, 153.99,
154.99, 158.99


1944
 
12-2-02
 
70.01 - 70.03, Ch. 71, Schs. I - VI


1945
 
12-16-02
 
155.01


1946
 
12-16-02
 
T.S.O. X


1947
 
12-16-02
 
T.S.O. X


1948
 
1-21-03
 
T.S.O. X


1949
 
2-3-03
 
T.S.O. X


1951
 
3-3-03
 
150.40


1952
 
3-3-03
 
T.S.O. II


1953
 
3-3-03
 
T.S.O. II


1954
 
3-3-03
 
T.S.O. X


1955
 
3-3-03
 
T.S.O. X


1956
 
3-17-03
 
T.S.O. IV


1957
 
3-17-03
 
T.S.O. X


1958
 
3-17-03
 
T.S.O. X


1959
 
3-17-03
 
T.S.O. X


1960
 
4-7-03
 
70.03, Ch. 71, Sch. I, Sch. II, Sch. III


1963
 
4-7-03
 
T.S.O. X


1964
 
4-7-03
 
T.S.O. X


1965
 
4-7-03
 
T.S.O. X


1966
 
4-28-03
 
T.S.O. II


1967
 
4-28-03
 
T.S.O. II


1968
 
4-28-03
 
T.S.O. II


1969
 
4-28-03
 
T.S.O. II


1970
 
4-28-03
 
T.S.O. X


1971
 
4-28-03
 
T.S.O. X


1972
 
5-19-03
 
T.S.O. X


1974
 
6-2-03
 
T.S.O. X


1975
 
6-2-03
 
T.S.O. X


1976
 
6-16-03
 
T.S.O. II


1977
 
6-16-03
 
T.S.O. II


1978
 
6-16-03
 
T.S.O. II


1979
 
6-16-03
 
T.S.O. II


1980
 
6-16-03
 
T.S.O. X


1981
 
6-16-03
 
T.S.O. X


1982
 
6-16-03
 
T.S.O. X


1983
 
6-16-03
 
T.S.O. II


1984
 
6-16-03
 
T.S.O. X


1985
 
6-16-03
 
T.S.O. X


1986
 
6-16-03
 
T.S.O. X


1987
 
6-16-03
 
T.S.O. X


1989
 
7-7-03
 
T.S.O. VII


1993
 
7-7-03
 
131.33, 131.99


1994
 
7-7-03
 
T.S.O. X


1995
 
7-7-03
 
T.S.O. X


1996
 
7-7-03
 
T.S.O. X


1997
 
7-7-03
 
T.S.O. X


1998
 
7-7-03
 
T.S.O. X


1999
 
7-21-03
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I


2000
 
7-21-03
 
T.S.O. X


2001
 
7-21-03
 
T.S.O. X


2002
 
7-21-03
 
T.S.O. X


2003
 
7-21-03
 
T.S.O. X


2004
 
8-4-03
 
131.34, 131.99


2005
 
8-4-03
 
51.026


2006
 
8-4-03
 
T.S.O. X


2007
 
8-4-03
 
T.S.O. X


2008
 
8-4-03
 
T.S.O. X


2009
 
8-18-03
 
T.S.O. X


2010
 
8-18-03
 
T.S.O. X


2011
 
9-2-03
 
T.S.O. II


2012
 
9-2-03
 
T.S.O. II


2013
 
9-2-03
 
T.S.O. X


2014
 
9-2-03
 
T.S.O. II


2015
 
9-2-03
 
T.S.O. II


2016
 
9-2-03
 
T.S.O. X


2017
 
9-2-03
 
T.S.O. II


2018
 
9-2-03
 
T.S.O. II


2019
 
9-2-03
 
T.S.O. X


2020
 
9-2-03
 
T.S.O. II


2021
 
9-2-03
 
T.S.O. II


2022
 
9-2-03
 
T.S.O. X


2023
 
9-15-03
 
T.S.O. II


2024
 
9-15-03
 
T.S.O. II


2025
 
9-15-03
 
T.S.O. X


2026
 
9-15-03
 
T.S.O. II


2027
 
9-15-03
 
T.S.O. II


2028
 
9-15-03
 
T.S.O. X


2029
 
9-15-03
 
T.S.O. X


2030
 
10-6-03
 
T.S.O. IV


2031
 
10-6-03
 
T.S.O. V


2032
 
10-6-03
 
T.S.O. X


2033
 
10-6-03
 
T.S.O. X


2034
 
11-3-03
 
T.S.O. X


2035
 
11-17-03
 
T.S.O. X


2037
 
12-15-03
 
T.S.O. III


2038
 
12-15-03
 
T.S.O. III


2039
 
12-15-03
 
T.S.O. X


2040
 
12-15-03
 
T.S.O. X


2041
 
12-15-03
 
T.S.O. X


2042
 
12-15-03
 
T.S.O. X


2043
 
1-5-04
 
70.03, Ch. 71, Schs. I - III


2044
 
1-20-04
 
T.S.O. X


2045
 
1-20-04
 
T.S.O. X


2046
 
1-20-04
 
T.S.O. X


2047
 
1-20-04
 
T.S.O. X


2048
 
2-2-04
 
Ch. 71, Schs. I - III


2049
 
2-2-04
 
T.S.O. X


2050
 
2-2-04
 
T.S.O. X


2051
 
2-17-04
 
T.S.O. II


2052
 
2-17-04
 
T.S.O. II


2053
 
2-17-04
 
T.S.O. II


2055
 
2-17-04
 
T.S.O. X


2056
 
2-17-04
 
T.S.O. X


2057
 
2-17-04
 
T.S.O. X


2058
 
2-3-04
 
Ch. 71, Schs. I, II


2060
 
3-2-04
 
T.S.O. X


2061
 
3-2-04
 
T.S.O. X


2062
 
3-2-04
 
T.S.O. X


2063
 
3-2-04
 
T.S.O. X


2064
 
3-15-04
 
T.S.O. IX


2065
 
4-5-04
 
T.S.O. X


2066
 
4-19-04
 
33.040 - 33.048, 33.999


2067
 
5-3-04
 
T.S.O. II


2068
 
5-3-04
 
T.S.O. II


2069
 
5-3-04
 
T.S.O. X


2070
 
5-3-04
 
T.S.O. II


2071
 
5-3-04
 
T.S.O. II


2072
 
5-3-04
 
T.S.O. X


2073
 
5-3-04
 
T.S.O. X


2074
 
5-3-04
 
T.S.O. X


2075
 
5-3-04
 
T.S.O. X


2076
 
5-17-04
 
113.20


2077
 
5-17-04
 
34.05


2078
 
5-17-04
 
T.S.O. II


2079
 
5-17-04
 
T.S.O. II


2080
 
5-17-04
 
T.S.O. X


2081
 
5-17-04
 
70.03, Ch. 71, Sch. III


2082
 
5-17-04
 
T.S.O. X


2083
 
5-17-04
 
T.S.O. X


2084
 
5-17-04
 
T.S.O. X


2086
 
6-7-04
 
T.S.O. X


2087
 
6-7-04
 
T.S.O. X


2088
 
6-7-04
 
T.S.O. X


2089
 
6-21-04
 
113.20


2090
 
6-21-04
 
T.S.O. X


2091
 
7-6-04
 
155.01


2092
 
7-6-04
 
T.S.O. X


2094
 
7-19-04
 
T.S.O. II


2095
 
7-19-04
 
T.S.O. II


2096
 
7-19-04
 
T.S.O. X


2097
 
7-19-04
 
T.S.O. II


2098
 
7-19-04
 
T.S.O. II


2099
 
7-19-04
 
T.S.O. X


2100
 
7-19-04
 
T.S.O. II


2101
 
7-19-04
 
T.S.O. II


2102
 
7-19-04
 
T.S.O. X


2103
 
7-19-04
 
74.01


2104
 
7-19-04
 
T.S.O. X


2105
 
7-19-04
 
T.S.O. X


2106
 
7-19-04
 
T.S.O. X


2107
 
7-19-04
 
T.S.O. X


2108
 
7-19-04
 
T.S.O. X


2109
 
7-19-04
 
T.S.O. X


2110
 
7-19-04
 
T.S.O. X


2111
 
7-19-04
 
T.S.O. X


2113
 
8-16-04
 
T.S.O. X


2114
 
9-7-04
 
T.S.O. X


2115
 
9-7-04
 
T.S.O. X


2116
 
9-7-04
 
T.S.O. X


2117
 
9-20-04
 
Ch. 71, Schs. I - III


2118
 
9-20-04
 
T.S.O. X


2119
 
9-20-04
 
T.S.O. X


2120
 
10-4-04
 
Ch. 71, Schs. I, II


2121
 
10-4-04
 
T.S.O. X


2122
 
10-4-04
 
T.S.O. X


2123
 
10-18-04
 
113.20


2124
 
10-18-04
 
T.S.O. X


2125
 
10-18-04
 
T.S.O. X


2126
 
10-18-04
 
T.S.O. X


2127
 
11-1-04
 
70.03, Ch. 71, Schs. I - III


2128
 
11-15-04
 
150.22


2129
 
11-15-04
 
T.S.O. X


2130
 
11-15-04
 
T.S.O. X


2134
 
12-6-04
 
T.S.O. X


2135
 
12-20-04
 
T.S.O. X


2136
 
12-20-04
 
T.S.O. II


2137
 
12-20-04
 
T.S.O. II


2138
 
12-20-04
 
T.S.O. X


2139
 
12-20-04
 
T.S.O. II


2140
 
12-20-04
 
T.S.O. X


2141
 
12-20-04
 
T.S.O. II


2142
 
12-20-04
 
T.S.O. II


2143
 
12-20-04
 
T.S.O. X


2144
 
12-20-04
 
Ch. 71, Sch. V


2146
 
12-20-04
 
T.S.O. X


2147
 
12-20-04
 
T.S.O. X


2148
 
1-18-05
 
T.S.O. III


2149
 
1-18-05
 
T.S.O. X


2150
 
2-7-05
 
T.S.O. III


2151
 
2-22-05
 
T.S.O. IV


2152
 
2-22-05
 
T.S.O. X


2153
 
2-22-05
 
T.S.O. X


2154
 
2-22-05
 
T.S.O. X


2155
 
2-22-05
 
T.S.O. X


2156
 
2-22-05
 
T.S.O. X


2157
 
4-4-05
 
T.S.O. X


2158
 
4-4-05
 
T.S.O. X


2159
 
4-18-05
 
T.S.O. VII


2160
 
5-16-05
 
T.S.O. X


2161
 
5-16-05
 
T.S.O. X


2162
 
5-16-05
 
T.S.O. X


2163
 
5-16-05
 
T.S.O. X


2164
 
6-6-05
 
T.S.O. III


2165
 
6-6-05
 
T.S.O. III


2166
 
6-6-05
 
T.S.O. X


2167
 
6-20-05
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I


2169
 
6-20-05
 
T.S.O. III


2170
 
6-20-05
 
T.S.O. III


2171
 
6-20-05
 
T.S.O. X


2172
 
7-5-05
 
153.03 - 153.05, 153.15 - 153.20, 153.30 - 153.39, 153.99


2173
 
7-5-05
 
T.S.O. X


2174
 
7-5-05
 
156.01


2175
 
7-18-05
 
T.S.O. VII


2177
 
7-18-05
 
T.S.O. X


2178
 
7-18-05
 
T.S.O. X


2179
 
8-1-05
 
T.S.O. III


2180
 
8-1-05
 
T.S.O. III


2181
 
8-1-05
 
T.S.O. X


2182
 
8-15-05
 
T.S.O. III


2183
 
8-15-05
 
T.S.O. III


2184
 
8-15-05
 
T.S.O. X


2185
 
8-15-05
 
T.S.O. X


2186
 
8-15-05
 
T.S.O. X


2187
 
8-5-05
 
T.S.O. X


2188
 
8-15-05
 
T.S.O. III


2189
 
8-15-05
 
T.S.O. X


2190
 
8-15-05
 
T.S.O. X


2191
 
9-6-05
 
113.20


2193
 
9-6-05
 
70.03, Ch. 71, Schs. I - V


2195
 
9-6-05
 
T.S.O. III


2196
 
9-6-05
 
T.S.O. III


2197
 
9-6-05
 
T.S.O. X


2198
 
9-6-05
 
T.S.O. X


2199
 
9-19-05
 
70.03, Ch. 71, Schs. I - III


2200
 
9-19-05
 
T.S.O. III


2201
 
9-19-05
 
T.S.O. III


2202
 
9-19-05
 
T.S.O. X


2203
 
9-19-05
 
T.S.O. III


2204
 
9-19-05
 
T.S.O. III


2205
 
9-19-05
 
T.S.O. X


2207
 
9-19-05
 
T.S.O. X


2208
 
9-19-05
 
T.S.O. X


2209
 
9-19-05
 
T.S.O. X


2210
 
9-19-05
 
T.S.O. X


2212
 
9-19-05
 
T.S.O. X


2213
 
10-3-05
 
T.S.O. III


2214
 
10-3-05
 
T.S.O. III


2215
 
10-3-05
 
T.S.O. III


2216
 
10-3-05
 
T.S.O. III


2217
 
10-3-05
 
T.S.O. III


2218
 
10-3-05
 
T.S.O. III


2219
 
10-3-05
 
T.S.O. III


2220
 
10-3-05
 
T.S.O. III


2221
 
10-3-05
 
T.S.O. III


2222
 
10-17-05
 
T.S.O. IV


2223
 
10-17-05
 
T.S.O. IV


2224
 
10-17-05
 
Ch. 71, Schs. I, VI


2225
 
10-17-05
 
T.S.O. X


2226
 
10-17-05
 
T.S.O. X


2227
 
10-17-05
 
T.S.O. X


2228
 
10-17-05
 
T.S.O. X


2229
 
10-17-05
 
T.S.O. X


2230
 
10-17-05
 
156.01


2231
 
11-7-05
 
T.S.O. III


2232
 
11-7-05
 
T.S.O. III


2233
 
11-7-05
 
T.S.O. X


2234
 
11-7-05
 
T.S.O. III


2235
 
11-7-05
 
T.S.O. III


2236
 
11-7-05
 
T.S.O. X


2237
 
11-7-05
 
T.S.O. X


2238
 
11-7-05
 
T.S.O. X


2239
 
11-21-05
 
T.S.O. X


2240
 
11-21-05
 
156.01


2241
 
11-21-05
 
T.S.O. X


2242
 
11-21-05
 
T.S.O. X


2243
 
11-21-05
 
151.001 - 151.007, 151.020 - 151.025, 151.040 - 151.044, 151.060 - 151.064,
151.075 - 151.080, 151.100 - 151.102


2246
 
12-5-05
 
117.01 - 117.09, 117.99, App. A


2247
 
12-5-05
 
156.01


2249
 
12-19-05
 
T.S.O. III


2250
 
12-19-05
 
T.S.O. III


2251
 
12-19-05
 
T.S.O. X


2252
 
12-19-05
 
T.S.O. III


2253
 
12-19-05
 
T.S.O. III


2254
 
12-19-05
 
T.S.O. III


2255
 
12-19-05
 
T.S.O. III


2256
 
12-19-05
 
T.S.O. X


2260
 
1-9-06
 
Ch. 71, Schs. I, VI


2262
 
1-9-06
 
34.05


2264
 
1-23-06
 
50.07


2265
 
2-21-06
 
153.03 - 153.05, 153.15 - 153.20,


 
 
 
 
153.30 - 153.39, 153.50 - 153.61,  153.99


2266
 
2-21-06
 
T.S.O. X


2267
 
2-21-06
 
T.S.O. X


2268
 
3-6-06
 
T.S.O. X


2269
 
3-6-06
 
T.S.O. X


2270
 
3-20-06
 
T.S.O. X


2271
 
3-20-06
 
T.S.O. X


2272
 
3-20-06
 
158.07, Ch. 158, App. C, D


2273
 
4-3-06
 
72.06


2274
 
4-3-06
 
113.02, 113.16 - 113.18, 113.20, 113.21, 113.36, 113.37


2275
 
4-3-06
 
113.03, 113.04


2276
 
4-3-06
 
72.07


2277
 
4-3-06
 
72.08


2278
 
4-3-06
 
T.S.O. X


2279
 
4-3-06
 
T.S.O. X


2280
 
4-24-06
 
T.S.O. X


2281
 
4-24-06
 
T.S.O. X


2282
 
4-24-06
 
T.S.O. X


2283
 
4-24-06
 
T.S.O. X


2284
 
5-1-06
 
T.S.O. X


2286
 
6-5-06
 
99.01 - 99.06, 99.99


2287
 
6-5-06
 
T.S.O. IV


2288
 
6-5-06
 
T.S.O. II


2289
 
6-5-06
 
T.S.O. II


2290
 
6-5-06
 
T.S.O. X


2293
 
6-5-06
 
113.20


2294
 
6-19-06
 
Ch. 71, Schs. I, II


2295
 
6-19-06
 
155.01


2296
 
6-19-06
 
T.S.O. X


2297
 
6-19-06
 
T.S.O. II


2298
 
6-19-06
 
T.S.O. II


2299
 
6-19-06
 
T.S.O. X


2301
 
7-3-06
 
T.S.O. IV


2302
 
7-3-06
 
T.S.O. X


2303
 
7-17-06
 
T.S.O. X


2304
 
7-17-06
 
T.S.O. X


2305
 
7-17-06
 
T.S.O. X


2306
 
8-7-06
 
T.S.O. X


2307
 
8-7-06
 
T.S.O. X


2308
 
8-7-06
 
T.S.O. X


2309
 
8-7-06
 
T.S.O. IV


2310
 
8-21-06
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I


2311
 
8-21-06
 
T.S.O. IV


2312
 
8-21-06
 
156.01


2313
 
8-21-06
 
156.01


2314
 
8-21-06
 
T.S.O. X


2315
 
8-21-06
 
31.11


2316
 
9-5-06
 
T.S.O. X


2317
 
9-5-06
 
T.S.O. X


2319
 
9-18-06
 
70.03, Ch. 71, Sch. III


2320
 
9-18-06
 
T.S.O. VII


2321
 
9-18-06
 
T.S.O. VII


2322
 
9-18-06
 
T.S.O. X


2323
 
10-2-06
 
T.S.O. X


2324
 
10-2-06
 
T.S.O. X


2325
 
10-16-06
 
T.S.O. II


2326
 
10-16-06
 
T.S.O. II


2327
 
10-16-06
 
T.S.O. II


2328
 
10-16-06
 
T.S.O. X


2329
 
10-16-06
 
T.S.O. X


2330
 
11-6-06
 
T.S.O. X


2331
 
11-6-06
 
T.S.O. X


2332
 
11-6-06
 
T.S.O. X


2333
 
11-6-06
 
T.S.O. X


2334
 
11-6-06
 
73.03


2336
 
11-20-06
 
T.S.O. X


2337
 
11-20-06
 
T.S.O. X


2338
 
11-20-06
 
T.S.O. X


2340
 
12-18-06
 
Ch. 71, Schs. I, II


2341
 
12-18-06
 
158.01 - 158.07, 158.15, 158.25 - 158.31, 158.45, 158.46, 158.99, Ch. 158,
App. A - G


2342
 
12-18-06
 
156.01


2343
 
12-18-06
 
T.S.O. X


2347
 
1-8-07
 
Ch. 71, Schs. I, IV, V


2348
 
1-8-07
 
T.S.O. II


2349
 
1-8-07
 
T.S.O. II


2350
 
1-8-07
 
T.S.O. X


2351
 
1-8-07
 
T.S.O. X


2352
 
1-8-07
 
T.S.O. X


2353
 
1-22-07
 
T.S.O. IV


2354
 
1-22-07
 
T.S.O. X


2355
 
1-22-07
 
T.S.O. X


2356
 
1-22-07
 
T.S.O. X


2357
 
1-22-07
 
T.S.O. X


2359
 
2-5-07
 
T.S.O. IV


2360
 
2-5-07
 
156.01


2361
 
2-5-07
 
T.S.O. X


2363
 
2-20-07
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I


2364
 
3-5-07
 
T.S.O. II


2365
 
3-5-07
 
T.S.O. II


2366
 
3-5-07
 
T.S.O. X


2367
 
3-5-07
 
T.S.O. II


2368
 
3-5-07
 
T.S.O. II


2369
 
3-5-07
 
T.S.O. II


2370
 
3-5-07
 
T.S.O. II


2371
 
3-5-07
 
T.S.O. X


2372
 
3-5-07
 
T.S.O. X


2373
 
3-5-07
 
113.20


2374
 
3-5-07
 
T.S.O. II


2375
 
3-5-07
 
T.S.O. II


2377
 
4-2-07
 
T.S.O. II


2378
 
4-2-07
 
T.S.O. X


2379
 
4-2-07
 
T.S.O. X


2380
 
4-2-07
 
T.S.O. X


2381
 
4-2-07
 
T.S.O. X


2382
 
4-2-07
 
113.20


2383
 
4-2-07
 
T.S.O. X


2384
 
4-30-07
 
150.53


2386
 
4-30-07
 
Ch. 71, Schs. I, VII


2387
 
4-30-07
 
T.S.O. X


2388
 
4-30-07
 
T.S.O. X


2389
 
5-14-07
 
T.S.O. X


2390
 
5-14-07
 
T.S.O. X


2391
 
6-4-07
 
T.S.O. X


2392
 
6-18-07
 
155.01


2395
 
6-18-07
 
113.03, 113.18, 113.45


2396
 
7-2-07
 
T.S.O. X


2397
 
7-2-07
 
T.S.O. X


2398
 
7-16-07
 
T.S.O. II


2399
 
7-16-07
 
T.S.O. X


2400
 
7-16-07
 
T.S.O. X


2401
 
7-16-07
 
T.S.O. X


2402
 
7-16-07
 
T.S.O. X


2404
 
8-6-07
 
T.S.O. X


2405
 
8-6-07
 
T.S.O. X


2406
 
8-6-07
 
113.20


2407
 
9-4-07
 
T.S.O. II


2408
 
9-4-07
 
T.S.O. II


2409
 
9-4-07
 
T.S.O. X


2410
 
9-4-07
 
T.S.O. X


2411
 
9-4-07
 
T.S.O. X


2412
 
9-4-07
 
T.S.O. X


2414
 
9-17-07
 
92.01 - 92.21, 92.99


2415
 
9-17-07
 
94.11


2416
 
9-17-07
 
150.75


2417
 
9-17-07
 
150.20


2418
 
10-1-07
 
T.S.O. X


2419
 
10-15-07
 
T.S.O. X


2420
 
10-15-07
 
T.S.O. X


2421
 
11-5-07
 
T.S.O. X


2422
 
11-5-07
 
T.S.O. X


2423
 
11-5-07
 
T.S.O. X


2424
 
11-5-07
 
T.S.O. X


2425
 
11-5-07
 
T.S.O. X


2426
 
11-5-07
 
T.S.O. X


2428
 
11-19-07
 
70.03, Ch. 71, Sch. VI


2429
 
12-3-07
 
138.01 - 138.08, 138.99


2432
 
12-17-07
 
156.01


2433
 
12-17-07
 
T.S.O. X


2435
 
12-17-07
 
T.S.O. III


2436
 
12-17-07
 
T.S.O. III


2438
 
1-22-08
 
T.S.O. II


2439
 
1-22-08
 
T.S.O. X


2440
 
1-22-08
 
113.20


2441
 
2-19-08
 
75.01, 75.02, 75.99


2443
 
2-19-08
 
T.S.O. X


2444
 
2-19-08
 
T.S.O. X


2445
 
3-3-08
 
T.S.O. II


2446
 
3-3-08
 
T.S.O. X


2447
 
3-17-08
 
T.S.O. II


2448
 
3-17-08
 
T.S.O. II


2449
 
3-17-08
 
T.S.O. X


2450
 
4-7-08
 
T.S.O. X


2451
 
4-7-08
 
T.S.O. X


2452
 
4-7-08
 
T.S.O. X


2453
 
4-7-08
 
T.S.O. X


2454
 
4-7-08
 
T.S.O. X


2455
 
4-7-08
 
T.S.O. X


2456
 
4-7-08
 
T.S.O. X


2457
 
4-7-08
 
T.S.O. X


2458
 
4-28-08
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I, II


2459
 
4-28-08
 
T.S.O. X


2460
 
4-28-08
 
T.S.O. X


2461
 
4-28-08
 
T.S.O. X


2462
 
5-5-08
 
T.S.O. X


2463
 
5-19-08
 
T.S.O. X


2464
 
5-19-08
 
T.S.O. X


2465
 
5-19-08
 
T.S.O. X


2466
 
5-19-08
 
T.S.O. X


2467
 
5-19-08
 
T.S.O. X


2468
 
5-19-08
 
T.S.O. X


2469
 
5-19-08
 
T.S.O. X


2470
 
5-19-08
 
T.S.O. X


2471
 
5-19-08
 
T.S.O. X


2472
 
5-19-08
 
T.S.O. X


2475
 
6-2-08
 
T.S.O. X


2476
 
6-2-08
 
113.20


2477
 
6-2-08
 
T.S.O. X


2478
 
6-16-08
 
118.01 - 118.07, 118.20 - 118.22, 118.99


2479
 
6-16-08
 
52.01 - 52.03, 52.10 - 52.18, 52.30 - 52.37, 52.50 - 52.53, 52.99


2480
 
6-16-08
 
150.20


2481
 
6-16-08
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I, VI


2482
 
6-16-08
 
T.S.O. X


2483
 
6-16-08
 
T.S.O. X


2484
 
6-16-08
 
T.S.O. X


2485
 
6-16-08
 
T.S.O. X


2490
 
7-21-08
 
T.S.O. X


2491
 
7-21-08
 
T.S.O. X


2492
 
7-21-08
 
T.S.O. X


2493
 
7-21-08
 
T.S.O. X


2494
 
8-4-08
 
T.S.O. X


2495
 
8-4-08
 
156.01


2496
 
8-4-08
 
T.S.O. X


2498
 
8-18-08
 
72.09


2499
 
8-18-08
 
51.067


2500
 
8-18-08
 
96.03


2501
 
8-18-08
 
T.S.O. II


2502
 
8-18-08
 
T.S.O. II


2503
 
8-18-08
 
T.S.O. X


2504
 
8-18-08
 
T.S.O. X


2505
 
8-18-08
 
T.S.O. X


2506
 
8-18-08
 
T.S.O. X


2507
 
8-18-08
 
T.S.O. X


2508
 
9-2-08
 
T.S.O. X


2509
 
9-2-08
 
T.S.O. X


2510
 
9-2-08
 
T.S.O. X


2511
 
9-2-08
 
T.S.O. X


2512
 
9-2-08
 
T.S.O. IV


2513
 
9-15-08
 
150.30, 150.99


2514
 
9-15-08
 
T.S.O. X


2515
 
9-15-08
 
T.S.O. X


2516
 
9-15-08
 
113.20


2517
 
9-22-08
 
T.S.O. X


2518
 
9-22-08
 
T.S.O. X


2519
 
10-6-08
 
T.S.O. X


2520
 
10-6-08
 
T.S.O. X


2521
 
10-6-08
 
T.S.O. X


2522
 
10-6-08
 
T.S.O. IV


2523
 
10-20-08
 
72.10


2524
 
10-20-08
 
51.066


2525
 
10-20-08
 
96.02


2526
 
10-20-08
 
T.S.O. X


2527
 
11-3-08
 
T.S.O. X


2528
 
11-3-08
 
T.S.O. X


2529
 
11-3-08
 
T.S.O. X


2530
 
11-3-08
 
T.S.O. X


2531
 
11-3-08
 
T.S.O. X


2533
 
11-17-08
 
T.S.O. II


2534
 
11-17-08
 
T.S.O. II


2535
 
11-17-08
 
T.S.O. II


2536
 
11-17-08
 
T.S.O. X


2537
 
11-17-08
 
T.S.O. X


2538
 
11-17-08
 
T.S.O. X


2539
 
11-17-08
 
T.S.O. X


2540
 
11-17-08
 
T.S.O. X


2542
 
12-1-08
 
T.S.O. III


2543
 
12-1-08
 
T.S.O. III


2545
 
12-1-08
 
113.18, 113.36, 113.41


2546
 
12-1-08
 
T.S.O. II


2547
 
12-1-08
 
T.S.O. IV


2548
 
12-1-08
 
T.S.O. X


2549
 
12-1-08
 
T.S.O. X


2550
 
12-1-08
 
156.01


2551
 
12-15-08
 
T.S.O. III


2552
 
12-15-08
 
T.S.O. X


2553
 
12-15-08
 
T.S.O. X


2554
 
12-15-08
 
T.S.O. X


2557
 
1-20-09
 
T.S.O. X


2558
 
1-20-09
 
T.S.O. X


2559
 
1-20-09
 
T.S.O. X


2560
 
1-20-09
 
T.S.O. X


2561
 
1-20-09
 
T.S.O. X


2562
 
1-20-09
 
T.S.O. X


2563
 
1-20-09
 
T.S.O. X


2564
 
2-2-09
 
113.20


2565
 
2-17-09
 
T.S.O. II


2566
 
2-17-09
 
T.S.O. X


2567
 
2-17-09
 
T.S.O. X


2568
 
2-17-09
 
T.S.O. X


2570
 
3-16-09
 
51.004


2571
 
3-16-09
 
T.S.O. X


2572
 
3-16-09
 
T.S.O. X


2573
 
3-16-09
 
T.S.O. X


2574
 
3-16-09
 
T.S.O. X


2575
 
3-16-09
 
T.S.O. X


2576
 
3-16-09
 
T.S.O. X


2577
 
3-26-09
 
113.20


2578
 
4-6-09
 
T.S.O. II


2579
 
4-6-09
 
T.S.O. II


2580
 
4-6-09
 
T.S.O. X


2581
 
4-6-09
 
T.S.O. X


2582
 
4-6-09
 
T.S.O. X


2587
 
5-18-09
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VI


2588
 
5-18-09
 
T.S.O. II


2589
 
5-18-09
 
T.S.O. X


2590
 
5-18-09
 
T.S.O. X


2591
 
5-18-09
 
T.S.O. X


2592
 
6-1-09
 
150.41


2593
 
6-1-09
 
151.006, 151.007


2595
 
6-15-09
 
150.20 - 150.29, 150.40


2597
 
6-15-09
 
T.S.O. X


2598
 
7-20-09
 
119.01 - 119.16, 119.99


2600
 
7-20-09
 
T.S.O. X


2601
 
7-20-09
 
T.S.O. X


2602
 
7-20-09
 
T.S.O. X


2603
 
7-20-09
 
T.S.O. X


2604
 
7-20-09
 
113.20


2606
 
8-17-09
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VI


2607
 
8-17-09
 
T.S.O. IX


2608
 
8-17-09
 
T.S.O. X


2609
 
8-17-09
 
T.S.O. X


2610
 
8-17-09
 
T.S.O. X


2611
 
9-8-09
 
T.S.O. X


2612
 
9-8-09
 
T.S.O. X


2613
 
9-8-09
 
T.S.O. X


2614
 
9-21-09
 
T.S.O. X


2615
 
10-5-09
 
T.S.O. X


2616
 
10-5-09
 
T.S.O. X


2617
 
10-5-09
 
113.20


2619
 
10-19-09
 
T.S.O. X


2620
 
10-19-09
 
T.S.O. X


2621
 
11-2-09
 
T.S.O. X


2622
 
11-2-09
 
113.20


2624
 
11-16-09
 
T.S.O. X


2625
 
11-16-09
 
T.S.O. X


2626
 
11-16-09
 
156.01


2627
 
11-16-09
 
T.S.O. X


2628
 
11-16-09
 
T.S.O. X


2629
 
12-7-09
 
51.135


2631
 
12-7-09
 
T.S.O. III


2632
 
12-7-09
 
T.S.O. III


2637
 
2-16-10
 
150.24


2638
 
2-16-10
 
T.S.O. X


2639
 
3-2-10
 
T.S.O. X


2640
 
3-2-10
 
T.S.O. X


2641
 
3-2-10
 
157.01


2642
 
3-15-10
 
T.S.O. X


2643
 
3-15-10
 
156.01


2644
 
3-15-10
 
113.18, 113.20


2645
 
4-12-10
 
T.S.O. X


2646
 
4-12-10
 
T.S.O. X


2647
 
4-12-10
 
113.20


2649
 
4-26-10
 
Ch. 71, Schs. I, II, V, VI


2650
 
4-26-10
 
T.S.O. X


2651
 
5-3-10
 
T.S.O. X


2652
 
5-17-10
 
T.S.O. X


2653
 
5-17-10
 
T.S.O. X


2654
 
6-7-10
 
T.S.O. X


2655
 
6-21-10
 
T.S.O. X


2656
 
6-21-10
 
T.S.O. X


2657
 
6-21-10
 
T.S.O. X


2659
 
7-6-10
 
T.S.O. X


2660
 
7-6-10
 
T.S.O. X


2661
 
7-6-10
 
113.20


2663
 
11-1-10
 
70.04


2664
 
7-19-10
 
T.S.O. X


2665
 
7-19-10
 
T.S.O. X


2666
 
7-19-10
 
T.S.O. X


2667
 
7-19-10
 
T.S.O. X


2669
 
8-2-10
 
113.20


2670
 
8-16-10
 
T.S.O. X


2671
 
8-16-10
 
T.S.O. X


2672
 
9-7-10
 
T.S.O. X


2674
 
9-20-10
 
T.S.O. X


2675
 
9-20-10
 
T.S.O. X


2676
 
10-4-10
 
51.026


2677
 
10-18-10
 
Ch. 71, Schs. V, VI


2679
 
10-18-10
 
T.S.O. X


2680
 
11-1-10
 
T.S.O. IX


2681
 
11-1-10
 
135.05


2682
 
11-15-10
 
Ch. 71, Sch. III


2684
 
12-6-10
 
T.S.O. III


2685
 
12-6-10
 
T.S.O. III


2687
 
12-6-10
 
113.20


2688
 
12-20-10
 
T.S.O. X


2690
 
1-24-11
 
32.121


2691
 
1-24-11
 
151.005, 151.044, 151.078, 151.080


2692
 
2-7-11
 
T.S.O. X


2693
 
2-22-11
 
74.02


2694
 
2-22-11
 
132.08, 132.99


2696
 
2-22-11
 
115.40 - 115.42, 115.99


2697
 
2-22-11
 
50.99


2698
 
2-22-11
 
110.02, 110.03, 110.04, 110.05


2699
 
2-22-11
 
T.S.O. X


2700
 
2-22-11
 
Ch. 71, Sch. V


2701
 
3-8-11
 
53.01, 53.02, 53.99


2703
 
3-21-11
 
72.09


2704
 
3-21-11
 
51.067


2705
 
3-21-11
 
96.03


2706
 
3-21-11
 
T.S.O. X


2707
 
4-4-11
 
T.S.O. X


2708
 
4-4-11
 
T.S.O. X


2709
 
4-18-11
 
120.01 - 120.05, 120.99


2710
 
4-18-11
 
113.20.1, 113.21, 113.99


2711
 
4-18-11
 
T.S.O. X


2712
 
4-18-11
 
T.S.O. X


2713
 
4-18-11
 
T.S.O. X


2714
 
4-18-11
 
T.S.O. X


2715
 
4-18-11
 
T.S.O. X


2716
 
4-18-11
 
T.S.O. X


2717
 
5-16-11
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VI


2718
 
5-16-11
 
94.15, 94.16


2719
 
5-16-11
 
T.S.O. X


2720
 
5-16-11
 
T.S.O. X


2721
 
5-16-11
 
T.S.O. X


2722
 
5-16-11
 
113.20


2723
 
6-6-11
 
T.S.O. X


2724
 
6-6-11
 
T.S.O. X


2725
 
6-20-11
 
T.S.O. X


2726
 
6-20-11
 
113.18, 113.20, 113.99


2728
 
7-5-11
 
113.20


2730
 
7-18-11
 
T.S.O. V


2731
 
7-18-11
 
113.20


2732
 
8-8-11
 
T.S.O. III


2733
 
8-8-11
 
T.S.O. V


2734
 
8-8-11
 
T.S.O. X


2735
 
8-8-11
 
T.S.O. X


2736
 
8-8-11
 
T.S.O. X


2737
 
8-22-11
 
T.S.O. X


2738
 
8-22-11
 
T.S.O. X


2739
 
8-22-11
 
T.S.O. X


2740
 
9-6-11
 
T.S.O. X


2741
 
9-19-11
 
T.S.O. X


2743
 
10-3-11
 
132.20, 132.22


2744
 
10-3-11
 
T.S.O. X


2745
 
10-3-11
 
113.18, 113.20, 113.99


2746
 
10-17-11
 
T.S.O. IV


2747
 
10-17-11
 
T.S.O. II


2748
 
10-17-11
 
T.S.O. X


2749
 
10-17-11
 
T.S.O. X


2750
 
10-17-11
 
T.S.O. X


2751
 
10-17-11
 
113.20


2752
 
11-7-11
 
T.S.O. X


2753
 
11-21-11
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I


2756
 
12-5-11
 
T.S.O. III


2757
 
12-5-11
 
T.S.O. III


2759
 
12-5-11
 
T.S.O. VI


2761
 
12-19-11
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I


2762
 
1-9-12
 
113.20


2763
 
1-23-12
 
136.20 - 136.23, 136.99


2764
 
1-23-12
 
T.S.O. X


2766
 
2-21-12
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VI


2767
 
3-6-12
 
T.S.O. X


2771
 
4-30-12
 
73.01 - 73.08


2772
 
4-30-12
 
72.06


2773
 
4-30-12
 
72.01, 72.07


2774
 
5-21-12
 
32.105


2775
 
5-21-12
 
T.S.O. IV


2776
 
6-4-12
 
T.S.O. X


2777
 
6-4-12
 
T.S.O. X


2778
 
6-4-12
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I


2779
 
6-4-12
 
119.01 - 119.16, 119.99


2780
 
6-4-12
 
156.01


2781
 
6-4-12
 
T.S.O. X


2782
 
6-4-12
 
T.S.O. X


2783
 
6-18-12
 
T.S.O. X


2784
 
6-18-12
 
T.S.O. X


2785
 
6-18-12
 
T.S.O. X


2786
 
6-18-12
 
T.S.O. X


2787
 
6-18-12
 
T.S.O. X


2788
 
6-18-12
 
T.S.O. X


2791
 
7-23-12
 
T.S.O. X


2792
 
8-6-12
 
T.S.O. II


2793
 
8-6-12
 
T.S.O. II


2794
 
8-6-12
 
T.S.O. X


2795
 
8-6-12
 
T.S.O. X


2796
 
8-6-12
 
T.S.O. X


2797
 
8-20-12
 
32.121


2798
 
8-20-12
 
T.S.O. X


2799
 
8-20-12
 
T.S.O. X


2800
 
8-20-12
 
113.18, 113.20, 113.99


2801
 
8-20-12
 
113.20


2802
 
9-4-12
 
T.S.O. X


2804
 
10-1-12
 
T.S.O. X


2805
 
10-1-12
 
T.S.O. X


2806
 
10-1-12
 
T.S.O. X


2807
 
10-1-12
 
T.S.O. X


2808
 
10-1-12
 
113.20


2809
 
10-15-12
 
150.24


2811
 
10-15-12
 
T.S.O. X


2812
 
11-5-12
 
T.S.O. X


2813
 
11-5-12
 
T.S.O. X


2814
 
11-5-12
 
113.20


2815
 
11-19-12
 
T.S.O. X


2816
 
11-19-12
 
T.S.O. X


2817
 
11-19-12
 
T.S.O. X


2818
 
11-19-12
 
T.S.O. X


2820
 
12-3-12
 
T.S.O. III


2822
 
12-3-12
 
113.60


2823
 
12-17-12
 
T.S.O. X


2824
 
12-17-12
 
113.20


2825
 
1-7-13
 
T.S.O. IV


2826
 
1-7-13
 
113.18, 113.20, 113.36, 113.37


2827
 
1-7-13
 
113.20


2829
 
1-22-13
 
T.S.O. X


2830
 
1-22-13
 
113.20


2831
 
2-19-13
 
113.36


2833
 
3-18-13
 
T.S.O. X


2834
 
4-8-13
 
T.S.O. X


2835
 
4-8-13
 
T.S.O. X


2836
 
4-8-13
 
T.S.O. X


2837
 
4-8-13
 
T.S.O. X


2838
 
4-29-13
 
T.S.O. X


2839
 
4-29-13
 
156.01


2841
 
6-3-13
 
T.S.O. X


2842
 
6-3-13
 
T.S.O. X


2843
 
6-3-13
 
T.S.O. X


2844
 
6-3-13
 
T.S.O. X


2845
 
6-3-13
 
T.S.O. X


2846
 
6-17-13
 
T.S.O. X


2847
 
6-17-13
 
T.S.O. X


2848
 
7-8-13
 
T.S.O. VII


2850
 
7-22-13
 
72.06


2851
 
7-22-13
 
T.S.O. X


2852
 
7-22-13
 
T.S.O. X


2856
 
8-19-13
 
T.S.O. XI


2857
 
8-19-13
 
T.S.O. X


2858
 
8-19-13
 
T.S.O. II


2859
 
8-19-13
 
T.S.O. II


2860
 
8-19-13
 
T.S.O. X


2861
 
9-3-13
 
T.S.O. X


2862
 
9-3-13
 
T.S.O. X


2863
 
9-3-13
 
T.S.O. X


2864
 
9-3-13
 
113.20


2866
 
9-16-13
 
70.03, Ch. 71, Sch. III


2867
 
9-16-13
 
T.S.O. X


2868
 
9-16-13
 
T.S.O. X


2869
 
9-16-13
 
113.20


2871
 
10-7-13
 
T.S.O. X


2872
 
10-7-13
 
T.S.O. IX


2873
 
10-7-13
 
T.S.O. VIII


2874
 
10-21-13
 
115.25, 115.27, 115.30, 115.31


2875
 
10-21-13
 
113.18, 119.06.1


2877
 
11-4-13
 
T.S.O. X


2878
 
11-18-13
 
T.S.O. X


2879
 
11-18-13
 
113.18, 113.20


2884
 
12-16-13
 
T.S.O. X


2885
 
12-16-13
 
T.S.O. X


2886
 
12-16-13
 
113.20


2887
 
1-6-14
 
T.S.O. II


2888
 
1-6-14
 
119.06.02


2889
 
1-6-14
 
119.06.02


2890
 
1-21-14
 
36.01 - 36.05


2891
 
1-21-14
 
T.S.O. X


2892
 
1-21-14
 
113.20


2893
 
1-21-14
 
113.20


2894
 
2-3-14
 
156.01


2895
 
2-3-14
 
T.S.O. X


2896
 
2-18-14
 
113.20


2897
 
3-17-14
 
137.01, 137.05


2898
 
4-7-14
 
T.S.O. X


2899
 
4-7-14
 
T.S.O. X


2900
 
4-28-14
 
T.S.O. IV


2901
 
4-28-14
 
T.S.O. X


2902
 
4-28-14
 
T.S.O. X


2903
 
5-5-14
 
T.S.O. X


2904
 
5-5-14
 
156.01


2905
 
5-5-14
 
T.S.O. X


2906
 
5-19-14
 
T.S.O. X


2907
 
5-19-14
 
T.S.O. X


2908
 
6-2-14
 
T.S.O. X


2909
 
6-23-14
 
T.S.O. X


2923
 
7-7-14
 
T.S.O. II


2924
 
7-7-14
 
T.S.O. II


2925
 
7-7-14
 
T.S.O. X


2926
 
7-7-14
 
T.S.O. X


2927
 
7-7-14
 
T.S.O. X


2928
 
7-7-14
 
T.S.O. X


2929
 
7-21-14
 
70.03, Ch. 71, Sch. III


2930
 
7-21-14
 
150.20


2931
 
7-21-14
 
T.S.O. X


2932
 
7-21-14
 
113.20, 113.99


2933
 
8-18-14
 
T.S.O. IV


2934
 
8-18-14
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VI


2935
 
8-18-14
 
T.S.O. X


2936
 
9-2-14
 
119.08


2937
 
9-2-14
 
T.S.O. X


2938
 
9-2-14
 
T.S.O. X


2939
 
9-15-14
 
T.S.O. IV


2940
 
9-15-14
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VI


2941
 
9-15-14
 
T.S.O. X


2942
 
9-15-14
 
T.S.O. X


2945
 
10-6-14
 
T.S.O. X


2946
 
10-20-14
 
T.S.O. IV


2947
 
11-3-14
 
T.S.O. X


2948
 
11-3-14
 
113.20


2949
 
11-17-14
 
T.S.O. IV


2950
 
11-17-14
 
T.S.O. X


2951
 
11-17-14
 
T.S.O. X


2952
 
11-17-14
 
T.S.O. X


2955
 
12-1-14
 
115.26 - 115.31


2956
 
12-1-14
 
119.02


2957
 
12-1-14
 
156.01


2958
 
12-15-14
 
113.18, 113.18.1, 113.18.2


2959
 
1-5-15
 
113.20


2960
 
1-20-15
 
T.S.O. IV


2961
 
1-20-15
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VI


2962
 
1-20-15
 
119.06.2


2963
 
1-20-15
 
113.20


2964
 
3-16-15
 
T.S.O. IV


2965
 
3-16-15
 
T.S.O. X


2966
 
3-16-15
 
T.S.O. X


2967
 
3-16-15
 
T.S.O. X


2968
 
3-16-15
 
T.S.O. X


2970
 
5-18-15
 
T.S.O. IV


2971
 
5-18-15
 
Ch. 71, Sch. V


2972
 
6-1-15
 
T.S.O. X


2973
 
6-1-15
 
T.S.O. X


2974
 
6-15-15
 
T.S.O. X


2975
 
6-15-15
 
T.S.O. X


2977
 
7-6-15
 
T.S.O. X


2978
 
7-20-15
 
T.S.O. IV


2979
 
8-17-15
 
T.S.O. X


2980
 
9-8-15
 
T.S.O. X


2981
 
9-8-15
 
113.20


2982
 
9-21-15
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VI


2983
 
9-21-15
 
T.S.O. X


2984
 
9-21-15
 
T.S.O. X


2985
 
9-21-15
 
T.S.O. X


2986
 
10-5-15
 
T.S.O. X


2987
 
10-5-15
 
T.S.O. X


2988
 
10-5-15
 
T.S.O. X


2989
 
10-5-15
 
T.S.O. X


2990
 
10-5-15
 
T.S.O. X


2991
 
10-5-15
 
T.S.O. X


2992
 
10-5-15
 
T.S.O. X


2993
 
10-19-15
 
T.S.O. IV


2994
 
10-19-15
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II, VII


2995
 
10-19-15
 
T.S.O. VIII


2996
 
10-19-15
 
T.S.O. X


2997
 
10-19-15
 
T.S.O. X


2998
 
10-19-15
 
T.S.O. X


2999
 
10-19-15
 
T.S.O. X


3000
 
11-2-15
 
113.20


3001
 
11-16-15
 
T.S.O. IV


3004
 
12-7-15
 
T.S.O. X


3005
 
12-21-15
 
36.01 - 36.05


3006
 
12-21-15
 
119.02, 119.03, 119.06.1, 119.08, 119.10 - 119.12, 119.14


3007
 
12-21-15
 
T.S.O. X


3008
 
1-19-16
 
150.77, 150.99


3009
 
2-1-16
 
T.S.O. X


3010
 
2-1-16
 
T.S.O. X


3011
 
2-16-16
 
51.026


3012
 
2-16-16
 
T.S.O. X


3013
 
3-8-16
 
T.S.O. X


3014
 
3-8-16
 
T.S.O. X


3016
 
3-21-16
 
T.S.O. IV


3017
 
3-21-16
 
113.02, 113.18 - 113.18.2


3018
 
3-21-16
 
113.20


3019
 
4-4-16
 
T.S.O. X


3020
 
4-4-16
 
T.S.O. X


3021
 
4-4-16
 
T.S.O. X


3022
 
4-4-16
 
T.S.O. X


3023
 
4-4-16
 
119.06.2


3024
 
4-25-16
 
T.S.O. IV


3025
 
4-25-16
 
113.18.1, 113.18.2


3026
 
4-25-16
 
T.S.O. X


3027
 
4-25-16
 
T.S.O. X


3028
 
5-2-16
 
T.S.O. II


3029
 
5-2-16
 
T.S.O. II


3030
 
5-16-16
 
T.S.O. IV


3031
 
5-16-16
 
T.S.O. X


3032
 
6-6-16
 
T.S.O. X


3033
 
6-6-16
 
T.S.O. X


3034
 
6-6-16
 
T.S.O. X


3035
 
6-20-16
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VI


3036
 
6-20-16
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VI


3038
 
7-5-16
 
T.S.O. X


3039
 
7-18-16
 
113.02, 113.18 - 113.18.2, 113.20, 113.41


3040
 
7-18-16
 
T.S.O. I


3041
 
7-18-16
 
156.01


3042
 
7-18-16
 
T.S.O. X


3043
 
7-18-16
 
T.S.O. X


3044
 
7-18-16
 
T.S.O. X


3045
 
8-1-16
 
T.S.O. X


3046
 
8-1-16
 
T.S.O. X


3047
 
8-1-16
 
T.S.O. X


3048
 
8-15-16
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VI


3049
 
8-15-16
 
T.S.O. IV


3050
 
8-15-16
 
T.S.O. X


3051
 
8-15-16
 
T.S.O. X


3052
 
8-15-16
 
T.S.O. X


3053
 
9-6-16
 
T.S.O. II


3054
 
9-6-16
 
T.S.O. X


3055
 
9-16-16
 
T.S.O. X


3056
 
9-19-16
 
36.01 - 36.05


3057
 
9-19-16
 
T.S.O. X


3058
 
10-3-16
 
T.S.O. X


3059
 
10-3-16
 
T.S.O. X


3060
 
10-3-16
 
T.S.O. X


3061
 
10-3-16
 
T.S.O. X


3062
 
10-3-16
 
113.20


3063
 
10-17-16
 
113.18 - 113.18.2, 113.20, 113.41, 113.99


3065
 
10-17-16
 
T.S.O. X


3066
 
10-17-16
 
T.S.O. X


3067
 
11-7-16
 
T.S.O. IV


3068
 
11-7-16
 
T.S.O. X


3069
 
11-7-16
 
T.S.O. X


3070
 
11-21-16
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VI


3071
 
11-21-16
 
113.20


3074
 
12-19-16
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VI


3075
 
12-19-16
 
T.S.O. X


3076
 
1-17-17
 
T.S.O. IV


3077
 
2-21-17
 
34.03


3078
 
2-21-17
 
T.S.O. X


3079
 
2-21-17
 
T.S.O. X


3080
 
2-21-17
 
T.S.O. X


3081
 
3-6-17
 
T.S.O. X


3082
 
3-6-17
 
T.S.O. X


3083
 
3-20-17
 
T.S.O. IV


3084
 
3-20-17
 
T.S.O. X


3085
 
4-24-17
 
Ch. 71, Sch. III, V


3086
 
4-24-17
 
50.32


3087
 
4-24-17
 
T.S.O. X


3088
 
3-24-17
 
113.20


3089
 
5-1-17
 
T.S.O. X


3090
 
6-5-17
 
T.S.O. X


3091
 
6-5-17
 
T.S.O. X


3092
 
6-5-17
 
T.S.O. X


3093
 
6-19-17
 
51.026


3094
 
6-19-17
 
50.30, 50.40


3095
 
6-19-17
 
33.020, 33.021


3096
 
6-19-17
 
33.060, 33.061


3097
 
6-19-17
 
T.S.O. X


3098
 
6-19-17
 
T.S.O. X


3099
 
6-19-17
 
113.20


3100
 
7-17-17
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VII


3102
 
8-7-17
 
T.S.O. X


3103
 
8-7-17
 
T.S.O. X


3104
 
8-7-17
 
T.S.O. II


3105
 
8-7-17
 
T.S.O. II


3106
 
8-7-17
 
T.S.O. X


3107
 
8-7-17
 
113.20


3108
 
8-21-17
 
T.S.O. X


3109
 
9-5-17
 
T.S.O. X


3110
 
9-18-17
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VI


3111
 
9-18-17
 
72.04


3112
 
9-18-17
 
T.S.O. X


3113
 
9-18-17
 
T.S.O. X


3114
 
9-18-17
 
T.S.O. X


3115
 
9-18-17
 
T.S.O. X


3116
 
9-18-17
 
T.S.O. X


3117
 
10-2-17
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VI


3118
 
10-2-17
 
113.20


3119
 
10-16-17
 
T.S.O. X


3120
 
10-16-17
 
T.S.O. X


3121
 
11-20-17
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VI


3122
 
11-20-17
 
T.S.O. IV


3123
 
11-20-17
 
113.20


3125
 
12-18-17
 
Ch. 71, Sch. VIII


3126
 
12-18-17
 
113.18, 113.18.1, 113.18.2, 113.20, 113.41


3127
 
1-16-18
 
T.S.O. X


3128
 
1-16-18
 
113.20


3129
 
2-5-18
 
Ch. 71, Sch. I, II


3130
 
2-5-18
 
T.S.O. X


3131
 
2-5-18
 
T.S.O. X


3132
 
2-5-18
 
113.20


3133
 
2-20-18
 
T.S.O. X


3134
 
3-5-18
 
T.S.O. X


3135
 
3-5-18
 
T.S.O. X


3136
 
3-18-18
 
T.S.O. IV


3137
 
3-19-18
 
72.07


3138
 
4-2-18
 
T.S.O. X


3139
 
4-2-18
 
T.S.O. X


3140
 
4-2-18
 
T.S.O. X


3141
 
4-2-18
 
T.S.O. X


3142
 
4-2-18
 
T.S.O. X


3143
 
4-16-18
 
135.06, 135.99


3144
 
4-16-18
 
32.075 - 32.079


3145
 
4-16-18
 
31.02


3146
 
5-7-18
 
T.S.O. X


3147
 
5-7-18
 
T.S.O. X


3148
 
5-7-18
 
T.S.O. X


3149
 
5-7-18
 
T.S.O. X


3150
 
5-7-18
 
T.S.O. X


3151
 
5-7-18
 
T.S.O. X


3152
 
5-7-18
 
T.S.O. X


3153
 
5-7-18
 
T.S.O. X


3154
 
5-7-18
 
T.S.O. X


3155
 
5-21-18
 
T.S.O. IV


3156
 
5-21-18
 
150.20 - 150.29


3157
 
5-21-18
 
72.05


3158
 
5-21-18
 
T.S.O. X


3159
 
6-28-18
 
Ch. 71, Sch. II, VI


3161
 
7-2-18
 
T.S.O. X


3163
 
7-16-18
 
T.S.O. X


3164
 
7-16-18
 
T.S.O. X


3165
 
7-16-18
 
T.S.O. X


3166
 
7-16-18
 
T.S.O. VII


3167
 
8-20-18
 
T.S.O. IV


3168
 
9-4-18
 
T.S.O. X


3169
 
9-4-18
 
T.S.O. X


3170
 
9-4-18
 
T.S.O. X


3171
 
9-4-18
 
T.S.O. X


3172
 
9-4-18
 
T.S.O. X


3173
 
9-4-18
 
T.S.O. X


3174
 
9-17-18
 
121.01 - 121.06


3175
 
10-1-18
 
T.S.O. X


3176
 
10-1-18
 
T.S.O. X


3177
 
11-5-18
 
T.S.O. X


3178
 
11-5-18
 
T.S.O. X


3179
 
11-19-19
 
T.S.O. VII


3180
 
11-19-18
 
T.S.O. IV


3181
 
11-19-18
 
T.S.O. X


3182
 
11-19-18
 
T.S.O. X


3184
 
12-17-18
 
119.04, 119.06.2


3185
 
12-17-18
 
T.S.O. X


3186
 
12-17-18
 
33.007


3187
 
1-22-19
 
152.001 - 152.004, 152.015 - 152.019, 152.025 - 152.028, 152.035 - 152.056,
152.065 - 152.074, 152.080 - 152.091, 152.100 - 152.118, 152.125 - 152.127,
152.998, 152.999

Amended by Village Ordinance #1887 on April 15, 2002
Amended by Village Ordinance #1888 on April 15, 2002
Amended by Village Ordinance #2174 on July 5, 2005
Amended by Village Ordinance #2230 on October 17, 2005
Amended by Village Ordinance #2240 on November 21, 2005
Amended by Village Ordinance #2247 on December 5, 2005
Amended by Village Ordinance #2312 on August 21, 2006
Amended by Village Ordinance #2313 on August 21, 2006
Amended by Village Ordinance #2342 on December 18, 2006
Amended by Village Ordinance #2360 on February 5, 2007
Amended by Village Ordinance #2495 on August 4, 2008
Amended by Village Ordinance #2550 on December 1, 2008
Amended by Village Ordinance #2626 on November 19, 2009
Amended by Village Ordinance #2643 on March 15, 2010
Amended by Village Ordinance #2780 on June 4, 2012
Amended by Village Ordinance #2839 on April 29, 2013
Amended by Village Ordinance #2894 on February 2, 2014
Amended by Village Ordinance #2904 on May 5, 2014
Amended by Village Ordinance #2957 on December 1, 2014
Amended by Village Ordinance #3041 on July 18, 2016
Amended by Village Ordinance #3229 on October 7, 2019
Amended by Village Ordinance #3230 on October 7, 2019
Ordinance # 1872
Village of Frankfort
Zoning Ordinance
2001
Adopted September 17, 2001
Last Revised October 7, 2019
Jim Holland, Mayor
Gene Savaria, Clerk
Board of Trustees
Richard Trevarthan
Jessica Petrow
Adam Borelli
John C. Clavio
Margaret Farina
Keith Ogle
Village of Frankfort
September 17, 2001
ARTICLE 1: INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS 1
SECTION A: TITLE 1
SECTION B: INTENT AND PURPOSE 1
SECTION C: GENERAL REGULATIONS 3
SECTION D: NEW STRUCTURES 4
SECTION E: LIMITATIONS & PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 4
SECTION F: NUMBER OF STRUCTURES & USES ON A ZONING LOT 4
SECTION G: PLATTED BUILDING & SETBACK LINES 4
SECTION H: YARD REQUIREMENTS FOR OPEN LAND 4
SECTION I: PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS IN REQUIRED YARDS 5
SECTION J: BULK REGULATIONS FOR PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES 6
SECTION K: CONTRADICTORY REGULATIONS 7
ARTICLE 2: REVIEW AND DECISION MAKING BODIES 8
SECTION A: CODE OFFICIAL 8
SECTION B: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 9
SECTION C: PLAN COMMISSION 10
SECTION D: VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES 11
SECTION E: 1890S THEME COMMITTEE 12
ARTICLE 3: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES AND SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS 13
SECTION A: ZONING AND OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATES 13
SECTION B: VARIATIONS 14
SECTION C: APPEALS 17
SECTION D: AMENDMENTS 18
SECTION E: SPECIAL USES 20
SECTION F: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS (PUDS) 23
SECTION G: REVERSIONS 47
SECTION H: ADMINISTRATION OF SITE PLAN REVIEW 49
ARTICLE 4: ZONING DISTRICTS 54
SECTION A: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 54
SECTION B: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 54
SECTION C: BOUNDARIES 54
SECTION D: STREETS, ALLEYS, PUBLIC WAYS, WATERWAYS & RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY 55
SECTION E: ANNEXED LAND 55
SECTION F: DESCRIPTION OF DISTRICTS 55
ARTICLE 5: USE REGULATIONS 59
SECTION A: GENERAL USE REGULATIONS 59
Village of Frankfort
September 17, 2001
SECTION B: TABLE OF PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES 60
SECTION C: USE STANDARDS 75
SECTION D: ACCESSORY USES 100
SECTION E: TEMPORARY USES 111
ARTICLE 6: DENSITY, DIMENSIONAL, AND OTHER STANDARDS 115
SECTION A: GENERAL REGULATIONS 115
SECTION B: DENSITY, DIMENSIONAL AND OTHER STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 116
SECTION C: DENSITY, DIMENSIONAL, AND OTHER STANDARDS FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 128
SECTION D: ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 138
ARTICLE 7: SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 145
SECTION A: SITE PLAN & ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW STANDARDS 145
SECTION B: OFF-STREET PARKING & LOADING 153
SECTION C: SEWER & WATER FACILITIES 168
SECTION D: LANDSCAPE PLANS 169
SECTION E: LIGHTING 170
SECTION F: SIGNS 173
ARTICLE 8: SUBDIVISIONS 174
ARTICLE 9: SCHOOL AND PARK DEDICATIONS 175
ARTICLE 10: NON-CONFORMITIES 176
SECTION A: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE 176
SECTION B: AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES & USES 176
SECTION C: REPAIRS & ALTERATIONS 176
SECTION D: ADDITIONS & ENLARGEMENTS 177
SECTION E: RELOCATION OF BUILDING OR STRUCTURE 177
SECTION F: RESTORATION OF DAMAGED NON-CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE 177
SECTION G: DISCONTINUANCE OF A NON-CONFORMING USE 178
SECTION H: EXPANSION OF NON-CONFORMING USE 178
SECTION I: VARIATIONS FOR NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, LOTS OR USES 178
SECTION J: CHANGE OF NON-CONFORMING USE 178
SECTION K: RECORDS 179
SECTION L: SUBSTANDARD LOTS WITH CONTINUOUS FRONTAGE UNDER THE SAME OWNERSHIP 179
ARTICLE 11: FEES AND PENALTIES 180
SECTION A: FEES 180
Village of Frankfort
September 17, 2001
ARTICLE 12: RULES AND DEFINITIONS 181
SECTION A: RULES AND DEFINITIONS 181
ARTICLE 13: REPEALER, SEVERABILITY, AND EFFECTIVE DATE 211
SECTION A: REPEALER 211
SECTION B: SEVERABILITY 211
SECTION C: EFFECTIVE DATE 211
Village of Frankfort
September 17, 2001
Ordinance No. 1872
An Ordinance establishing “The Village of Frankfort Zoning Ordinance” for the purpose of dividing the Village of Frankfort, Will County, Illinois, into districts; regulating and restricting the location, use and intensity of building, structure and other specified uses within a said district; requiring permits; providing for the administration of and penalties for violation of said Ordinance; and rescinding Ordinance Number 919, Village of Frankfort Bicentennial Zoning Ordinance.
WHEREAS, Chapter 65 ILCS 5/11-13-1 authorizes municipalities within the State of Illinois to exercise the powers and regulate land use in the manner set forth therein; and
WHEREAS, it is essential to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Village of Frankfort that adequate land and facilities are available and properly managed; and
WHEREAS, these services are impacted by the expansion and growth of the Village; and
WHEREAS, the Village Board of the Village of Frankfort directed the Plan Commission to initiate the amendatory process for the addition of updated language for division of land and its management to the Village of Frankfort Bicentennial Zoning Ordinance; and
WHEREAS, the amendment proposes to establish districts, requirements and management demanded by modern day needs; and
WHEREAS, the Village recognizes the importance of such amending, being used to directly benefit residents, developers, land and growth of the Village of Frankfort; and
WHEREAS, a Notice of Public Hearing before the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of Frankfort was published in the Frankfort—Mokena Star, a newspaper of general circulation within the Village, announcing a Public Hearing on this amendment; and
WHEREAS, at a time and place designated in such Notice, a Public Hearing was held before the Village of Frankfort Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals to review and consider such amendment; and
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF FRANKFORT, WILL COUNTY, ILLINOIS as follows:
Village of Frankfort
Article 1: Introductory Provisions
September 17, 2001 1
ARTICLE 1: INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
Section A: Title
This Ordinance shall be known, and may be cited and referred to as “The Village of Frankfort Zoning Ordinance 2001,” rescinding Ordinance Number 919, the Bicentennial Zoning Ordinance.
Section B: Intent and Purpose
Part 1: Purpose
This Zoning Ordinance is adopted to ensure that adequate light, pure air and safety from fire and other dangers may be secured, that the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the Village of Frankfort may be conserved, that congestion in the public streets may be lessened or avoided, that hazards to persons and damage to property resulting from the accumulation or runoff of storm or flood waters may be lessened or avoided, and that the public health, safety, comfort, morals and welfare may otherwise be promoted, and to ensure and facilitate the preservation of sites, areas and structures of historical, architectural, aesthetic, and environmental importance.
Part 2: Objectives
The fulfillment of this purpose is to be accomplished by seeking the following objectives:
a. To divide the Village into districts of such number, shape, area and such different classes, according to the use of land, buildings, the height and bulk of buildings, the intensity of use and the area of open spaces and recreational spaces, as may be deemed best suited to carry out the purposes of this ordinance.
b. To prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of structures, so far as is possible and appropriate in each district, by regulating the use and bulk of buildings in relation to the land surrounding them, thereby ensuring proper living and working conditions and preventing the development of blight and slums.
c. To fix reasonable standards to which buildings and structures shall conform.
d. To provide for a land use pattern that emphasizes the desirability of single-family residential land uses that will strengthen and enhance the Village’s low-density community character.
e. To protect the aesthetic appearance of the Village; protect the Village’s “quality of life;” and preserve the unique identity of Frankfort.
f. To provide adequate light, clean air, privacy and convenience of access to property.
g. To minimize the potential adverse impacts of industrial land uses on residential areas with landscaping, berms and transportation planning.
Village of Frankfort
Article 1: Introductory Provisions
September 17, 2001 2
h. To encourage innovative development techniques by providing for use of planned unit developments in areas suitable for this development method.
i. To facilitate the provision of adequate transportation, and of other public requirements and services such as water, sewage, schools and parks.
j. To preserve the values of property throughout the Village and to protect the character and stability of residential, business and industrial areas.
k. To avoid the inappropriate development of lands and provide for adequate drainage, erosion control and reduction of flood damage; as well as lessening or avoiding the hazard to persons and damage to property resulting from the accumulation of runoff of storm or flood waters.
l. To ensure a balance of green space and development, and to preserve and insure the preservation of nature resources.
m. To provide a well-defined system of streets and pedestrian/bike trails which allow access to all local and regional points of origin and destination.
n. To limit congestion in the public streets and to protect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare, by providing for the off-street parking of motor vehicles and the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles.
o. To preserve and ensure the preservation of areas of historical, architectural, and environmental significance.
p. To foster compatible relationships between residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural and historical uses for the mutual benefit of all.
q. To isolate or control the location of unavoidable nuisance producing uses, and to protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other dangers.
r. To define the powers and duties of the administrative and enforcement officers and bodies.
s. To prescribe penalties for any violation of the provision of this ordinance, or any amendment thereto.
The standards and requirements contained in this Ordinance, and the district mapping reflected on the Frankfort Zoning District Map, are intended to implement the objectives of the Village of Frankfort Comprehensive Plan.
Village of Frankfort
Article 1: Introductory Provisions
September 17, 2001 3
Section C: General Regulations
a. All buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings established hereafter and all structural alterations or relocations of existing buildings occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this Ordinance which are applicable to the zoning districts in which such buildings, uses or land shall be located except for those lots of record in the R2 district existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance, which shall continue to be subject to the minimum side yard and lot size regulations of the Bi-centennial Zoning Ordinance listed below, unless any of the following are true, in which case the property must adhere to all regulations of this Ordinance, unless a variance is obtained in accordance with Article 3, Section B:
1. The property is used for a non-residential use.
2. The property is rezoned after 9/17/2001.
3. Preliminary Plat approval was granted after September 17, 2001.
4. Final Plat is recorded after September 17, 2008.
Bi-centennial Zoning Ordinance Requirements-R2 District
Minimum side yard Setback 10’
Minimum Lot Size 13,500 Sq. Ft.
(Am. Ord. 2550, passed 11.13.08)
b. However, where a building permit for a building or structure has been issued, in accordance with law, prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, and provided that the construction is begun within six (6) months of such effective date and diligently prosecuted to completion (completion to be accomplished within eighteen (18) months of the adoption of this Ordinance), unless an extension is granted by the Village Board, said building or structure may be completed in accordance with approved plans, on the basis of which the building permit has been issued, and further, may, upon completion and inspection, be occupied under a certificate of occupancy by the use for which originally designated subject thereafter to the provisions of Article 10, Nonconforming Buildings, Structures and Uses.
c. Where the Code Official has issued a permitted use permit, a special use permit or a permit for variation, pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance, such permit shall become null and void unless work thereon is substantially underway within six (6) months of the date of the issuance of such permit by the Code Official, and completed within eighteen (18) months of the issuance of such permit, unless an extension is granted by the Village Board. Any expansion of a special use or variance shall require authorization of a new special use permit or variance as the case may be. (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
Village of Frankfort
Article 1: Introductory Provisions
September 17, 2001 4
d. A special use permit shall be deemed to authorize only the particular use for which it was issued. Such permits shall automatically expire and cease to be of any force or effect if such use shall be discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months or more (unless an extension is granted by the Village Board), and a new special use permit must be obtained from the Village according to the guidelines contained within this Code. (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02)
Section D: New Structures
All structures built hereafter shall comply with all of the regulations of this Zoning Ordinance. Any structure hereafter moved from one site to another shall be considered to be a structure built hereafter. Any structure rebuilt or restored after damage or destruction by fire or other casualty shall be considered to be a structure built hereafter, unless Article 10 of this Ordinance permits such a structure to be rebuilt or restored. All enlargements of or additions to existing uses occurring hereafter shall comply with the regulations of this Ordinance.
Section E: Limitations & Performance Standards
No permitted use hereafter established, altered, modified, or enlarged shall be operated or designed so as to conflict with the limitations or performance standards imposed on such use by this Ordinance.
Section F: Number of Structures & Uses On a Zoning Lot
Not more than one (1) principal building shall be located on a single zoning lot, nor shall a principal building be located on the same zoning lot with any other principal building, unless such principal building is located in a planned unit development that has been approved pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance.
Section G: Platted Building & Setback Lines
If a recorded subdivision plat imposes a building or setback line for a lot which is greater than the minimum front yard required by the applicable section of this Ordinance, then, notwithstanding any other provision of this Ordinance, the minimum front yard shown on such subdivision plat shall govern.
Section H: Yard Requirements for Open Land
If a zoning lot is, or will be, occupied by a permitted use without structures, then the minimum front, side or rear yards that would otherwise be required for such zoning lot shall be provided and maintained, unless some other provision of this Ordinance requires or permits a different front, side or rear yard, provided however, that front, side and rear yards shall not be required on zoning lots used for garden purposes without structures, or on zoning lots used for open, public recreation areas.
Village of Frankfort
Article 1: Introductory Provisions
September 17, 2001 5
Section I: Permitted Obstructions in Required Yards
Part 1: Required Yard Specifications
The following table shall delineate permitted obstructions when located in required yards, subject to review by the Code Official. (P= Permitted; N= Not Permitted)
Permitted Obstructions In Required Yards Projection, Obstruction, Or Accessory Use Yard Type Front Rear Side Corner Side
Air-conditioning units, window only (not to exceed 2 feet)
P
P
P
P
Air-conditioning equipment shelters (not less than 10 feet from any property line)
N
P
N
P
Arbors and Trellises
P
P
P
P
Awnings and canopies (projecting less than six feet out and at least seven feet-six inches above the level of the adjoining ground)
P
P
P
P
Balconies, open
P
P
P
P
Basketball Goal (limited to one pole mounted or garage-mounted goal in residential zoning districts only and not closer than five feet from any property line, located within driveway pavement area if located in front, side, or corner side yard)
P
P
P
P
Cantilever encroachments into required setbacks may not exceed 24 inches. (Am. Ord. 2360, passed 01.25.07)
Chimney encroachments into required setbacks may not exceed 24 inches (Am. Ord. 2839, passed 04.29.13)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Decks, Terrace, Patios, open, in a residential district (not less than ten feet from any property line)
P
P
P
P
Decks, Terrace, Patios, open, in a non-residential district (not less than twenty-five feet from a front or corner side property line, or ten feet from any side or rear property line)
P
P
P
P
Dish antennas – greater than 30” diameter
less than 30” diameter
N
N
P
P
N
P
N
N
Dog runs, enclosed (not less than ten feet from any property line)
N
P
N
N
Village of Frankfort
Article 1: Introductory Provisions
September 17, 2001 6
Permitted Obstructions In Required Yards Projection, Obstruction, Or Accessory Use Yard Type Front Rear Side Corner Side
Fences (as per Article 5, Section D)
P
P
P
P
Flagpoles
P
P
P
P
Laundry drying equipment
N
P
P
N
Ramps for use by persons with disabilities
P
P
P
P
Residential Wing wall encroachments into required setbacks may not exceed 24” (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
P
P
P
P
Swimming pools, private (as per Article 5, Section D)
N
P
N
N
Television or radio towers or antennas
N
P
N
N
Tennis courts, private (not less than ten feet from any property line)
N
P
N
N
Trash dumpsters and/or garbage receptacles (also subject to other provisions of this Code)
N
P
P
N
Volleyball, basketball, shuffleboard and other courts, private (in residential districts only and not less than ten feet from any property line)
N
P
N
N
Other accessory uses (as may be permitted elsewhere in this Code)
N
P
N
N
Section J: Bulk Regulations for Public Utility Facilities
Part 1: Service Uses
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, none of the following public utility or public service uses shall be required to comply with the lot size requirements and bulk regulations of the zoning district in which they are located, except that such public utility and public service uses located on or above the surface of the ground shall observe the applicable minimum front, side and rear yard requirements:
a. Electric and telephone substations and distribution equipment;
b. Gas regulator;
c. Poles, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains, valves, or other similar equipment for distribution to consumers for transmission of electricity, gas or water;
d. Pumping stations;
Village of Frankfort
Article 1: Introductory Provisions
September 17, 2001 7
e. Transformer stations; and
f. Water standpipes.
Part 2: Easements
In addition, where electrical, telephone, water and sewer or other utility services require structures or facilities other than buildings located on or above the surface of the ground on easements through or abutting any lot in a residence district, said structures or facilities shall be prohibited in any required yard adjacent to a public street, or in any dedicated street right-of-way.
Section K: Contradictory Regulations
Where any contradictory regulations, restrictions or requirements imposed by any provision of this Ordinance upon the use of land, building, structures or improvements are either more restrictive or less restrictive than restrictions or requirements imposed by any other provision of this Ordinance or any other law of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the subject matter thereof, those restrictions or requirements which are more restrictive shall govern.
Village of Frankfort
Article 2: Review and Decision Making Bodies
September 17, 2001 8
ARTICLE 2: REVIEW AND DECISION MAKING BODIES
The administration of this Ordinance is hereby vested in five (5) offices of the government of the Village of Frankfort. The purpose of this Article is to define and outline the five (5) offices, their duties and their responsibilities in administration of the Ordinance. The Village of Frankfort Police Department will assist the five (5) offices by reporting to them upon new construction, reconstruction, new land uses or possible violations.
Section A: Code Official
The Code Official shall enforce this Ordinance and, in addition thereto, and in furtherance of such authority, shall:
a. Issue all zoning certificates, as well as make and maintain records thereof;
b. Issue all certificates of occupancy, as well as make and maintain records thereof;
c. Conduct inspections of buildings, structures and use of land to determine compliance with the terms of this Ordinance;
d. Maintain permanent and current records of this Ordinance including, but not limited to all maps, amendments, special uses, variations, appeals and applications thereof;
e. Provide and maintain a public information bureau relative to all matters arising out of this Ordinance;
f. Forward to the Plan Commission all applications for special uses, and for amendments to this Ordinance that are initially filed with the Village of Frankfort;
g. Forward to the Zoning Board of Appeals applications for appeals, variations or other matters on which the Zoning Board of Appeals is required to pass under this Ordinance;
h. Submit all decisions to the Community Development Director for review, substantiation, amendment or approval;
i. Interpret and answer questions regarding the provisions of this Ordinance; and
j. Appoint deputy Code Officials to assist the Code Official carry out his/her duties hereunder.
Village of Frankfort
Article 2: Review and Decision Making Bodies
September 17, 2001 9
Section B: Zoning Board of Appeals
Creation and membership is hereby authorized and established. The Board shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the Village President, with the consent of the Board of Trustees, who shall serve terms of three (3) years.
Part 1: Procedure
In accordance with the applicable Statutes of the State of Illinois, as follows:
a. All appointments to the Board of Appeals shall be made by the President and Village Board of Trustees. One of the members so appointed shall be named as Chairperson at the time of their appointment. The amount of compensation to be paid, if any, shall be fixed by the President and Village Board of Trustees. Vacancies shall be filled as soon as possible for the remaining term of any member whose position has become vacant. In the event that the office of Chairperson is vacated for any reason, the President and Village Board of Trustees shall immediately appoint a new Chairperson.
b. All meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the Chairperson, and at such other times as the Board may determine. All testimony by witnesses at any hearing provided for in this Ordinance shall be given under oath. The Chairperson, or in their absence, the acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and require the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and other official actions.
c. No hearing shall be conducted without a quorum of the Board of Appeals being present, which shall consist of a majority of the members. Any absent member who certifies that he/she has read the transcript of the proceedings before the Board of Appeals may vote upon any question before the Board. Every rule, regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and every order, requirement, decision or determination of the Board of Appeals shall immediately be filed in the office of the Village Clerk and shall be of public record. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board of Appeals is necessary to revise any order, requirement, decision or determination of the Code Official, or to recommend any variation or new application in the ordinance to the Village Board.
Part 2: Jurisdiction & Authority
The Board of Appeals is hereby invested with the powers as granted by the Statutes of the State of Illinois and this Ordinance as follows:
a. To hear and decide appeals and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Code Official, pertaining to conformance with requirements of this Ordinance, but not including the Building Code and other applicable Village standards and requirements;
Village of Frankfort
Article 2: Review and Decision Making Bodies
September 17, 2001 10
b. To hear and make recommendations to the Village Board on applications for variations from the terms provided in this Ordinance in the manner and standards set forth in this Article; and
c. To hear and decide all matters referred to it, or upon which matters it is required to pass under this Ordinance.
Part 3: Variations
The Village Board shall decide all applications for variations of the provisions of this Ordinance, after a public hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold public hearings upon all applications for variations and shall report its recommendations to the Village Board. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall recommend a variation only after it has made findings of fact specifying the reason or reasons for recommending the variation. Such findings shall be based upon the standards prescribed in Article 3, Section B of this Ordinance. No ordinance granting a variation shall be adopted by the Village Board without such findings of fact and receipt of conclusions from the Zoning Board of Appeal.
Section C: Plan Commission
Part 1: Creation & Membership
A Plan Commission is hereby authorized and established. The Commission shall consist of seven (7) members, appointed by the Village President, with the consent of the Board of Trustees. One of the members so appointed shall be named Chairperson at the time of their appointment. The members shall serve terms of three (3) years and may serve on the Zoning Board of Appeals conterminously.
Part 2: Meetings & Rules
All meetings of the Plan Commission shall be held at the call of the Chairperson, and at such times as the Plan Commission may determine.
a. All hearings conducted by said Plan Commission under this Ordinance shall be in accordance with Illinois Statutes. In all proceedings of the Plan Commission provided for in this Ordinance, the Chairperson, or in their absence, the acting Chairperson, shall have the power to administer oaths. All testimony by witnesses at any hearing provided for in this Ordinance shall be given under oath. The Plan Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, and shall also keep records of its hearings and other official actions. A copy of every rule or regulation, every amendment and special use, and every recommendation, order, requirement, decision or determination of the Plan Commission under this Ordinance shall be filed in the Office of the Village Clerk and shall be considered public record. The Plan Commission shall adopt its own rules and procedures, not in conflict with this Ordinance or applicable Illinois Statutes.
b. No hearing shall be conducted without a quorum of the Plan Commission being present, which shall consist of a majority of the seven members.
Village of Frankfort
Article 2: Review and Decision Making Bodies
September 17, 2001 11
Part 2: Jurisdiction
The Plan Commission shall discharge the following duties under this Ordinance:
a. Review all applications for special uses and amendments to this Ordinance, either text or map, and report said findings and recommendations to the Village Board in the manner prescribed in Article 3, Section D (Amendments) and Section E (Special Uses);
b. Receive from the Code Official their recommendations, as related to the effectiveness of this Ordinance, and report any conclusions and recommendations to the Village Board on an as-needed basis;
c. Review all applications for approval of non-listed uses and report findings and recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees;
d. Hear and decide upon matters that are required to be reviewed by the Plan Commission under this Ordinance;
e. To receive and review all plats of subdivision, and recommend with respect thereto, to the Village Board of Trustees; and
f. To review all applications concerning land use issues and make recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees.
g. To establish, review, and uphold local standards for the exterior design and usage of building materials for buildings and structures. (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
Section D: Village Board of Trustees
The Village Board of Trustees shall discharge the following duties under this Ordinance:
a. Receive from the Zoning Board of Appeals recommendations on all appeals and variations to the Zoning Ordinance, and determine final disposition of any such matter;
b. Receive recommendations from the Plan Commission relating to amendments to the Zoning Ordinance (text and map), plats, special uses and planned unit developments, and determine the final disposition of any such application; and
c. Decide all matters that are required to be approved by the Corporate Authorities under this Ordinance.
Village of Frankfort
Article 2: Review and Decision Making Bodies
September 17, 2001 12
Section E: 1890s Theme Committee
Part 1: Creation
For the purpose of administering the provisions of this Ordinance there is hereby created the “1890 Theme Committee,” as outlined in the Village of Frankfort’s Historic Preservation Ordinance. The 1890 Theme Committee may also be known as the Historic Preservation Commission.
a. The Committee shall consist of five voting members who are residents of the Village, appointed by the Mayor, and approved by the Village Board.
b. The committee members shall serve without salary.
Part 2: Meetings and Rules
The meetings and rules of the 1890 Theme Committee shall be as described in the Village of Frankfort’s Historic Preservation Ordinance.
Part 3: Jurisdiction and Authority of Committee
In addition to the powers and duties set forth in the Village of Frankfort’s Historic Preservation Ordinance, the Committee is hereby vested with the power and the duty to review applications for building permits, site plans, fences, or permits to erect signs in the H-R and H-1 zoning districts to determine the compatibility of the requested action with the Village of Frankfort Historic Preservation Design Guidelines, the Village of Frankfort’s Historic Preservation Ordinance and any supplemental provisions as approved by the Village Board, and to make recommendations to the Village Board for final action thereon, and such other powers and duties as may from time to time hereafter be delegated to it by Ordinance, by the Village Board. The Committee shall adopt its own rules and procedures, not in conflict with this Ordinance or with applicable Illinois Statutes.
Part 4: Procedures
The procedures for review by the 1890s Theme Committee shall be as set forth in the Village of Frankfort’s Historic Preservation Ordinance. The 1890 Theme Committee shall be guided by the architectural standards in the Village of Frankfort Historic Preservation Design Guidelines and any supplemental provisions as approved by the Village Board.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 13
ARTICLE 3: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES AND SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Section A: Zoning and Occupancy Certificates
Part 1: Zoning Certificates
Except as hereinafter provided, no permit pertaining to the use of land or buildings shall be issued by an officer, department or employee unless the application for such permit has been examined by the Code Official and has affixed to it their signature, indicating that the proposed building or structure complies with all the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and the Village of Frankfort Engineering Design Standards. Any permit or certificate of occupancy issued in conflict with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance or the Village of Frankfort Design Standards shall be null and void.
a. Required Submissions. Every application for a zoning certificate shall be accompanied by:
1. Twenty (20) copies of a current subdivision plat or property survey of the parcel of land, lot, lots, block or blocks, or parts or portions thereof, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and monuments, as certified by a “registered Illinois land surveyor,” as a true copy of the piece or parcel lot, lots, block or blocks, or portion thereof, according to the registered or recorded plat of such land;
2. Twenty (20) copies of additional drawings drawn to scale in such form which may, from time to time, be prescribed by the Code Official, showing the ground area, height and bulk of the building or structure; the building lines in relation to lot lines; the use to be made of the building, structure, or land; architectural plans, where required by Article 3, Section H; and such other information as may be required by the Code Official for the proper enforcement of this Ordinance;
3. Twenty (20) copies of a Landscape Plan defining the size, location and species of plant material and other landscape materials. Such plan shall be prepared by a qualified expert, and must meet all standards and guidelines established in the Village of Frankfort Landscape Regulations, and sections 150.75 and 150.76 of the Village Code;
b. Waiver of Requirements. A Code Official may, in those cases where, in their judgment, the information is not necessary because of existing evidence in Village records, waive all or portions of the requirements listed above.
Part 2: Occupancy Certificates
Except for single family residential buildings, no building, or addition thereto, constructed after the effective date of this Ordinance; no addition to a previously existing building; no existing building with a change in use, business or ownership; and no land, vacant on the effective date of this Ordinance, shall be occupied or used for any purpose until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Code Official. Every certificate of occupancy shall state that the use of occupancy complies with the provisions of this Ordinance.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 14
a. Application. Every application for a business license, building permit or zoning certificate shall be deemed to be an application for an occupancy certificate.
b. Issuance. No occupancy certificate for a building, or portion thereof, constructed after the effective date of this Ordinance, shall be issued until construction has been completed and the premises has been inspected and certified by the Building Inspector and/or the Code Official to be in conformity with the plans and specifications upon which the zoning certificate was based. No occupancy certificate for a building, addition thereto, or change in ownership or use, constructed or applicable after the effective date of this Ordinance, shall be issued, and no addition to a previously existing building shall be occupied until the premises have been inspected and certified by the Building Inspector and/or the Code Official to be in compliance with all applicable standards.
c. Temporary Certificate. Pending the issuance of a regular certificate, a temporary certificate may be issued, to be valid for a period not to exceed six (6) months from its date, during the completion of any addition, or during partial occupancy of the premises. The temporary certificate shall be valid during construction, and shall be discontinued within thirty (30) days after completion of construction.
d. Time Limit. The occupancy certificate shall be issued, or written notice shall be given to the applicant stating the reasons why a certificate cannot be issued, not later than ten (10) business days after the Building Inspector and/or Code Official is notified in writing that the building or premises are ready for occupancy.
e. Building Code. The issuance of an occupancy certificate shall comply with all regulations and requirements as outlined in the BOCA National Building Code, adopted by the Village of Frankfort.
Section B: Variations
Part 1: Purpose
The "variation" process is intended to provide limited relief from the requirements of this Ordinance in those cases where strict application of those requirements will create a practical difficulty or particular hardship prohibiting the use of land in a manner otherwise allowed under this Ordinance. It is not intended that variations be granted merely to remove inconveniences or financial burdens that the requirements of this Ordinance may impose on property owners in general. Rather, it is intended to provide relief where the requirements of this Ordinance render the land difficult to use because of some unique physical attribute of the property itself or some other factor unique to the property for which the variation is requested. In no event, however, shall the Village grant a variation which would allow the establishment of a use which is not otherwise allowed in a zoning district or which would change the zoning district classification of any or all of the affected property.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 15
Part 2: Application; Notice of Hearing; Procedures
a. An application for a variation shall be filed in writing with the Code Official. The application shall contain such information as the Zoning Board of Appeals may require.
b. Notice of the time and place of the public hearing to consider the application shall be published at least once in the Official Newspaper, said publication to be made not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before the date of the hearing.
c. The Zoning Board of Appeals, after a public hearing, may recommend to the Village Board the variation of the regulations of this Ordinance. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall make recommendations only in cases where there are practical difficulties or particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the regulations of this Ordinance relating to the construction or alterations of buildings or structures or the use of land in harmony with their general purpose and intent of the regulations; only where such Zoning Board of Appeals makes findings of fact in accordance with the standards in Part 3 below; and, further, finds that there are practical difficulties or particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the regulations of this Ordinance relating to the construction, or alteration of buildings or structures on the use of land. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall recommend to the Village Board such imposition of the conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variation as may be necessary to comply with the standards set forth in Part 3, to reduce or minimize the effect of such variation upon other property in the neighborhood and to implement the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall reach its decision within ninety (90) days from the date of filing of the variation, unless such time is extended by mutual consent of the Zoning Board of Appeals and petitioner, or it shall be deemed to have been denied.
d. The Village Board may grant or deny the application for a variation. If the application is not acted upon finally by the Village Board within ninety (90) days of the date the Village Board receives the Zoning Board of Appeals recommendation, and such time is not extended by mutual consent of the Village Board and petitioner, it shall be deemed to have been denied.
Part 3: Standards of Variation
a. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not vary the provisions of this Ordinance as authorized in this Article 3, Section B, unless they have made findings based upon the evidence presented to it in the following cases:
1. That the property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations in that zone;
2. That the plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances; and
3. That the variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 16
b. A variation shall be recommended to the Village Board only if the evidence, in the judgment of the Board of Appeals, sustains each of the three (3) conditions enumerated in Part 3(a).
c. For the purpose of supplementing the above standards, the Zoning Board of Appeals, in making this determination, whenever there are practical difficulties or particular hardships, shall also take into consideration the extent to which the following facts, favorable to the applicant, have been established by the evidence:
1. That the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved will bring a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the regulations was carried out;
2. That the conditions upon which the petition for variation is based would not be applicable, generally, to other property within the same zoning classification;
3. That the purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire to make more money out of the property;
4. That the alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by any person presently having an interest in the property;
5. That the granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public welfare or unduly injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located;
6. That the exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of any proposed structure will not be so at variance with either the exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of the structures already constructed, or in the course of construction in the immediate neighborhood or the character of the applicable district, as to cause a substantial depreciation in the property values within the neighborhood; or
7. That the proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of air to adjacent property, substantially increase the danger of fire, otherwise endanger the public safety or substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 17
Section C: Appeals
a. Scope of Appeals. An appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals by any person, firm or corporation, or by any office, department, board or bureau aggrieved by an order, requirement, decision or determination of the Code Official or the Director of Building and Zoning. Such an appeal shall be taken within forty-five (45) days after the decision of the action complained of, by filing with Code Official and with the Zoning Board of Appeals, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Code Official shall forthwith transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals all of the papers constituting a record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
b. Stay of Proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Code Official has certified to the Zoning Board of Appeals after the notice of the appeal has been filed that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, such stay would in their opinion cause imminent peril to life and property. In which case, the proceedings shall not be stayed unless by a restraining order which may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals or by a court of record on application, on notice of the said Code Officials, and on due cause shown.
c. Procedures. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties by one publication in the Official Newspaper, said publication to be made not more than thirty (30) days, nor less than fifteen (15) days before the date of the hearing. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall reach its decision within ninety (90) days from the date of the filing of the appeal. The Zoning Board of Appeals may affirm or reverse, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination of the Director of Building and Zoning or Code Officials which, in its opinion, ought to be done; and, to what end, shall have all the powers of the Code Official from whom the appeal is taken. The Code Official shall maintain records of all actions of the Zoning Board of Appeals relative to appeals.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 18
Section D: Amendments
Part 1: Authority and Declaration of Public Policy
For the purpose of promoting the public health, safety and general welfare, conserving the value of property throughout the community and lessening or avoiding congestion in the on public streets and highways, the Village Board may, from time to time, in the manner hereinafter set forth, amend the regulations imposed in the districts created by this Ordinance (text amendment), or amend district boundary lines (map amendment), provided that in all amendatory ordinances adopted under the authority of this section due allowance shall be made for existing conditions, the conservation of property values, the direction of building development to the best advantage of the entire community and the uses to which property is devoted at the time of the adoption of such amendatory ordinance.
Part 2: Initiation of Amendment
Amendments may be proposed by the Board of Trustees, the Plan Commission, or by any person having an ownership or contractual purchase interest in affected property.
Part 3: Application for Amendment
An application for an amendment shall be filed with the Code Official in such form and accompanied by such information as required by the Code Official. Such application should be submitted to the Plan Commission for review, public hearing and written recommendations and thereon to the Village Board of Trustees for their final disposition.
Part 4: Hearing on Petition
Within forty-five (45) days of receipt of any complete application for rezoning, the Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing on such application at a time and place as shall be established by legal advertisement by the Plan Commission (see Part 5 below). The hearing shall be conducted, and a record of the proceedings shall be preserved in such a manner as the Village Board shall, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
Part 5: Notice of Hearings
Notice of time and place of the hearing shall be published at least once in the Official Newspaper, not more than thirty (30) days, nor less than fifteen (15) days before such hearing. Supplemental or additional notices may be published or distributed as the Village Board, may, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
Part 6: Findings of Fact and Recommendation of the Plan Commission
a. The Plan Commission shall make written findings of fact and shall submit same, together with its recommendations to the Village Board, for action. Where the purpose and effect of the proposed amendment is to change the zoning classification of particular property, the Plan Commission shall make findings based upon all the evidence presented to it and shall consider among other pertinent matters, the following:
Existing uses of property within the general area of the property in question;
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 19
The zoning classification of property within the general area of the property in question;
The suitability of the property in question to the uses permitted under the existing zoning classification;
The trend of development, if any, in the general area of the property in question, including changes, if any, which have taken place in its present zoning classification; and
The change in zoning is in conformance with the comprehensive plan of the Village and its official map.
b. After consideration of the above matters, the Plan Commission may recommend the adoption of a proposed amendment, a denial of a proposed amendment or a modification to such proposed amendment. The Plan Commission may include with its recommendation certain conditions or modifications to a proposed amendment for consideration by the Board of Trustees.
Part 7: Action by Village Board of Trustees
a. The Village Board shall not act upon a proposed amendment to this Ordinance until it shall have received a written report and recommendation from the Plan Commission on the proposed amendment.
b. The Village Board may grant, deny, or modify the request with the petitioner’s consent, any application for an amendment; provided, however, that in case a written protest against any proposed amendment of the regulations or districts, signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the properties proposed to be altered, or by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the properties immediately adjoining or across an alley there from, or by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the properties directly opposite the properties proposed to be altered, is filed with the Village Clerk, the amendment shall not be passed, except by a favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the Board of Trustees. In such cases, a copy of the written protest shall be served by the protestor or protestors on the applicant for the proposed amendment and a copy upon the applicant’s attorney, if any, by certified mail at the address of such applicant and attorney shown in the application for the proposed amendment.
c. If an application for a proposed amendment is not acted upon finally by the Village Board within ninety (90) days of the date the Village Board receives the Plan Commission recommendations, and such time is not extended by mutual consent of the Village Board and petitioner, it shall be deemed to have been denied.
d. If an application for a proposed amendment is granted by the Village Board, an ordinance authorizing the map or text amendment will be adopted by the Village Board.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 20
Part 8: Effect of Denial of Amendment
No application for a map amendment which has been denied by the Village Board shall be resubmitted for a period of one (1) year from the date of the order of denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of change of condition found to be valid by the Plan Commission and Village Board.
Section E: Special Uses
Part 1: Purpose
The development and execution of this Ordinance is based upon the division of the community into districts. Within these districts, the use of land and buildings, and bulk location of buildings and structures in relation to the land are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are certain uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified in any particular district or districts, without consideration in each case of the impact upon neighboring land, and the public need for the particular use in the particular location.
Part 2: Initiation of Special Use
Any person having a freehold interest in land; a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession; a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest; or an exclusive possessory interest, and which is specifically enforceable, may file an application to use such land for one or more of the special uses provided for in this Ordinance in the zoning district in which the land is located.
Part 3: Application for Special Use
An application for a special use shall be filed with the Code Official on a prescribed form. The application shall be accompanied by such plans and/or data prescribed by the Plan Commission, and shall include a statement in writing by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed special use will conform to the standards set forth in Part 6 below. A site plan, as provided in Article 3, Section H, shall be required. Such applications shall be forwarded from the Code Official to the Plan Commission, with a request to review said application and accompanying data, conduct a public hearing thereon and submit written recommendations thereon to the Village Board of Trustees.
Part 4: Hearing on Application for Special Use
Within forty-five (45) days of receipt of any application for a special use, the Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application, at such time and place as shall be established by legal advertisement (Notice of Hearing) by the Plan Commission. The hearing shall be recorded in such manner as the Village Board shall, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
Part 5: Notice of Hearing
Notice of time and place of the hearing shall be published at least once in the Official Newspaper not more than thirty (30) days, nor less than fifteen (15) days before such hearing. Supplemental or additional notices may be published or distributed as the Village Board may, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 21
Part 6: Findings of Fact and Recommendation of the Plan Commission
The Plan Commission shall make written findings of fact and shall refer to any exhibits containing plans and specifications for the proposed special use, which shall remain a part of the permanent record of the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall submit same, together with its recommendation to the Village Board for final action. No special use shall be recommended by the Plan Commission, unless such Commission shall find:
a. That the establishment, maintenance or operation of the special use will not be detrimental to, or endanger, the public health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare.
b. That the special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood.
c. That the establishment of the special use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district.
d. That the exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of any proposed structure will not be so at variance with either the exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of the structures already constructed, or in the course of construction in the immediate neighborhood or the character of the applicable district, as to cause a substantial depreciation in the property values within the neighborhood.
e. That the adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or necessary facilities have been or are being provided.
f. That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
g. That the special use shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such regulations may, in each instance, be modified by the Village Board, pursuant to the recommendations of the Plan Commission.
Part 7: Terms of Relief, Conditions and Guarantees
Prior to recommending any special use, the Plan Commission shall, in a conclusion or paragraph, separate from the findings of fact, stipulate the terms or relief recommended. The Plan Commission may also stipulate any conditions and restrictions that are uniquely and specifically attributable to the effect of the special use on surrounding land uses, upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance, design and operation of the use as is deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified in Part 6 above. In cases in which special uses are recommended, the Plan Commission may require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection herewith are being, and will be, complied with.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 22
Part 8: Action by the Village Board of Trustees
a. The Village Board shall not act upon a proposed special use permitted under this Ordinance until it has received a written report and recommendation from the Plan Commission on the proposed special use.
b. The Village Board may grant by ordinance or deny any application for special use, and may establish any conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance, design and operation of the special use, as is deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest, and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified in Part 6 above.
c. In all cases in which the Village Board permits the establishment of a special use, the terms of the relief granted shall be specifically set forth in the ordinance.
d. Each special use, which is approved by the Village Board, shall attach to the property itself in perpetuity, until revoked.
Part 9: Effect of Denial
No application for a special use which has been denied by the Village Board shall be resubmitted for a period of one (1) year from the date of the order of denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of change of condition found to be valid by the Plan Commission and Village Board.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 23
Section F: Planned Unit Developments (PUDs)
Part 1: Purpose
This section is intended to provide the means and guidelines through which tracts of land may be developed through a comprehensive approach, rather than the traditional lot-by-lot treatment afforded by other districts in this ordinance. It is intended to provide a maximum of design freedom by permitting the developer an opportunity to more fully utilize the physical characteristics of the site through the reduction of lot sizes, yards, height and bulk restrictions and mixing of uses. Through the requirement of a development plan, it is the intent that property under this section will be developed through a unified design, providing contiguity between the various elements, and ultimately leading to a better environment. Increased densities may be permitted under this section if such increases can be substantiated on the basis that the superior site design makes greater densities possible, with no reduction of amenities; and keeping with the Village desire to provide a wide range of open space opportunities to serve local park and recreation facilities for active and passive use. This section is not intended to be a device for making increased densities more acceptable, or as a means of circumventing the Village’s bulk regulations or standards. This section should only be employed in instances where a benefit for the community can truly be derived from its use.
The planned unit development is intended to provide for developments incorporating a single type or a variety of related uses that are planned and developed as a unit. Such development may consist of conventionally subdivided lots, or provide for development by a planned unit development plan, in keeping with the purpose of the Comprehensive Plan of the Village of Frankfort.
To ensure that large scale commercial developments are designed as an integrated project, any commercial development in a B-2, B-3 or B-4 district of twenty (20) or more acres and in a OR district of thirty (30) or more acres shall be administered as a Planned Unit Development.
Part 2: Objectives
In addition to the general purpose of this Ordinance, the purpose of this section is to establish standards and procedures for Planned Unit Developments, in order that the following objectives may be obtained:
a. Encourage variety and flexibility in land development that is necessary to meet the best interests of the entire Village;
b. Regulate the allocation, maintenance and permanent preservation of common open space, recreation areas and facilities to offer recreational opportunities close to home and to enhance the appearance of neighborhoods by the conservation of natural resources;
c. Provide for a variety of housing types to accommodate the life stages and lifestyle choices of a range of persons, by allowing development that would not be possible under the strict application of the other sections of this Ordinance;
d. Preserve natural vegetation, topographic and geologic features, and other natural resources and amenities, and improve air and water quality;
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 24
e. Use a creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities that results in better design and provision of exceptional amenities;
f. Prioritize an efficient use of land, resulting in more economic networks of utilities, streets, schools, public grounds and buildings and other community facilities;
g. Support land use which promotes the public health, safety, comfort and welfare; and
h. Encourage innovations in residential, commercial and industrial development so that growing demands of the population may be met by greater variety in type, design and layout of space ancillary to said buildings.
Part 3: General Application Procedures
a. A planned unit development shall be granted as a special use permit, in accordance with standards and procedures outlined in Article 3, Section E (Special Uses) and this Section F (PUDs), and may depart from the normal procedures and requirements of other articles of this Ordinance. Applications shall be accompanied by the required plats, documents and other data as specified in this Ordinance.
b. Before submitting an application for a planned unit development, an applicant may confer with the Code Official to obtain information and guidance before entering into binding commitments or incurring substantial costs, provided, however, that no such pre-application conference shall result in any binding commitments on behalf of the applicant or the Village.
c. The procedure for approval of a Planned Unit Development is set forth in detail, in Part 9 through Part 11 below. In general, every application must proceed according to the following steps:
Pre-application conference with staff, at which time a concept plan is reviewed.
Preliminary plan review by the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission holds a public hearing and makes a recommendation, which is then reviewed by the Village Board. The application must receive approval from the Village Board before proceeding to the next step.
Final plan review by the Plan Commission. If no major changes have been made since the preliminary plan was approved, no public hearing is required. The Plan Commission makes a recommendation, which is then reviewed by the Village Board.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 25
Part 4: Review Standards
In granting or withholding approval of Preliminary Plans and Final Plans, the Plan Commission and the Village Board shall consider the extent to which the application fulfills the requirements of this Ordinance and the following standards:
a. The plan is designed to protect the public health, welfare and safety.
b. The proposed development does not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the immediate area.
c. The plan provides for protection of the aesthetic and function of the natural environment, which shall include, but not be limited to, flood plains, streams, creeks, lakes, ponds, wetlands, soil and geologic characteristics, air quality, vegetation, woodlands, and steep slopes.
d. The plan provides for and ensures the preservation of adequate recreational amenities and common open spaces.
e. Residential use areas may provide a variety of housing types to achieve a balanced neighborhood.
f. The planned unit development provides land area to accommodate cultural, educational, recreational and other public and quasi-public activities to serve the needs of the residents thereof.
g. The proposed development provide for the orderly and creative arrangement of all land uses with respect to each other and to the entire Village.
Part 5: Permitted Variations from Village Ordinances
a. Except as specifically provided otherwise in this Section, planned developments shall be developed in conformity with the Zoning Ordinance (including Site Development Standards in Article 7), Subdivision Ordinance, Engineering Design Standards, Landscape Regulations, and all other applicable codes and ordinances of the Village of Frankfort.
b. Modifications in zoning, subdivision, and other applicable regulations are privileges and will be considered by the Village only in direct response to the tangible benefits received from the planned unit development to the Village or the neighborhood in which it would be located. These benefits shall be in the form of exceptional amenities; outstanding environmental, landscape, architectural or site design; or the conservation of special man-made or natural features of the site.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 26
c. Bulk Regulations. Planned Unit Developments are governed by the bulk regulations of the underlying zoning district. However, the Plan Commission may recommend, and Village Board may authorize, exceptions to the applicable bulk regulations of this ordinance within the boundaries of such planned unit development including lot area, width, depth, and yard setback requirements, provided that the Plan Commission shall find:
1. That such exception shall be solely for the purpose of promoting an efficient and coordinated site plan, no less beneficial to the residents or occupants of such development, as well as the neighboring property, than would be obtained under the bulk regulations of this ordinance for buildings developed on separate zoning lots; and
That along the periphery of such planned unit developments, yards shall be provided as required by the regulations of the district in which said development is located.
d. The Plan Commission may recommend, and Village Board may authorize, that there be permitted in part of the area of a proposed planned unit development, and for the duration of such development, specified uses not permitted by the use regulations of the district in which said development is located. Such mixed Residential PUDs (see Part 7) or Mixed Use PUDs (see Part 8) shall not be approved unless the Plan Commission shall find:
That the uses permitted by such exceptions are necessary or desirable and are appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the planned unit development;
That the uses permitted by such exception are not of such a nature or so located as to exercise a detrimental influence on the surrounding neighborhood;
Part 6: Development Standards Applicable to all Planned Unit Developments
a. Site Development Regulations. The PUD shall comply with the site development requirements in Article 7, including the site design criteria, parking, landscaping, sign regulations, and lighting.
b. Landscape Screening. In accordance with the regulations of Village of Frankfort Landscape Regulations, screening at the edges of the planned unit development shall be regulated as follows:
1. Fences, walls or vegetation screening shall be provided along the edges of the planned unit development where needed to protect residents from undesirable views, lighting, noise or other off-site influences, or to protect occupants of adjoining residential districts from similar adverse influences within the planned unit development.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 27
2. Screening shall be designed to control existing or potential first floor residential window views in the planned unit development or other residential district.
The Plan Commission may waive screening requirements where terrain makes visual protection impractical.
c. Pedestrian and Bicycle Circulation. The development shall facilitate safe and continuous pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular movement.
Access for pedestrians and cyclists shall be arranged to provide safe, convenient routes, and need not be limited to vehicular access points. Walkways shall form a logical, safe and convenient system for pedestrian access to all dwelling units and to on-site amenities and off-site destinations likely to attract substantial pedestrian traffic. Walkways to be used by substantial numbers of children as play areas or routes to school or other principal destinations shall be so located and safeguarded as to minimize contacts with normal automobile traffic. Street crossings shall be minimized on such walkways, appropriately marked and located and designed to promote safety. When pedestrian access points do not occur at street intersections, they shall be marked and controlled, and when such ways are exposed to substantial vehicular traffic at the edges of a district, fences or other barriers shall be erected and maintained to prevent crossings, except at designated points.
If substantial bicycle traffic is anticipated, and where shown on the Bike Trail Master Plan, bicycle paths are encouraged as part of the walkway system. Pedestrian ways appropriately located, designed and constructed may be combined with other easements and uses by emergency or service vehicles, but shall not be used by other vehicular traffic. Where possible, bicycle and bridle paths shall be combined with the street crossings. Such paths may be counted toward open space required by paragraph (d) below.
d. Designation of Recreational Amenities and Permanent Common Open Spaces. At least 20% of the net acreage of PUDs that contain only residential uses, and at least 20% of the net acreage of the residential portion of mixed use PUDs, shall be usable common open space.
Usable common open space shall be defined as follows:
Active or Passive. Usable common open space may include active open space and/or passive open space, as defined in Article 12.
Parcel Size: Each parcel of common open space used for active recreation shall be at least 10,000 square feet with a minimum width of 125 feet. For trail purposes the minimum open space width shall be 20 (twenty) feet.
Parcel Location: Each parcel must be accessible to all the residents it is intended to serve. The parcels must be linked by sidewalks, bike trails or pedestrian trails.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 28
Water Coverage: Not more than 70% of the land designated as usable open space may be covered by water on a permanent basis.
Slope: Not more than 20% of the usable open space may have a finished grade exceeding 10%.
Ownership: Land dedicated to the Village or Park District may be included in the calculation of usable common open space. Where cash in lieu of land is provided, the acreage of land that otherwise would have been dedicated may be included in the calculation of usable common open space.
Usable common open space shall not include:
Areas reserved for the exclusive use or benefit of an individual tenant or owner;
Dedicated streets, alleys, and other public rights-of-way;
Required detention areas;
Floodplains or wetlands, unless the Village Board determines that natural features, such as a creek or lake, will be a substantial amenity to prospective residents;
Vehicular drives or parking, loading and storage areas; and
Irregular or unusable narrow strips of land less than fifty (50) feet wide, unless containing a trail or bicycle path.
e. Open Space Ownership and Maintenance
Prior to the final approval of any PUD, the public or private ownership and maintenance responsibilities for all common open spaces shall be established by the developer and approved by the Village. Public ownership shall be either the Village or Park District. Private ownership shall be a Property Owner’s Association duly established by Sections of incorporation and bylaws, in accordance with the Illinois Condominium Property Act. The instrument of conveyance shall include restrictive covenants running with the land to guarantee the common open space will be properly cared for and used only for purposes designated in the approved final PUD development plan.
In the event that any portion of the property shall be developed under the Illinois Statutes relating to condominiums, the condominium covenants, conditions and restrictions shall include a provision whereby the Village shall have the right, but not the obligation, to enforce covenants or obligations of which the Village is a part, of the association or the owners of the units as defined and provided within the Declaration of Condominium. The Village shall also have the right to charge or place a lien upon the property of the condominium association for the repayment of such costs and expenses, including reasonable attorneys’ fees in enforcing such
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 29
obligations. The declaration shall further provide that this provision may not be amended without the approval of the Village. Prior to recording, the finalized Declaration of Condominium shall be submitted to the Village for their approval.
No property shall be conveyed or dedicated for public use to any public body until the Plan Commission reviews and the Village Board approves such conveyance or dedication.
No common open space may be put to any use not specified in the final development plan unless the final development plan has been amended to permit that use as provided herein. However, no change of use authorized under amendments of the plan may be considered as a waiver of any of the covenants limiting the use of common open space areas.
To ensure appropriate long-term maintenance of common open spaces the developer shall submit a detailed open space management plan describing the method and schedule of maintenance. The Village may require a Maintenance Reserve Fee, whereby each homeowner, at the time of initial closing of the property, shall pay a maintenance fee into an escrow account held by the Village, in an amount determined by the Village.
f. Completion of Recreation Facilities and Other Site Amenities
Construction of recreational facilities and other improvements to common open spaces serving a PUD shall commence prior to the completion of not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the dwelling units in the development, or fifty percent (50%) of the total gross floor area of commercial and industrial uses.
Recreation facilities and other improvements to common open spaces shall be completed prior to the issuance of building permits for the last forty percent (40%) of the dwelling units, or thirty percent (30%) of the total gross floor area of commercial and industrial uses within a PUD developed as a single phase.
In PUDs containing two (2) or more phases, construction of recreation facilities in earlier phases shall be completed prior to the issuance of occupancy permits for the next phase of the PUD.
g. Additional Conditions. To meet the unique circumstances presented by each PUD and to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of existing Village residents and the residents of the proposed development, the Village reserves the right to attach any other conditions it deems necessary, but not specifically provided herein, to the approval of all PUDs.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 30
Part 7: Planned Residential Development
a. Definition. Planned Residential Developments generally fall into one of two categories:
Single-Family Cluster. A planned residential cluster subdivision is a comprehensively planned single family residential development in which dwelling units are clustered at one or more locations, but where the overall density does not exceed the maximum density permitted under the regulations for the zoning district in which said subdivision is located. The remaining land “saved” is devoted to common open space. A cluster residential development is most appropriate for those areas designated on the Comprehensive Plan for single family detached housing.
Mixed Residential. A mixed residential development is a comprehensively planned residential development in which a mix of housing types may be permitted, but where the overall density does not exceed the maximum density permitted under the regulations for the zoning district in which said subdivision is located. Dwelling units may be clustered in the same manner as in a residential cluster development. A mixed residential development is most appropriate for those areas designated on the Comprehensive Plan for attached housing.
b. Permitted and Special Uses
The permitted and special uses in a planned residential development are those that are allowed in the underlying zoning district, as well as support commercial uses that are intended to serve the residents of the development or adjacent subdivisions.
Support commercial uses are appropriate in PUDs that are ten (10) acres or more, (although smaller PUDs with support commercial uses may be approved by the Plan Commission and Village Board). To ensure that the predominantly residential character of the PUD is maintained, the appropriate amount of land area devoted to commercial uses should generally not exceed five percent (5%) of the total land area of the PUD. Support commercial uses shall be developed in accordance with the following standards:
Definition: For the purposes of these regulations, support commercial uses are defined as small establishments designed and intended to serve the daily or frequent trade or service needs of the immediately surrounding population (i.e. neighborhood area). Support commercial uses include those uses permitted in the B-1 district.
Maximum Size of Establishments: No individual support commercial establishment created under the provisions of this Subsection shall have a gross floor area in excess of 5,000 square feet, and no combination of such establishments in any one location shall have a total gross floor area of more than 10,000 square feet.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 31
c. Determination of Permitted Density for a Residential Subdivision
Base Density. The total number of dwelling units to be built in a residential subdivision shall not exceed the number that could be developed on the same acreage as a standard subdivision, with the underlying zoning districts’ minimum lot size and setback requirements strictly enforced. The base density permitted shall be determined upon submission of a subdivision plan prepared by the developer, or “yield plan,” which plan shall comply with the strict requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, and the Village Design Standards and Subdivision Ordinance.
Sample Yield Plan
Sample PUD Plan
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 32
Bonus Density. The permitted density in a planned residential subdivision may be higher than that allowed in paragraph (1) above if it qualifies for density increases under the incentives listed in subsection (d) below.
d. Density Bonuses. To encourage excellence in design the following density bonuses shall be totaled to yield an allowed percentage increase over the maximum base density allowed in Part 7(d)(1) above. In no case shall the cumulative density increase exceed twenty percent (20%) of the permitted base density. The percentage of common open space in the PUD development should not be reduced below the minimum required by Part 6.d above to accommodate increased density allowed by the bonus provision.
Landscaped Buffer Yard. One (1%) percent for each twenty (20') feet in width in addition to the buffer yard requirements of the Village of Frankfort Landscape Regulations.
Landscaping. For excellence in creativity of design, quality and quantity of landscaping beyond the requirements of the Village of Frankfort Landscape Regulations, a bonus of up to two (2%) percent will be allowed.
Swimming Pool. One percent (1%) for each outdoor pool; and two percent (2%) for each indoor pool.
Tennis Courts. One (1%) percent for each tennis court, not to exceed two (2%) percent.
Community Center and/or Club Building. Up to five (5%) percent for a community center and/or club building.
Municipal Facility. Up to five percent (5%) for land donations for a municipal facility and up to ten (10%) percent for donations of land and structure(s) for such facilities.
Open Space. Up to one percent (1%) for each five percent (5%) of additional common open space above that required by Part 6d.
Senior Housing. Up to five percent (5%) for inclusion of housing specifically targeted toward senior citizens, including independent living, assisted living, or nursing home facilities.
e. Site Design Standards
Bulk Regulations. With the exception of minimum lot area, residential dwelling units shall comply with the bulk regulations set forth by the standards of the underlying zoning district in Article 6, including minimum yards, maximum building height, maximum lot coverage, maximum impervious coverage, minimum gross floor area, etc. The Village may relax these standards in accordance with the standards of Part 5(c) above.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 33
Minimum Lot Size. No minimum lot area shall be required, provided that the density regulations of paragraph (d)(1) above are met.
Building Separation. For single family detached units and support commercial uses, the minimum side-to-side separation between principal buildings shall not be less than 20 feet. For attached residential units, the minimum separations between principal buildings shall be as follows:
Side-to-side: 30 feet
Side-to-rear: 40 feet
Rear-to-rear: 60 feet
Open Space. Open space shall be provided in accordance with Part 6(d) above. Primary (abutting) access from common open space to each building site need not be provided. However, convenient access shall be guaranteed to all residents within the development.
Tot Lots/Neighborhood Park. A minimum of one (1) tot lot or neighborhood park shall be provided for every one hundred (100) dwelling units, or as determined necessary by the Plan Commission. Tot lots and neighborhood parks shall be centrally located in relationship to the dwelling units to which they serve.
Part 8: Mixed Use Development
a. Zoning Districts Where Permitted. Mixed use PUDs may be allowed by special use permit in all zoning districts except the AG Agricultural District.
b. Permitted and Special Uses
Mixed use PUDs shall be designed to permit a wide variety of land use types, and may have one or a mix of land uses on a single parcel, including residential (single family detached and attached), office, retail commercial, manufacturing and warehouse. Land uses should be generally consistent with the guidelines of the Comprehensive Plan. The PUD must be planned and established as a single entity.
Individual permitted uses shall be those found in the list of permitted and special uses in the Village’s existing zoning districts.
c. Determination of Residential Density. The total number of dwelling units to be built in a mixed use PUD shall not exceed the number that could be developed on the same acreage as a standard subdivision for only that portion of the PUD proposed for residential uses, with the minimum lot size requirement of the underlying zoning district strictly enforced. The technique set forth in Part 7(c)(1) shall be used to determine the base density.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 34
d. Bonus Density. The permitted residential density in a mixed use PUD may be higher than that allowed in paragraph (c) above, if it qualifies for density increases under the incentives listed in Part 7(d).
e. Site Design Standards
Bulk Regulations. With the exception of maximum building height, buildings shall comply with the bulk regulations set forth by the standards of the underlying zoning district in Article 6, including minimum yards, minimum landscaped yards, maximum lot coverage, maximum impervious coverage, minimum gross floor area, etc. The Village may relax these standards in accordance with the provisions of Part 5(c) above.
Maximum Building Height. The maximum building height for principal and accessory non-residential uses shall be the same as the height allowed by the underlying zoning district, or by requirement of the adjacent zoning district, whichever is greater. An additional one foot (1') in height is permitted for every four feet (4') of additional front, side, or rear setback, as applicable, from an adjoining lower intensity zoning district. Increased height may also be approved in cases of unique topography, where the elevation of the building site is much lower than the elevation of the adjacent public right-of-way.
Building Separation. For single family detached units the minimum side-to-side separation between principal buildings shall not be less than 20 feet. For attached residential units, the minimum separations between principal buildings shall be as follows:
Side-to-side: 30 feet
Side-to-rear: 40 feet
Rear-to-rear: 60 feet
Minimum Common Open Space. The residential portion of a mixed use planned unit development shall comply with the open space standards in planned residential subdivisions in Part 7(e)(4).
Part 9: Pre-Application Conference and Concept Plan
a. Purpose. Prior to filing a formal application for approval of a planned unit development, the applicant shall request a pre-application conference with the Community Development Department. The purpose of the pre-application conference is to make advice and assistance available to the applicant before presentation of the preliminary development plan as required by this Code, so that the applicant may determine:
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 35
Whether the proposed planned unit development conceptually appears to be in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and all other applicable Village standards and ordinances;
Whether any zoning amendment or variation is required in connection with the proposed development; and
Whether the proposed planned unit development will be in conformity with the land-use policies and objectives of the Village of Frankfort.
b. Concept Plan. Prior to the pre-application meeting, the petitioner shall provide 5 copies of a concept plan describing the proposed development and surrounding area in sufficient detail to demonstrate the relationship of the proposed PUD to adjoining uses, both existing and planned, and to the topography and natural features of the site and adjoining lands. The concept plan shall include the following:
North arrow, scale, and date of preparation.
Name and address of site planner, engineer or surveyor who prepared the plan.
Proposed land uses, acreage and percent of the site devoted to each land use, including layout and configuration of common open space.
Yield plan, as described in Part 7(c)(1).
Proposed layout of streets, lots, and blocks for those phases of the PUD for which the petitioner will seek initial preliminary approval.
Proposed building footprints and estimated floor area for non-residential structures for those phases of the PUD for which the petitioner will seek initial preliminary approval.
Conceptual sketches demonstrating the land planning concept for each proposed type of housing unit.
Gross and net density of residential areas and housing types.
Location of parking areas, number of spaces to be provided, and method used to calculate the number of required spaces.
Wetlands, flood plains, and drainage characteristics, including topographic contour lines with a minimum of 10’ intervals.
Major stands of trees and other significant vegetative areas.
A preliminary engineering study providing a general description of existing sanitary, storm, and water service facilities, on and adjacent to the proposed development
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 36
and the proposed improvements necessary to properly handle the utility needs of the development and any additional information as may be requested by the Village Engineer.
A brief written statement that contains general descriptions of the design and architectural standards for the PUD, treatment of environmentally sensitive land, proposed time frame for phased development, a statement of present ownership and contractual purchase agreements, and proposed zoning.
Any other data determined to be reasonably necessary by the Code Official to provide an accurate overview of the proposed development.
c. Procedures
The Community Development Department shall review the Concept Plan and other documentation, and shall advise the petitioner as to the compatibility of the PUD with the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Ordinance, the Subdivision Ordinance, and the Village of Frankfort Engineering Design Standards. Recommendations relative to a pre-application review are advisory only, and shall not constitute a waiver from the requirements contained in the Village Code.
The Community Development Department may require revisions to the Concept Plan prior to acceptance of the Preliminary Plan. This may necessitate additional meetings between the petitioner and the Community Development Department.
When deemed desirable by the Community Development Department, Village staff and/or consultants shall prepare a written summary report which shall be forwarded to the Plan Commission and Village Board.
Part 10: Preliminary Development Plan
The purpose of the Preliminary Plan is to provide a transitional phase between concept plan review and final plan approval and a logical sequence of events. It is intended to permit the applicant the opportunity to provide specific information pertaining to that portion of the planned unit development that is the subject of the preliminary plan.
a. Application Submittal Requirements. Application for Preliminary Plan approval of a planned unit development shall be filed with the Code Official, accompanied by twenty (20) copies of a preliminary development plan. The following information shall be required:
1. Ownership. The entire site of the planned unit development shall be under single ownership, and/or unified control as demonstrated by a statement of ownership description of legal responsibility as necessary to effectuate and maintain the plan.
2. Boundary Survey and Legal Description. A boundary survey and legal description of the area covered by such Preliminary Plan, prepared and certified by a Registered
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 37
Illinois Land Surveyor, including the total acreage therein certified to the nearest one-hundredth (1/100) of an acre, a north point (designated as true north) and the date of preparation.
3. Site Location Map.
4. Topographical Survey. A topographical survey of the area covered by such Preliminary Plan at two (2) foot contour intervals as such area exists at that time.
5. Existing Zoning and Land Use Map. A map showing the existing zoning and land use of the property covered by the Preliminary Plan and the area within 500 feet thereof, as well as of the boundaries of the total planned unit development.
6. Concept Plan. For large projects that may be developed over several years, an applicant shall be required to submit a concept plan for those portions of a property that will not be developed immediately. Concept plans shall meet the requirements of Part 9(b) above.
7. Statement of Character. A written explanation of the general character of the proposed development, including:
a) the description and quantity of all land uses to be included in the development, with maximum and minimum percentage limitations for each use as well as the proposed number of acres to be devoted to recreational areas, schools, and municipal purposes;
b) the projected type, location and number of dwelling units and densities to be constructed in each phase of the total development;
c) a description of each type of residential, commercial, or industrial unit proposed to be constructed (i.e., single-family, commercial, industrial, etc);
the estimated population broken down by housing type, location, and school district, as may be anticipated upon completion of the development.
8. Drawings. A detailed drawing of the area covered by such plan prepared at a scale of not less than 1" – 200 and shall show such designations as proposed streets (public and private) for the area covered by such preliminary plan and the area within 500 feet thereof, all buildings, their height and use, common open space, recreational areas and facilities, parking areas, service areas and other facilities related to the proposed development. The submission may be composed of one or more sheets and drawings and shall include:
a) Existing and proposed public roads including classifications, width or right-of-way, width of pavement and construction details;
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 38
b) Existing easements and proposed easements to be granted in lieu of rights-of-way;
c) The gross and net density of residential uses, including dwelling units per acre, the number of dwelling units by type and the number of buildings by type;
d) Schematic street lighting and public area lighting systems; and
e) A landscape plan which satisfies the requirements of the Village of Frankfort Landscape Regulations, and sections 150.75 and 150.76 of the Village Code.
f) Engineering plans for storm water and floodplain management in compliance with Village ordinances.
9. Traffic Study. A traffic study prepared by a qualified expert, providing:
a) A general description of existing roads on and adjacent to the proposed development, and the proposed road improvements necessary to handle properly the traffic anticipated to be generated upon development;
b) A circulation diagram indicating the proposed movement of vehicles, goods and pedestrians within and adjacent to the planned unit development; and
c) Any special engineering features and traffic control devices needed to facilitate traffic safety.
10. Village Ordinance Report. A description of the modifications, exceptions, and variances from this ordinance or the Village’s subdivision ordinance which are being requested as part of the application for establishment of the planned unit development;
11. Market Study. If deemed necessary by the Code Official, a general market analysis report, or other appropriate evidence, to establish the need for and feasibility of a non-residential or mixed use development;
12. Environmental Study. A general statement identifying existing natural and environmental resources, including a policy statement by the applicant expressing basic plans and procedures, which will be utilized to ensure protection of the total physical setting of the development and related environs. The statement should identify and locate on one (1) or more exhibits, the following environmental factors:
a) A soil analysis shall be prepared, along with recommendations, if any, from the Will County Soil and Water Conservation District. The analysis must include soil types, code numbers and limitations for urbanized areas, conservation and agricultural productivity, soil wetness and erosion potential;
b) Scenic views and vistas;
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 39
c) Surface hydrology identifying: existing surface drainage patterns; topography; major and minor water sheds; base flood limits as established by hydrological investigations atlas, FEMA Flood Insurance Maps, historical flood of record or best available information; projected 100 year flood boundaries; all ponds, lakes, creeks, streams, rivers and ditches; and wetlands;
d) Geology identifying surface geological deposits and a statement of their characteristics and limitations, prepared pursuant to the recommendations and published data of the Illinois Geological Survey and of other mapping data, and analysis of subsurface conditions on the subject property if required by the Village Engineer;
e) Natural coverage and vegetation showing marshes, bogs, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees, natural prairie, rock outcroppings, existing pasture land, crop land, orchards, other agricultural uses, areas of sand, gravel, or peat extractions and any unique natural or ecologically sensitive area;
f) Current ground elevations on the tract with contours at two (2) foot intervals and spot elevations at all breaks in grade, along all drainage channels or swales and at selected points, not more than 100 feet in all directions; and
g) The generalized pattern of existing land use, major and minor roadways, sidewalks, railroads, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and drainage improvements, water mains, utilities and designated landmarks, historical areas and buildings.
13. Construction Schedule. A proposed construction schedule showing the anticipated number of dwelling units or other structures to be constructed during the anticipated term of development, and showing the anticipated amount of square feet of commercial or industrial property (if any) to be constructed and ready for occupancy during the anticipated term of the development. The schedule shall include:
a) The approximate date on which construction of the project can be expected to begin;
b) The stages in which the project will be built;
c) The anticipated rate of development;
d) The approximate dates when the development of each of the stages will be completed; and
e) The area and location of recreational space and common open space that will be provided at each stage.
14. Covenants. Proposed agreements, provisions or covenants and by-laws which will govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of the planned unit
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 40
development and any of its common open space of the homeowner associations, recreational areas and facilities, in the area covered by the Preliminary Plan.
15. Title and Certificates. Present tract designation, according to official records in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds, title under which the proposed development is to be recorded, with names and addresses of owners, and notation stating acreage.
16. Open Space and Recreation Areas and Facilities. All parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use or reserved for the use of all property owners with the purpose indicated, and the improvements which will be made to each area and facility.
17. Architectural Renderings. Architectural renderings of the proposed structures (except single family detached homes) within only the area which is the subject of the Preliminary Plan.
18. Notices. Names and addresses of the persons to whom notices of hearings hereunder may be sent, including the subdivider, the designer of the subdivision and the owners of the land within 250 feet from the boundary lines of the property immediately adjoining the land to be platted.
b. Preliminary Plan Procedural Requirements are as follows:
1. Public Hearings. The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application for a special use for a planned unit development and preliminary plans, giving notice of the time and place not more than thirty (30), nor less than fifteen (15) days before the date of the hearing by publishing a notice thereof at least once in the Official Newspaper.
2. Phased Planned Unit Developments. If the Preliminary Plan initially submitted shall cover less than all of the planned unit development, Preliminary Plans for additional areas of the planned unit development may be submitted to the Village Board within such period of time as shall have been prescribed in the approval of the application for establishment of the planned unit development, provided, further, that upon request in writing of the developer, the Village Board may, by resolution duly adopted at any meeting of the Village Board, extend the period of time for submission of Preliminary Plans covering all of the planned unit development.
3. Status of Approved Preliminary Development Plan. Approval of a preliminary plan shall not constitute approval of the final plan, nor qualify a plat of the planned unit development for recording. Rather it shall be deemed an expression of approval of the preliminary plan as a guide to preparation of the final plan.
A preliminary plan which has been granted approval as submitted, or approval with conditions or modifications, shall not be modified, revoked or otherwise impaired by action of the Village, pending an application for final approval, without the
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 41
consent of the applicants, provided that application for final approval is filed within the time or times specified in the resolution granting preliminary approval, and thereafter, but prior to final approval, the applicant shall choose to abandon such plan and shall so notify the Plan Commission in writing, the preliminary plan approval shall be deemed to be revoked and all that portion of the area included in the plan for which final approval has not been given, shall be subject to those local ordinances applicable thereto. No building permit shall be issued for any structure until approval has been given by the Village Board.
4. Submission with Preliminary Development Plans. At any time, and from time to time when a Preliminary Plan for a portion of the planned unit development is submitted for approval, it shall be an obligation of the developer of such portion to cause the developer of the overall planned unit development to prepare and submit to the Village with such Preliminary Plan, an updated Land Use Plan for those areas in the planned unit development for which Preliminary Plans shall not then have been submitted for approval.
5. Annual Submissions. When no updated Land Use Plan of the planned unit development has been prepared for one (1) year, the developer of the planned unit development shall, unless the Village waives such obligation, prepare and submit to the Village a Land Use Plan for those areas in the planned unit development for which Preliminary Plans have not been submitted for approval.
Part 11: Final Development Plan
The purpose of the final plan is to provide a detailed design for the land to be subdivided, as well as, the division of other lands into common open spaces and building areas, and to more specifically address land uses and building locations.
a. Application Submittal Requirements. The following information shall be required in addition to all Preliminary Plan information as per Article 3, Section F, Part 10 of this Code:
1. If the planned unit development constitutes a subdivision, a final subdivision plat shall be submitted. Any such final subdivision plat shall set forth, on the face thereof, suitable dedications of permanent open spaces and recreational amenities to be owned in common easements, rights-of way and all other criteria in form and substance, conforming to the requirements of the Village’s Subdivision Regulations and Design Standards, and all other applicable Village standards and regulations, as the same may be amended and in force from time to time.
2. The final version of the site plan of the planned unit development shall be filed, indicating the locations of all buildings, all parking and loading spaces, setbacks, block and lot numbers, street names, and any other special structure, facility or feature approved or required by the Village Board.
3. The final version of the covenants, if any, by which the applicant proposes to regulate land use and otherwise protect the proposed development, accompanied
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 42
by the written representation and warranty of the applicant, in form and substance satisfactory to the Village Attorney, to the effect that the owner of the real property which is the subject of the proposed planned unit development has not sold or otherwise disposed of any interest in said property and will not sell, or otherwise dispose of any such interest, prior to the filing for record of said covenants in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Will County, Illinois.
4. Such deeds or easement agreement, if any, as required or approved by the Village Board, shall be filed in form and substance approved by the Village Attorney, conveying a suitable ownership interest in the parcels within the proposed planned unit development which are to be subject to public or common ownership.
5. Filing a copy of the Articles of Incorporation of homeowners, merchants or business or property owners association, if any, required or approved by the Village Board, certified by the Secretary of State of Illinois, not more than thirty (30) days prior to the filing of the final plan; a certificate of good standing for such corporation certified by the Secretary as being true, correct; and a complete copy of such bylaws, as of the date not more than thirty (30) days prior to the filing of such final plan.
6. Engineering drawings and specifications for:
a) Sanitary and storm sewer systems.
b) Water supply system.
c) Street lighting and public area lighting systems.
d) Sidewalks, trails, and paths.
e) Storm water management.
f) Floodplain management.
g) Erosion control plan for all disturbed areas and a plan to preserve existing vegetation.
Such engineering drawings and any other drawings required by any other ordinance of the Village shall be prepared in such detail as may be required by the Village Engineer and the Village of Frankfort Engineering Design Standards, and the Village of Frankfort’s Ordinance Regulating Development in Special Flood Hazard Areas.
7. Estimate of the cost of installation of all proposed public improvements, confirmed by a registered Illinois engineer.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 43
8. A plan or report shall be prepared by the developer and shall evaluate, in general terms, the impact of the proposed development on the natural environment. The report shall identify:
a) The final version of the developer’s policy toward maintaining the natural environment;
b) An analysis of the existing environment, prior to the proposed action. Consideration should be given to the following factors:
i) Unique physical features of the land such as soil stability, erosion, and ground contours;
ii) Scenic views and vistas;
iii) Drainage, run-off surface water, ground water, flood plains, lakes, streams, creeks, streams, rivers, ditches and wetlands;
iv) Air quality;
v) Areas underlain by sand and gravel aquifers;
vi) Vegetation; and
vii) Wildlife.
c) A general listing of the effects on the environment which would be caused by the proposed development, and the actions which the developer proposes to undertake to resolve any adverse conditions resulting from development of the land.
9. Final architectural renderings and facades of all proposed primary structures, except single family detached residences. Elevations must include all building facades.
10. A certificate shall be furnished from the County Collector that finds no delinquent taxes are outstanding on the property, and that all special assessments constituting a lien on the whole or any part of the property of the planned unit development have been paid.
11. Certificates and signature blocks as required by Illinois Statutes and Plat Act.
b. Final Development Plan Procedural Requirements. The final plan shall conform substantially to the preliminary plan, as approved, and if desired by the developer, it
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 44
may be submitted in stages, with each stage reflecting a portion of the approved preliminary plan which is proposed to be recorded and developed. Submission in stages may occur, provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations. The required procedure for approval of the final plan of a planned unit development shall be as follows:
1. Application for final plan approval shall be filed with the Community Development Department, and be accompanied by twenty (20) copies of the final plan. The final plan and supporting data shall be filed with the Village Clerk and forwarded to the Plan Commission for certification that the final plan is in conformity with these regulations and in agreement with any approved preliminary plans.
2. Final Plans for all or specified development phases of the planned unit development shall be submitted for approval. There shall be no minimum acreage requirement with respect to Final Plans. Approval of final plans may not be withheld for reasons that would be inconsistent with the approved Preliminary Development Plan. In considering the approval of the Final Plan, no further public hearings shall be required to approve changes from Preliminary Development Plans which are not “major changes” as defined in Article 3, Section F, Part 12 of this Ordinance.
3. After review of the final plan and supporting data, the Plan Commission shall approve or disapprove the plan within sixty (60) days after filing by the developer. Disapproval of the final plan of the planned unit development shall include a clear statement of the reasons thereof.
4. The Village Board shall review the final plan after receiving the recommendation of the Plan Commission. Approval by the Village Board of the final plan for any proposed planned unit development shall be effective only for a period of sixty (60) days after the date of such approval, unless within such sixty (60) day period the applicant shall record or cause the recordation of the final plan including any final subdivision plat, the final restrictive covenants and the deeds and/or easement agreement required or approved by the Village Board, in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Will County, Illinois.
5. Final Plans for all or part of the area covered by the Preliminary Plan shall be submitted to the Board of Trustees for Approval within one (1) year after approval of the Preliminary Development Plan by the Village Board, provided that upon request in writing of the developer, the Village Board may, by resolution duly adopted at any meeting of the Village Board, extend the period of time for the submission of such final plans.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 45
Part 12: PUD Compliance and Amendments
All planned unit developments shall be developed in strict compliance with the recorded final plan and supporting data. All final plans and covenants filed and recorded hereunder shall be contractual undertakings by, and shall be binding upon, the applicants, therefore the owners of the land covered by such planned unit development, their successors and assigns; and shall limit and control the construction location and use and operation of all land in such planned unit development, and all improvements and structures to be located thereon.
a. Schedule. The Village Board shall consider a planned unit development subject to revocation if construction falls more than two (2) years behind the filed and approved schedule. The developer shall be notified at least ninety (90) days prior to any revocation hearing. The site will revert back to its original zoning if revocation occurs.
b. Occupancy. No planned unit development, or any portion thereof, may be occupied until such time as a certificate of Zoning Compliance has been issued by the Building Inspector and/or the Code Official certifying that the development, or a stage of the development, if applicable, has been completed in compliance with the final plan and any recorded covenant or developer agreement as approved and recorded.
c. Amendments to the Final Approved Plan During Development. Upon issuance of a special use permit and the necessary building permits, no major changes may be made during or after the development of the final plan as approved and recorded by the Village Board unless the applicant applies for approval of a major change to a planned unit development.
d. Major Changes. A major change requires a public hearing before the Plan Commission and approval by the Village Board. Any of the following changes shall be deemed to be a “major change:”
1. A change which alters the concept, character or intent of the final development plan;
2. A change which increases residential density by five (5) percent or more;
3. A change which increases the height of any building or structure beyond five (5) percent, or alters the uses and design standards set forth as a minimum in this Ordinance;
4. A change which significantly increases nonresidential floor area by more than ten (10) percent;
5. A change which reduces the amount of common open spaces or recreational amenities;
6. A change in the Final Development Plan; or
7. A change in the Transportation Plan.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 46
e. Minor Changes. The Code Official may approve minor changes in the planned unit development which do not change the concept or intent of the development and shall convey all decisions to the Plan Commission in writing. Minor changes are defined as any change not defined as a major change.
Part 13: Building Permits and Excavation Operations
Building and occupancy permits shall be required for each structure in a planned unit development. No building permit relating to any part of a planned unit development shall be issued prior to the approval of a Final Plan, or such part of the planned unit development,
Part 14: Effect of Denial of a Planned Development Special Use
No application for a planned development special use which has been denied wholly or in part by the Village Board shall be resubmitted for a period of one (1) year from the date of said order of denial, except on the grounds of new evidence, or proof of change of conditions found to be valid by the Plan Commission and the Village Board of Trustees.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 47
Section G: Reversions
Part 1: Reversion Standards
a. A variation, special use, zoning amendment or a planned unit development shall be revoked if the testimony upon which such variance, special use or change of zoning was granted was falsely given.
b. A variation, special use, or planned unit development may be revoked if there is a discontinuance of these uses for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
c. A variation, special use, or planned unit development may be revoked if the property to which the variation, special use permit or planned unit development has been approved but has not been put to use as allowed within one and one-half (1 ½) years of the granting of the variation, special use permit or planned unit development approval. However, an extension of one (1) additional year may be granted by the Village Board of Trustees if cause for such non-use is deemed responsible and an application for such an extension is made to the Plan Commission not less than sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the one (1) year period.
Part 2: Initiation of Reversion
The Village Board may initiate a request for a reversion or revocation.
Part 3: Application for Reversion
A request for a reversion or revocation shall be filed with the Code Official and shall be in such form, contain such information and be accompanied by such exhibits as the Plan Commission may reasonably require. A copy of such request shall be delivered via registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of record of the subject land at their last ascertainable known address. A copy of such request so filed for a revocation of a variation, a special use or the reversion of a planned unit development approval shall be immediately forwarded by the Code Official, to the Plan Commission.
Part 4: Public Hearing
The Plan Commission shall hold a Public Hearing on the request for reversion or revocation within ninety (90) days after receiving the request from the Code Official. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at least once, not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days before the hearing in a newspaper published or of general circulation in the Village, according to law. Not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, a copy of the form of such notice shall be mailed by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of record addressed to their last ascertainable known address. The Public Hearing on any such request shall be held in the Village Hall, and may be adjourned from time to time.
Part 5: Recommendation of Plan Commission
The Plan Commission, within sixty (60) days after the conclusion of the hearing on any such request, shall transmit a written report to the Village Board stating its findings and recommendations with regard to such request. If granted, the Board shall pass an ordinance.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 48
Part 6: Action by the Village Board of Trustees
Within thirty (30) days after the receipt of the findings and recommendation of the Plan Commission, the Village Board shall grant or deny the requested revocation or reversion, or refer the request back to the Plan Commission for further consideration.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 49
Section H: Administration of Site Plan Review
Part 1: Administration
The review of architecture and site plans provided for in this Article is intended to be only a part of the zoning and subdivision review procedure of the Village of Frankfort development review process. Site plan approval does not in any way signify final approval of any portion of a project.
Part 2: Applicability
Site plans, prepared and approved in accordance with the provisions of this Section H and the Site Development Regulations of Article 7, shall be required to assist Village administrative officials in the review of certain applications for building permits, special use permits, and planned unit developments to assure compliance with all applicable requirements of this Zoning Ordinance.
Part 3: Developments And Uses Requiring a Site Plan
The following activities require a site plan:
a. All permitted uses in residential zoning districts, except the following:
1. Individual single family detached dwellings.
2. Agricultural structures on farmsteads.
b. Subdivisions.
c. All permitted uses in business zoning districts.
d. All permitted uses in manufacturing zoning districts.
e. When an alteration or amendment is proposed to the site improvements or design of a previously approved site plan.
f. All special uses and Planned Unit Developments.
g. Government buildings.
h. Changes in the use of land or existing buildings, except for those listed in paragraph (a) above, which result in an expansion, rebuilding, relocation, reconstruction, change in use, or increase in intensity of use or zoning, except for normal maintenance, including painting, repairs, and cleaning that does not significantly alter the façade or appearance of the building.
i. Accessory uses and structures, unless the requirement for site plan review is waived by the Code Official.
j. All other uses, and changes from existing uses, for which a site plan is required as determined by the Code Official.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 50
Part 4: Exceptions
No site plan shall be required for the following uses:
a. Individual single family detached dwellings or agricultural structures on farmsteads. (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02)
b. Additions or alterations to existing buildings or uses when such addition does not exceed 2,000 square feet or ten (10%) percent of the gross floor area of the existing building or use, whichever is greater.
c. Any use permitted on a temporary basis for a period not to exceed six (6) months.
Part 5: Required Information on Site Plans
Five copies of the site plan submission shall be provided, including the following:
a. Site plans, or any portion thereof, involving engineering, architecture, or land surveying shall be respectively certified by an engineer, architect, or land surveyor authorized by the State to practice as such.
b. Site plans shall be prepared to a reasonable scale, not greater than 1"=100'.
c. A site plan may be prepared in one (1) or more sheets to show clearly the information required by this Part 5 and to facilitate the review and approval of the plan. If prepared on more than one (1) sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join.
d. All site plans shall be submitted to the Code Official in five (5) clearly legible blue or black line copies. Each site plan shall be accompanied by a receipt from the Village Clerk evidencing the payment of all required site plan fees for processing and approval as set by the Village Board from time to time. Where applicable, all site plans shall contain the following information:
1. Location of tract by an insert map at a scale of not less than one inch equals two thousand feet (1" = 2000'), indicating such information as the names and numbers of adjoining roads, streams and bodies of water, railroads, subdivisions, towns, or other landmarks sufficient to clearly identify the location of the property.
2. On every sheet, the name and address of the owner and developer, the north point, date and scale of drawing, and number of sheets.
3. A boundary survey of the property.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 51
4. All existing and proposed streets and easements, their names, widths and whether such streets will be publicly dedicated; existing and proposed utilities; watercourses and their names; owners of adjacent properties and the zoning and present use of all adjoining properties.
5. A landscape plan prepared by a registered landscape architect, drawn to scale, including dimensions and distances and the location, size and description of all proposed landscape materials as required by the provisions of Article 7 of this Zoning Ordinance and the Village of Frankfort’s Landscape Regulations, and sections 150.75 and 150.76 of the Village Code.
6. A lighting plan in accordance with regulations specified in Article 7, Section E of this ordinance.
7. A sign plan in accordance with regulations specified in Section F of this Article 7.
8. A survey of existing trees on the property as required by the provisions of the Village of Frankfort’s Landscape Regulations and sections 150.75 and 150.76 of the Village Code.
9. The size and location of all floodplains, floodways, and wetlands.
10. The size and location of proposed detention and retention areas, including normal and high water lines and whether such areas will be wet or dry bottom.
11. Location, type, size and height of fencing, retaining walls and screen planting as required by the provisions of Article 7 of this Zoning Ordinance.
12. All off-street parking, driveways, loading spaces and walkways; indicating type of surfacing, size, angle of stalls, width of aisles and a specific schedule showing the number of parking spaces provided and the number required by Article 7, Section B of this Zoning Ordinance.
13. All bike trails provided on the property.
14. The size in square feet of all lots, the width and depth of each lot, all required setback lines on each lot, the average lot size of the entire subdivision.
15. The proposed location, general use, number of floors, height and the net and gross floor area for each building; including outside display areas, the proposed floor area ratio and, where applicable, the number, size and type of dwelling units.
16. For all uses except single family detached homes, architectural elevations
identifying all exterior building materials and a building materials sample board identifying the color and any relevant design specifications for all exterior building materials including roof materials. Where brick is proposed brick size must be specified. (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 52
17. Sufficient information to show how the physical improvements associated with the proposed development interrelate with existing or proposed development on adjacent properties.
18. Existing topography with a maximum contour interval of two (2') feet, except where existing ground is on a slope of less than two (2%) percent where one (1') foot contours shall be shown.
19. Proposed finished grading by contours and ground floor elevation.
20. Where applicable, any other information as may be required by the Code Official.
Part 6: Procedure For Review of Site Plans
a. The Code Official shall check the site plan for general completeness, and shall forward copies of the submission to appropriate Village staff members for their review.
b. After receiving a complete application, the Code Official shall set a date for a Site Plan Review meeting with the applicant, at which meeting the Code Official and all appropriate Village staff members will be invited. The purpose of the Site Plan Review meeting is to provide the applicant with the results of Village staff's review of his/her proposal and to identify ways in which the proposed site plan complies or does not comply with the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance, relative to:
1. Location and design of vehicular and pedestrian access points, to include concurrence from the Illinois Department of Transportation on proposed entrances and exits from State routes.
2. Location and adequacy of off-street parking and loading areas.
3. Design of traffic circulation and control within the site and in relationship to adjoining properties.
4. Adequacy of drainage, water supply, fire protection and sanitary sewer facilities.
5. Compliance with applicable established design criteria, construction standards and specifications for all improvements required by the Village Code.
6. Provision of adequate erosion and sedimentation and flood control measures of both a temporary and permanent nature.
7. Compliance with all of the other applicable requirements of this Ordinance.
Village of Frankfort
Article 3: Development Review Procedures and Submission Requirements
September 17, 2001 53
c. The Code Official shall approve or deny the site plan within thirty (30) days of receipt of a completed application, unless such time is extended by mutual consent of the Code Official and the petitioner, or it shall be deemed to have been denied. Recommendations of the Code Official shall be based on criteria set forth in Article 7.
d. In the event an exception to the regulations is sought by the petitioner, the Plan Commission shall review the site plan within sixty (60) days from the receipt of a complete application, except under abnormal circumstances.
Part 7: Appeals
Any person or persons aggrieved by any decisions of the Code Official regarding site plan review may appeal the decision to the Plan Commission. Such appeal shall be filed with the Community Development Department within thirty (30) days of the decision of the Code Official. The Plan Commission shall review the site plan within sixty (60) days from the filing of the appeal, except under abnormal circumstances.
Part 8: Approval Effect and Term
a. Where site plan review is required, a building permit shall not be issued by the Village of Frankfort until site plan approval has been obtained.
b. Approval of a site plan submitted under the provisions of this Section H is valid for a maximum duration of one (1) year, unless a building permit(s) has been obtained, in which case the site plan approval, or part thereof for which a building permit is obtained, is extended for the life of the building permit.
Village of Frankfort
Article 4: Zoning Districts
September 17, 2001 54
ARTICLE 4: ZONING DISTRICTS
Section A: Establishment of Districts
The Village is hereby divided into fifteen (15) zoning districts, as defined below.
Part 1: E-R Estate Residential District
Part 2: R-1 Single Family Residential District
Part 3: R-2 Single Family Residential District
Part 4: R-3 Attached Two Family Residential District
Part 5: R-4 Attached Single Family Residential District
Part 7: AG Agricultural District
Part 8: B-1 Local Business District
Part 9: B-2 Community Business District
Part 10: B-3 General Business District
Part 12: B-4 Office District
Part 13: OR Office/Research/Limited Industrial District
Part 13: I-1 Limited Industrial District
Part 14: I-2 General Industrial District
Part 15: H-1 Historic District
Part 16: H-R Historic Residential District
Section B: Official Zoning Map
Part 1: Sale of Map
The existing zoning uses, restrictions, division and regulations listed in this Ordinance are clearly shown on the Village of Frankfort Official Zoning Map, a copy of which is on file at the Village Administrative Offices. Said Official Zoning Map, with all notations, references and other matters shown thereon, is hereby declared by this reference to be part of this Ordinance. The Official Zoning Map is updated periodically with utilization of the Village’s Geographical Information System, referred to as the "Unofficial Zoning Map," and is available for purchase at the Village Administrative Offices.
Part 2: Inclusion
It is the intent of this Ordinance that the entire area of the Village, including all land and water areas, rivers, streets, alleys, railroads and other rights-of-way, be included in the districts established by this Ordinance. Any area not shown on the said Official Zoning Map as being included in any district shall be deemed to be in the E-R Estate Residence District.
Section C: Boundaries
Part 1: Clarification of Zoning Map
In the event that uncertainties exist with respect to the intended boundaries of the various districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
Village of Frankfort
Article 4: Zoning Districts
September 17, 2001 55
a. The district boundaries are the center-lines of streets or alleys, unless otherwise indicated. Where designation of a boundary line on the Zoning Map coincides with the location of a street or alley, easements, railroads, and right of ways, the centerline of such street or alley shall be construed to be the boundary of such district.
b. Where the district boundaries do not coincide with the location of streets or alleys, but do coincide with lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of such districts.
c. Where the district boundaries do not coincide with the location of streets, alleys or lot lines, the district boundary shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the Village of Frankfort Official Zoning Map.
d. When a lot held in one ownership on the effective date of this Ordinance is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot shall be deemed to be located within the more restrictive district.
Section D: Streets, Alleys, Public Ways, Waterways & Railroad Right-Of-Way
All streets, alleys, public ways, waterways and railroad rights-of-ways, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property immediately abutting upon such streets, alleys, public ways, waterways and railroad rights-of-ways. Where the center line of the street, alley, public way, waterway or railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such center line.
Section E: Annexed Land
Unless otherwise provided for in an Annexation Agreement, all land which may hereafter be annexed to the Village shall automatically be classified in the E-R Estate Residence District. When land is automatically classified in the E-R District, pursuant to this Section, the annexation ordinance, upon passage, shall be referred to the Plan Commission, and the Plan Commission shall, within sixty (60) days after the effective date of the annexation ordinance, schedule and hold a public hearing with respect to the zoning classification of the proposed annexed land, pursuant to Article 3, Section D of this Ordinance. The Plan Commission shall make findings and recommendations with respect to the appropriate zoning classifications of the annexed land and the Village of Frankfort Comprehensive Plan, and transmit the same to the Village President and the Village Board of Trustees.
Section F: Description of Districts
Part 1: E-R Estate Residential
The E-R Estate Residential district is intended to provide for single-family dwellings on large rural lots at a density of not more than one (1) dwelling units per net buildable acre. This district functions as a transition from rural areas with agricultural designations to residential areas more urban in character.
Village of Frankfort
Article 4: Zoning Districts
September 17, 2001 56
Part 2: R-1 Single Family Residential
The R-1 Single Family Residential District is intended to provide for single family dwellings on large lots in more developed settings than the Estate Residential district, at a low density of not more than two (2) dwelling units per net buildable acre and a lot area of not less than 20,000 square feet per dwelling unit. This district maximizes building separation and minimizes lot coverage.
Part 3: R-2 Single Family Residential District
The R-2 Single Family Residential District is intended to provide for single family dwellings at a medium density of not more than two and one quarter (2.25) dwelling units per net buildable acre and a lot area of not less than 15,000 square feet per dwelling unit. Larger lot widths and side yard separations are intended to provide for maximum building space, while offering flexibility to minimize the monotony of house separations and lot width, balancing the scale and height of buildings.
Part 4: R-3 Attached Two Family Residential District
The R-3 Attached Two Family Residential District is intended to provide for two family residential uses. The character of development in this district should emulate the design and density of a single family neighborhood. The minimum lot size of this district is 15,000 square feet and the density in this district shall not exceed four (4) dwelling units per net buildable acre.
Part 5: R-4 Attached Single Family Residential District
The R-4 Attached Single Family Residential District is intended to provide the opportunity for attached housing, in condominiums, row- or townhouses with not more than 4 dwelling units per building. Additional dwelling units within a single building may be appropriate with special use approval. The maximum density shall be six (6) dwelling units per net buildable acre. The district may function as a transition from residential districts of lower density to nonresidential uses.
Part 6: AG Agricultural District
This district was designed to encourage the utilization of land for agricultural purposes. This district has a minimum contiguous acreage requirement of twenty (20) acres. Land zoned under the Agriculture District may be utilized for agriculture as defined herein, except that those farms or ranches utilized for the production or raising of livestock or poultry shall be located no closer than one half mile from residential districts.
The specific intent of the district is to facilitate the proper use of lands best suited to agriculture through preventing the mixture of urban and rural uses which create incompatibility and conflict, place unbalanced tax loads on agricultural lands to help pay for urban services and contribute to the premature termination of agricultural pursuits.
Part 7: B-1 Local Business District
The B-1 Local Business District is intended to provide areas to be used by retail or service establishments supplying convenience goods or personal services for the daily needs of the residents living in nearby residential neighborhoods. The district is designed to encourage shopping centers with planned off-street parking and loading, and to provide for existing individual or small groups of local stores. This district is normally located on primary or secondary thoroughfares, is relatively small in size and has bulk standards comparable to low-density residential districts.
Village of Frankfort
Article 4: Zoning Districts
September 17, 2001 57
Part 8: B-2 Community Business District
The B-2 Community Business District is intended to provide areas to be used as the primary business area for residents of Frankfort and other nearby towns, area visitors and for employees of various business and industrial establishments. The district permits most types of business and commercial enterprises, offices and service establishments. This district is normally of a central location, and is located at the convergence of, or along major Village thoroughfares. Comprehensive planning and design of commercial development is encouraged, while strip shopping centers are discouraged.
Part 9: B-3 General Business District
The B-3 General Business District is intended to provide areas to be used for most types of retailing and service uses, including those uses that are oriented toward the service of automobiles. The uses allowed often occupy large spaces (greater than 100,000 square feet) and cater to customers who do not make frequent purchases. The market area for the permitted uses extends to an area much larger than the Village. The district is normally located along frontage roads of major thoroughfares, where adequately sized parcels of land allow for large setbacks, clear vision, and safe ingress and egress. The General Business District is to be comprehensively designed with respect to architecture, parking, loading and storm water design. (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02)
Part 10: B-4 Office District
The B-4 Office District is intended to provide land and structures used primarily to provide office space. The district is characterized by low intensity campus type office and research development, heavily landscaped, with limited signage. The uses permitted are characterized by a low volume of traffic so as to protect the abutting and surrounding residential districts. This district is often located as a buffer between residential and commercial areas.
Part 11: OR Office/ Research/ Limited Industrial District
The OR Office/Research/Limited Industrial District is intended to provide for well-designed, attractive, and innovative buildings housing nuisance-free, office, research, and light industrial uses in an environment which is characterized by controlled ingress and egress to major streets, extensive setbacks and yard areas containing imaginative landscaping and screening necessary to create a proper relationship with adjacent areas. Development in this district should be designed and planned as an integrated campus-like environment. No outdoor storage is allowed in this district, and all operations conducted within this district must be in an enclosed building.
Part 12: I-1 Limited Industrial District
The I-1 Limited Industrial District is intended to provide for well-designed, attractive, and innovative buildings housing nuisance-free, office, research, and light industrial. Outdoor storage of contained materials is allowed in this district only with special use approval, and all operations conducted within this district must be in an enclosed building.
Part 13: I-2 General Industrial District
The I-2 General Industrial District is intended to provide for lands for development by most types of industrial firms. The regulations are designed to permit operations in a clean and quiet manner, and to protect adjacent district uses as well as industries within the district. Development of residences is prohibited in this district to avoid incompatible mixed uses, and to conserve the supply of industrial land for industrial use.
Village of Frankfort
Article 4: Zoning Districts
September 17, 2001 58
Part 14: H-1 Historic District
The H-1 Historic District is intended to preserve and enhance the historic downtown commercial area. In the Village of Frankfort, the movements and shifts of population and the changes in residential, commercial and industrial uses threaten the disappearance of areas, places, buildings, community and aesthetic interests, values and customs of historical significance to the Village. Their preservation and continued utilization are necessary and desirable to sound development of the Village of Frankfort, and to the welfare of its residents.
Part 15: H-R Historic Residential District
The H-R Historic Residential District is intended to preserve and enhance the historic neighborhoods in and around downtown Frankfort. Certain residential areas of the community with historical and architectural significance follow a pattern of development that does not conform to the bulk and other regulations of the other residential districts. The preservation of this area has been prioritized by the Village and requires regulations and standards that preserve the integrity of the historical character of the area, while protecting the rights of homeowners in the area to use and enjoy their property.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 59
ARTICLE 5: USE REGULATIONS
Section A: General Use Regulations
Part 1: New Uses of Old Structures
If the use of any existing structure is hereafter changed to another use permitted in the applicable zoning district, then the new use shall comply with all regulations of this Ordinance; provided that the mere establishment of a new use does not by itself require the existing structure to conform to the lot size or other bulk regulations of this Ordinance, however, compliance with all Village ordinances pertaining to building, life and safety concerns is required.
Part 2: Remodeling
If any structure is hereafter remodeled the following regulations shall be adhered to:
a. The entire structure, as remodeled, shall comply with all regulations of this Ordinance and all other applicable codes, or any degree of non-conformance shall not be increased; and
b. The off-street parking facilities provided for the structure shall not be reduced below (or if already less than, shall not be further reduced below) the requirements that would be applicable to a similar new structure or use within the zoning district.
Part 3: Uses Permitted in All Districts
The following public utility and municipal uses are permitted in all districts: wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains, valves or any other similar equipment (not including antennae or sub-stations located on or above the surface of the ground) for the distribution to consumers of telephone or other communications, electricity, gas or water, or for the collection of sewage or surface water. All of the above-mentioned public utility and municipal uses must be approved by the Village and with the exception of municipal water standpipes, installed underground. (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
Part 4: Permitted Uses
No structure shall hereafter be built, moved or remodeled, and no structure or land shall hereafter be used, occupied or designed for use or occupancy, except for a permitted use within the zoning district in which the structure or land is located.
Part 5: Special Uses
No use of a structure or parcel of land that is designated as a special use in any zoning district shall hereafter be established, and no existing special use shall hereafter be changed to another special use, in such district, unless a special use permit has been secured in accordance with the provisions of Article 3, Section E of this Ordinance.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 60
Part 6: Interpretation of Use Lists
The Code Official may allow land uses (permitted or special), which though not contained by name in the Table of Permitted and Special Uses, are deemed to be similar in nature and clearly compatible with the listed uses. However, such non-listed uses shall not be approved by the Code Official until the application for such use has been reviewed by the Plan Commission and approved by the Village Board of Trustees. All non-listed uses which are tentatively approved by the Village Board shall be added to the Table of Permitted and Special Uses by ordinance at the time of periodic updating and revision.
Section B: Table of Permitted and Special Uses
Part 1: Description
The Table of Permitted and Special Uses lists the uses allowed within zoning districts, according to the following:
a. The uses are divided into categories. The individual uses are listed in alphabetical order within each category. The categories are as follows:
1. Residential uses
2. Public, cultural, recreation, and other institutional uses
3. Agriculture, farming, and mining uses
4. Business uses
5. Industrial and higher intensity uses
6. Transportation-related uses
7. Miscellaneous
b. A “P” indicates that a use is allowed by right in the respective zoning district. Permitted uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of this Ordinance.
c. An “S” indicates that a use is allowed only if reviewed and approved as a Special Use, in accordance with the Special Use review procedures of Article 3, Section E. Special uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of this Ordinance.
d. A blank cell indicates that a use is not allowed in the respective zoning district.
e. The “Use Standards” column contains references to the applicable standards that apply to the listed use type. The Use Standards are presented in alphabetical order in Section C of this Article 5.
f. Regulations for accessory and temporary uses are contained in Sections D and E of this Article 5.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 61
This Page Was Intentionally Left Blank
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 62
Table of Permitted and Special Uses
Table of Permitted and Special Uses
P Permitted Use
S Special Use
Blank Not permitted
E-R R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 AG H-R B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OR I-1 I-2 H-1 Use Standards Residential Uses
Single-family detached dwelling
P
P
P
P
P
Single-family dwelling, only if ancillary
P
Two-family residences contained in one building
P
P
Attached single family dwelling units constructed as a rowhouse, town home and/or condominium containing a maximum of 4 individual dwelling units
P
A single building containing more than 4 individual dwelling units
S
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 63
E-R R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 AG H-R B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OR I-1 I-2 H-1 Use Standards
Manufactured homes, factory-built homes or any other similar homes
S
5.C.11
Small group home
S
S
S
S
S
S
5.C.7
Large group home
S
5.C.7
Bed and breakfast inn
S
5.C.4
Dwelling unit(s) above first floor commercial use (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
S
P
Hotel and/or motel
S
S
S
S
Long-term care facility, assisted living facility or independent living facility
(Am. Ord. 2247, passed 12.05.05)
S
S
P
S
Residence of the proprietor of a commercial use
S
S
P
5.C.15 Public, Cultural, Recreation, and Other Institutional Uses
Ambulance service (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
S
P
5.C.20
Cemetery
S
S
S
S
S
P
S
College or university
S
S
S
S
S
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 64
E-R R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 AG H-R B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OR I-1 I-2 H-1 Use Standards
Indoor civic, cultural, religious and institutional (including elementary and high schools, hospitals, and government buildings)
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
5.C.9
Indoor recreation and entertainment (other than schools) (Am. Ord. 2342, passed 12.18.06)
S
S
S
S
S
S
Outdoor recreation and entertainment (public and private) over 1 acre (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
S
S
S
S
S
P
S
S
S
S
S
5.C.23
Outdoor recreation and entertainment (public and private) under 1 acre(see Article 5, Part 3, Section k) (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
S
5.C.23 Agriculture, Farming, and Mining Uses
Agriculture on a Lot of not less than 40 feet
P
Agriculture Warehouse
P
P
Arboretum or botanical garden
S
S
S
S
S
P
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 65
E-R R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 AG H-R B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OR I-1 I-2 H-1 Use Standards
Breeding facilities
S
P
Cultivation of field and garden corps
P
Dairy farm, including processing
P
Flower farm with no retail trade
P
Grain storage
P
S
Grass or sod farm
P
Hatchery, poultry
P
Mining and extraction
S
S
5.C.12
Outdoor discharge of firearms within a controlled environment on the premises of a duly licensed shooting gallery, gun club, or rifle club. (Am. Ord. 2240, passed 10.21.05)
S
Business Uses
Animal Clinic
P
S
P
S
Animal hospital and kennel (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
P
S
S
S
S
S
5.C.21
Automobile fueling station
S
S
Automobile rental agency (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02)
S
S
S
S
S
Automobile repair and service
S
S
S
S
5.C.2
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 66
E-R R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 AG H-R B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OR I-1 I-2 H-1 Use Standards
Automobile sales (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02)
S
S
S
S
Bakery
P
P
P
S
S
5.C.3
Boat, camper, equipment (large), manufactured home, RV or motorcycle rental, sales and service (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02)
S
S
S
S
5.C.5
Body piercing and/or tattooing establishments where body piercing and/or tattooing is performed only by licensed physicians (Am. Ord. 2174, passed 07.05.05)
S
Catering Service (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
P
P
P
5.C.24
Car wash
S
S
P
P
Convenience store
S
P
P
S
S
S
Crematoria
S
S
S
S
5.C.32
Day care center or nursery
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
Dry cleaning central plant serving not more than one retail outlet
P
P
S
P
S
Equipment (small) rental
P
P
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 67
E-R R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 AG H-R B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OR I-1 I-2 H-1 Use Standards
Health clinic/office
P
P
P
P
P
P
Indoor business sales and service, over 100,000 square feet (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02)
P
P
P
Indoor business sales and service, between 10,000 and 100,000 square feet (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02)
P
P
P
P
S
Indoor business sales and service, between 5,000 and 10,000 square feet (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02)
P
P
P
S
S
P
P
S
Indoor business sales and service, under 5,000 square feet (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02)
P
P
P
S
S
P
P
P
Indoor retail sales of goods, over 100,000 square feet
P
5.C.10
Indoor retail sales of goods, between 10,000 and 100,000 square feet
P
P
S
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 68
E-R R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 AG H-R B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OR I-1 I-2 H-1 Use Standards
Indoor retail sales of goods, between 5,000 and 10,000 square feet
P
P
P
S
S
S
Indoor retail sales of goods, under 5,000 square feet
P
P
P
S
S
P
Laundromat, launderette, or any self-service laundry facility (Am. Ord. 2240, passed 11.21.05)
S
Massage Establishment (Am. Ord. 2904, passed 05.05.14)
S
S
S
5.C.11.1
Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center (Am. Ord. 2894. Passed 02.03.14)
S
5.C.34
Medical Cannabis Dispensary (Am. Ord. 2894. Passed 02.03.14)
S
5.C.35
Microbrewery / Distillery / Winery with Sampling Area (Am. Ord. 3041, passed 07.18.16)
S
S
S
S
S
5.C.25
5.C.36
Office and professional service
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
5.C.13
Accessory liquor sales
S
S
S
S
S
5.C.26
Packaged liquor store
S
S
5.C.25
5.C.27
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 69
E-R R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 AG H-R B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OR I-1 I-2 H-1 Use Standards
Personal Service
P
P
P
S
S
P
Restaurant, carry-out (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
S
S
S
S
S
S
5.C.24
Restaurant, full service (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02 and Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
S
P
P
S
S
S
S
5.C.24
Restaurant, full service, with liquor sales
S
S
S
S
S
5.C.24
5.C.25
5.C.28
Restaurant/Tavern
S
S
S
5.C.24
5.C.25
5.C.29
Tasting Room
P
P
5.C.25
5.C.30
Tavern
S
S
S
5.C.25
5.C.31
Theater, indoor
P
S
Tobacco Store
(Am. Ord. 2780, passed 06.04.12)
S
S
5.C.33
Treatment facility (Am. Ord. 2247, passed 12.05.05)
S
S
S
Undertaking establishment or funeral parlor
S
P
P
S
S
Industrial and Higher Intensity Uses
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 70
E-R R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 AG H-R B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OR I-1 I-2 H-1 Use Standards
Animal feed preparation, grinding, mixing and storage
S
S
Automotive and scrap salvage yard, if in a completely enclosed building
P
Automotive body shop
S
P
5.C.2
Building trades’ and contractor’s office
P
P
5.C.6
Commercial testing laboratory
S
P
P
Construction or demolition landfill
S
Industry and manufacturing, heavy
P
5.C.8
Industry and manufacturing, light
P
P
P
5.C.8
Landscape Company (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
P
S
S
Limited retail sales in association with a warehouse use (Am. Ord. 2240, passed 11.21.05 and Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
S
S
5.C.19
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 71
E-R R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 AG H-R B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OR I-1 I-2 H-1 Use Standards
Manufacture, storage and sale of mobile homes and/or trailers, farm implements and other similar equipment on a paved open lot
P
Printing, publishing or lithography establishments
P
P
P
P
Radio and television studios, stations
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
Research facilities
P
P
P
P
S
Sale, distribution, or discharge of firearms, or ammunition within an indoor controlled environment (Am. Ord. 2240, passed 11.21.05)
S
5.C.37
Self-service storage facility
S
5.C.16
Taxicab association (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
S
P
5.C.22
Telecommunication stations and transmission devices
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
5.C.17
Towing service with storage of vehicles
S
S
5.C.18
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 72
E-R R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 AG H-R B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OR I-1 I-2 H-1 Use Standards
Utility facilities
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
S
Warehouse and wholesale establishments
P
P
P
5.C.19 Transportation-Related Uses
Airport and heliport
S
S
Public garages
S
P
P
S
P
P
P
S
Railroad freight station (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
S
P
Transit and transportation facilities
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
Truck terminals
S
Miscellaneous Adult use
S
5.C.19
Drive-up service windows associated with permitted uses
S
S
S
S
S
S
Off-street parking facility on a separate zoning lot from the associated use
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
S
Outdoor seating associated with a permitted restaurant (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
5.C.14
Outdoor sales
S
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 73
E-R R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 AG H-R B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OR I-1 I-2 H-1 Use Standards
Outdoor storage except uncontained materials (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
S
S
S
P
Outdoor storage of un-contained bulk materials (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
S
S
Planned unit development
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S

Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 75
Section C: Use Standards
Part 1: Adult Use
Based on experiences and studies prepared by Detroit, Michigan; Seattle, Washington; Los Angeles, California; Minneapolis-St. Paul, Minnesota; Indianapolis, Indiana; Phoenix, Arizona; Islip, New York; and the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses, by Hubert H. Humphrey, III, Attorney General, State of Minnesota, 1989; the Village has determined that adult use establishments, and particularly concentrations of adult uses, have an adverse impact on property values, crime, and neighborhood quality. In a desire to minimize these secondary effects and protect neighborhood quality, the Village finds it necessary to regulate such uses while maintaining reasonably available alternative avenues of communication. Therefore, adult uses, as defined in Article 12, shall not be located within 1,000 feet of:
a. any residential zoning district;
b. any other adult business; or
c. the property boundaries of any single family dwelling, school, child care center or nursery, cemetery, public park, public housing, nursing home, assisted living or independent living facility, or place of religious worship.
Part 2: Automobile Repair, Service and Body Shop
a. Disabled vehicles may not be stored longer than two weeks.
b. Where vehicles are stored outdoors, vehicles must be screened by a fence, wall, or solid landscape screen adequate to conceal such vehicles from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way. No vehicles may be stored at a height greater than the screening, and no vehicles may exceed ten (10) feet in height.
Part 3: Bakery
A bakery shall limit the manufacture of goods to goods retailed on the premises only. A bakery which conducts wholesale operations shall be considered a Wholesale Establishment.
Part 4: Bed and Breakfast
A Bed and Breakfast shall be operated in accordance with the following:
a. A maximum of five (5) lodging rooms are permitted.
b. There must be at least 500 square feet of gross interior floor area for each lodging room. The maximum potential number of rental units is determined by dividing the gross interior floor area of the structure by 500 square feet.
c. One parking space shall be provided for each guest room, plus the spaces required for a single family home. Parking spaces may be stacked in a driveway to prevent the over-paving of the area.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 76
d. One unlighted identification sign is permitted, not to exceed two square feet in area and 3 1/2' in height.
e. No Bed and Breakfast shall be located on a lot closer than 200 feet from any other lot containing a Bed and Breakfast.
f. The only meal to be provided to guests shall be breakfast, and it shall only be served to guests taking lodging in the facility.
g. New construction, additions, or remodeling must be in keeping with a residential character, and is subject to review by the Village of Frankfort 1890’s Theme Committee.
h. In addition to any other requirements posed by the Village of Frankfort Fire Department, each guest room must contain at least one hard wire smoke detector.
Part 5: Boat, Camper, Equipment (Large), Manufactured Home, RV, Or Motorcycle Rental, Sales And Service
a. Where items are stored outdoors, such items must be screened by a fence, wall, or solid landscape screen adequate to conceal such vehicles from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way. No items may be stored at a height greater than the screening. (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02)
Part 6: Building Trades’ And Contractor’s Office
Vehicles or equipment such as tractors which are stored outdoors must be completely screened from view from public rights-of-way and adjacent residential districts or uses by a solid landscape screen or fence at least 6 feet but not more than 8 feet in height.
Part 7: Group Homes (Large or Small)
An occupancy permit must be obtained from the Village of Frankfort prior to occupancy of a group home.
a. An application for such permit must be filed with the Village, and must indicate the following:
1. Address of the proposed group home;
2. Number of residents;
3. Number of staff; and
4. Evidence that the proposed group home/operating agency has been licensed by the appropriate governmental regulatory agency.
b. No occupancy permit shall be issued for a group home unless the home/operating agency has been licensed by the appropriate governmental regulatory agency having said authority.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 77
c. No occupancy permit shall be issued for a group home that is located within 600 feet of another group home.
d. No occupancy permit shall be issued for a group home that does not comply with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance, the Village Building Code, and all other applicable Village standards, regulations and ordinances.
e. Each group home shall be subject to the regulations of the Village of Frankfort Business License Ordinance, which includes obtaining the applicable license and an annual inspection by the Village of the group home structure and premises.
Part 8: Industry and Manufacturing
a. Industry and Manufacturing, Heavy, shall include the following categories, as defined by the 1997 North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) (see Appendix for complete list):
1. 311 Food Manufacturing
2. 312 Beverage Manufacturing
3. 313 Textile Mills
4. 314 Textile Product Mills
5. 316 Leather and Allied Product Manufacturing
6. 321 Wood Product Manufacturing
7. 322 Paper Manufacturing
8. 332 Fabricated Metal Product Manufacturing
9. 333 Machinery Manufacturing
10. 336 Transportation Equipment Manufacturing
b. Industry and Manufacturing, Light, shall include the following categories, as defined by the 1997 North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) (see Appendix for complete list):
1. 315 Apparel Manufacturing
2. 323 Printing and Related Support Activities
3. 334 Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 78
4. 335 Electrical Equipment, Appliance and Component
5. 337 Furniture and Related Product Manufacturing
6. 339 Miscellaneous Manufacturing
Part 9: Indoor Civic, Cultural, Religious, and Institutional
The Village of Frankfort has determined that certain areas of the Village should be reserved for economic development opportunities. These highly visible and accessible locations should be developed with tax-generating uses that will enhance the property tax revenue, sales tax revenue and employment base of the Village. Therefore, elementary schools, middle schools, high schools, and religious places of worship shall not be permitted in the following locations:
a. Properties along Route 30 or Route 45 that are located within 1,320 feet of the intersection of Route 30 and Route 45.
Part 10: Indoor Retail Sales of Goods Over 100,000 Square Feet
In addition to all other requirements of this Ordinance, large retail establishments shall be subject to the following:
a. To avoid long uninterrupted facades, facades greater than 100 feet in length must incorporate recesses and projections along at least 20 percent of the length of the façade. Windows, awnings and/or arcades must total at least 60 percent of the façade length abutting a public street.
b. Roof lines must have at least two of the following features:
1. parapets concealing flat roofs and rooftop equipment;
2. overhanging eaves;
3. sloped roofs; or
4. three or more roof slope planes.
c. All facades of a building that are visible from adjoining properties and/or public streets should feature architectural features similar to the front façade.
d. Façade colors must be of low reflectance, subtle, neutral, or earth tone colors. The use of high intensity colors, metallic colors, black, or fluorescent colors is prohibited.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 79
e. Building trim may feature brighter colors, but neon tubing is not permitted as an accent material.
f. Smaller retail shops that are part of a larger principal building (“in-line shops”) shall have display windows and separate outside entrances.
g. Each principal retail anchor shall have a clearly defined, highly visible customer entrance with features such as canopies or porticos, arcades, arches, wing walls, and integral planters.
h. All sides of a principal building that directly face an abutting public street shall feature at least one customer entrance. Where a principal building directly faces more than two abutting public streets, this requirement shall apply only to two sides of the building.
i. Predominant exterior building materials must be of high quality, including brick, wood, sandstone, other native stone, and tinted/textured concrete masonry units. Smooth-faced concrete block, tilt-up concrete panels, poured in place concrete walls or prefabricated steel panels are prohibited as the predominant exterior building materials. (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
j. Sidewalks shall be provided along all sides of the lot that abut a public street, and a continuous internal pedestrian walkway must be provided from the perimeter public sidewalk to the principal customer entrance. This internal walkway must feature landscaping, benches, and other such materials and facilities for no less than 50 percent of its length. Internal pedestrian walkways must be distinguished from driving surfaces through the use of special pavers, bricks, or scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and the attractiveness of the walkways.
k. Sidewalks shall also be provided along the full length of the building along any façade featuring a customer entrance and along any façade abutting public parking areas. Planted landscaped areas or tree grates shall constitute at least 35%of the area of such sidewalks, while maintaining adequate width for pedestrians.
l. Parking lots are encouraged to be broken up into smaller “modules” separated by landscaping and other features. No more than 70 percent of the off-street parking area for the entire property may be located between the front façade of the principal building and the primary abutting street. No more than 500 parking spaces may be provided in any given module, and modules must be separated by a continuous greenway or pedestrian-way of at least 30’ in width.
Part 11: Manufactured Homes
a. Utilities: All utilities, including but not limited to water, sewer, electric, gas, telephone, and cable TV, must be located in underground, unobstructable locations including individual connections to each dwelling unit pad. Each dwelling unit shall be individually metered for utility service provision.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 80
b. Site Analysis: Development of the site shall be based on the site analysis to determine geology and soil; existing vegetation, structures, and road networks; visual features; and present and proposed use of a site.
c. Development: The development shall be laid out to avoid adversely affecting ground water and aquifer recharge to reduce cut and fill; to avoid unnecessary impervious cover; to prevent flooding; to provide adequate access to lots and sites; and to mitigate adverse effects of shadow, noise, odor, traffic, drainage, and utilities on neighboring properties. An underground storm sewer system shall be provided, in accordance with Village of Frankfort Subdivision Ordinance to serve any manufactured home subdivision.
d. Open Space: All developments shall be required to provide at least 15% of the net buildable land area as open space. Developed open space shall be designed to provide active recreational facilities to serve the residents of the area. Undeveloped open space shall be designed to preserve important site amenities or environmentally sensitive areas.
e. Clustering: Lot layout shall provide for clustering or various angle arrangements of the lots. A as opposed to the grid pattern, in which the majority of blocks and streets are arranged in straight lines, is discouraged.
f. Driveways: There shall be no adjoining driveways serving abutting lots.
g. Manufactured Home Design Standards
1. Placements. The Manufactured Home stand shall be so placed as to provide for the practical placement on the site of both the Manufactured Home and its appurtenant structures, and the retention of the Manufactured Home on the site in a stable condition, and in satisfactory relationship to its surroundings.
2. Size. The size of the Manufactured Home stand shall be suitable for the Manufactured Home to be served by the individual park, and suitable to fit the dimensions of the anticipated Manufactured Home and be properly maintained.
3. Location. The location of each Manufactured Home stand shall be at such elevation, distance and angle in relation to the access street and the Manufactured Home lot driveway that placement and removal of the Manufactured Home is practical.
4. Construction. Only concrete slab or concrete runways will be permitted.
5. Gradient. All lots shall be graded according to the requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance. There shall be a minimum of two percent (2%) longitudinal and adequate crown, or cross-gradient and surface drainage.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 81
6. Undercarriage. Each manufactured home unit shall be skirted via a structural an architectural treatment similar to that of the home unit, or a landscaping treatment conforming to the subdivision landscape plan in such a manner so as not to permit the undercarriage of the unit to be visible. Each unit shall have its wheels removed and appropriate means of anchoring the units shall be provided so as to reduce the potential for damage during periods of high winds.
7. Construction of Manufactured Home. Manufactured home construction must meet or exceed all applicable Village building permit requirements and other code requirements.
8. Additions to Manufactured Home. No permanent or semi-permanent structure shall be affixed to a Manufactured Home. This does not apply to awnings or any expansion unit specifically manufactured for Manufactured Homes. The maximum lot coverage of the Manufactured Home shall be governed by the requirements of the table of Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards for Residential Districts.
h. Electric Lighting and Outlets: All street entrances, exits, and driveways shall be lighted at night. Not less than 100 watt or equivalent shall be provided for each 200 feet of collector and sub-collector streets within the Manufactured Home Park. All required lighting shall be provided in accordance with Article 7, Section E.
i. Patios: Each Manufactured Home site shall provide an appropriate outdoor living space to supplement the interior living space of a manufactured home.
1. Size. The minimum size of each manufactured home patio shall be 225 square feet.
2. Location. Every patio shall be conveniently located near the entrance of the manufactured home, open space areas of the site and other facilities, fitted to terrain and natural features and related to anticipated Manufactured Home models.
3. Elevation. Where practical, the elevation of the patio shall equal the elevation of the Manufactured Home stand. Where conditions permit, the patio and adjoining yard area may be as much as two (2) feet higher than the Manufactured Home stand in order that the level of the patio and outdoor living area will be close to the floor of an in-place Manufactured Home.
4. Construction. Any sub-grading shall be well drained, uniformly graded and compacted. Construction of the manufactured home stand shall be on an impervious surface.
j. Storage
1. Storage facilities shall be provided for the active storage of outdoor equipment, furniture or tools, which are used frequently, or and for the inactive storage for such materials which are used only seasonally or infrequently, and cannot be stored in the Manufactured Home.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 82
2. There shall be a minimum of 100 square feet provided for general storage for each Manufactured Home site exclusive of the manufactured home. This may be achieved by a garage or storage unit, in accordance with Article 5, Section D.
3. Storage structures should be designed to enhance the appearance of the park, constructed out of materials similar to the manufactured home, coordinated with appropriate landscaping plan, designed to provide for hazardous weather protection and must be maintained in coordination with other features of the Manufactured Home.
4. No individual storage facilities for gasoline, oil, gas, liquefied petroleum or other fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be permitted unless a piping from such a facility were permanently installed with an earth cover of eighteen (18) inches.
k. Fencing: All fencing shall comply with regulations set forth in Article 5, Section D of this Ordinance.
l. Garbage and Waste
1. A sufficient number of adequate fly-proof and watertight containers shall be supplied for the storage of garbage. Garbage containers shall be emptied at least twice weekly and shall not be filled to over flowing or allowed to become foul smelling or attract insects. All garbage shall be disposed of in a manner which is approved by the Health Authority.
2. Garbage and Waste areas shall be fenced in and completely screened from public right-of-ways.
m. Park Attendant: Each development shall be in the charge of a responsible attendant or manager at all times. Duties of the attendant or manager will be maintenance of the park, its facilities and equipment, in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition, and be answerable with the licensee, for any violation of the provisions of this Ordinance.
n. Streets and Sidewalks
1. The road system shall be designed to permit the safe, efficient and orderly movement of traffic; to meet, but not exceed the needs of the present and future population served; to have a simple and logical pattern; to respect natural features and topography; to meet the needs of snow plows, fire trucks, school buses, ambulances, and other emergency vehicles; and to present an attractive streetscape. The road system shall be designed to serve the needs of the subdivision and to discourage use by through traffic.
2. All lots shall front on residential access or sub-collector streets, not on collector streets. All streets shall have curbs, gutters, street-lights, street trees, storm sewers and sidewalks accompanying same, in accordance with the Village Subdivision Ordinance Design Standards.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 83
3. There will be no private streets.
4. All residential parking will be off-street. No on-street parking is allowed.
5. Off-street parking shall be provided in front and side yards only. Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided per dwelling unit. The off-street parking surface shall be covered with a concrete surface. Each space shall be no less than ten (10) feet wide and twenty (20) feet deep. Enclosed garage space shall not count toward the required off-street parking requirements.
6. All sidewalks and driveways shall be concrete and meet Village standards.
o. Manufactured Home Sales: Manufactured home sales are permitted on a limited basis. One home may be used for a model, and one model is allowed for each park. This model must follow all structural and aesthetic guidelines as outlined for a manufactured residence.
p. Landscaping: Landscaping shall be provided as part of site plan and subdivision design. It shall be provided comprehensively throughout the site; integrating the various elements of site design, preserving and enhancing the particular identity of the site, and creating a pleasing site character. Landscaping shall include plant materials such as trees, shrubs, ground covers, perennials, and annuals, and other materials such as rocks, water, sculpture, art, walls, fences, paving materials, and street furniture. All landscaping shall meet all standards and guidelines established in the Village of Frankfort Landscape Regulations.
q. Landscape Plan: A landscape plan prepared by a certified landscape architect shall be submitted with each subdivision development request. The plan shall identify existing and proposed trees, shrubs, and ground covers; natural features such as rock outcroppings; and other landscaping elements. The plan shall show where they are or will be located and planting and/or construction details. Special attention shall be paid so as to substantially screen the development from all adjoining zoning districts and land uses. The landscaping plan must meet all standards and guidelines established in the Village of Frankfort Landscape Regulations, and sections 150.75 and 150.76 of the Village Code.
Part 11.1: Massage Establishments
(Am. Ord. 2174, passed 07.05.05)
a. Facilities
1. Cabinets. Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean linens, towels, and other materials used in connection with administering massages. All soiled linens, towels, and other materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets, which containers or cabinets shall be kept separate from the clean storage areas.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 84
2. Dressing rooms. Provision of a separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing.
3. Electrical equipment. All electrical equipment shall be installed in accordance with the building codes adopted by the Village of Frankfort.
4. Lavatories or wash basins. Lavatories or wash basins provided with both hot and cold running water shall be installed in either the toilet room or the vestibule. Lavatories or wash basins shall be provided with soap in a dispenser and with sanitary towels.
5. Light and ventilation. All portions of massage establishments shall be provided with adequate light and ventilation by means of windows or skylights with an area of not less than one-eighth (1/8) of the total floor area, or shall be provided with approved artificial light and a mechanical operating ventilating system. When windows or skylights are used for ventilation, at least one-half (1/2) of the total required window area shall be operable. To allow for adequate ventilation, cubicles, rooms, and areas provided for patrons’ use not served directly by a required window, skylight, or mechanical system of ventilation shall be constructed so that the height of partitions does not exceed seventy five percent (75%) of the floor-to-ceiling height of the area in which they are located.
6. Locks. No massage service may be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth, or any area within a massage establishment that is fitted with a door capable of being locked.
7. Plumbing. All plumbing fixtures shall be installed in accordance with the building codes adopted by the Village of Frankfort.
8. Service sink. The premises shall be equipped with a service sink for a custodial services.
9. Toilet facilities. Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When five (5) or more employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided. A single water closet per sex shall be provided for each twenty (20) or more employees or patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be substituted for water closets after one water closet has been provided. All toilet rooms shall be equipped with self-closing doors opening in the direction of ingress to the toilet rooms. Toilets shall be designated as to the sex accommodated therein.
10. Waterproofing. Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths, and showers shall be made waterproof with approved waterproofed materials and shall be installed in accordance with the building codes adopted by the Village of Frankfort. For toilet rooms, toilet room vestibules, and rooms containing bathtubs, there shall be a waterproof floor covering, which will be carried up all walls to a height of at least six inches (6”), and floors shall be covered up on base with at least
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 85
three-fourths inch (3/4”) cover. The walls of all toilet rooms and rooms containing bathtubs shall be finished to a height of six feet (6’) with a smooth, nonabsorbent finish surface of Keene cement, tile, or similar material. Steam rooms and shower compartments shall have waterproof ceilings, floors, and walls approved by the Building and Zoning Department.
11. Wet and dry heat rooms. Floors of wet and dry heat rooms shall be adequately pitched to one or more floor drains properly connected to the sewer. (Exception: dry heat rooms with wooden floors need not be provided with pitched floors and floor drains.) A source of hot water must be available within the immediate vicinity of dry and wet heat rooms to facilitate cleaning.
b. Operating conditions
1. Cleanliness. Every portion of a massage establishment, including appliances, apparatus, and personnel shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition. The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing nondisposable instruments and materials used in administering massages, and such nondisposable instruments and materials shall disinfected after use on each patron. Oils, creams, lotions, or other preparations used in administering massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets. Wet and dry heat rooms, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. Eating in the massage work areas shall not be permitted. Animals, except service animals for persons with disabilities, shall not be permitted in the massage work areas.
2. Employees. All employees and operators shall be clean and shall wear suitable clean, nontransparent outer garments, covering the sexual and genital areas, whose use is restricted to the massage establishment. It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly or recklessly, in a massage establishment, to touch with any part of the body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage the genitals, pubic area, anus, or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. No employee or operator shall perform, offer, or agree to perform any act that would require the touching of these areas. Patrons must cover these areas with towels, cloths, or undergarments when in the presence of an employee or operator.
3. Licenses. Persons administering massage for compensation must be licensed by the Illinois Department of Professional Regulation as massage therapists. A massage establishment must maintain a register of all persons employed as massage therapists and their license numbers. Such register shall be available for inspection at all times during regular business hours.
4. Price rates. Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all prospective customers.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 86
c. Inspections
1. Following application. The Village Clerk, upon receiving an application from a massage establishment seeking a general business license, shall refer the application to a Code Official, who shall inspect the proposed premises and shall make written recommendations to the Village Clerk. A general business license application for a massage establishment may be rejected if the operation as proposed by the applicant will not comply with all building codes adopted by the Village of Frankfort or regulations adopted by the Village Clerk or the Director of Building and Zoning.
2. On-going. A Code Official shall from time to time and at least twice a year, make an inspection of the public areas of each massage establishment in the Village of Frankfort for the purposes of determining that the provisions of this Part are complied with.
Part 12: Mining
Mining, and/or the extraction of minerals, sand, gravel, topsoil or other aggregates, including equipment, buildings or structures for screening, crushing, mixing, washing or storage shall be subject to the following:
a. No open pit or shaft shall be less than 200 feet from any public road or less than 500 feet from any adjacent residential district.
b. All buildings or structures shall be located not less than 200 feet from any property line. All grinding, or processing machinery shall be located at the farthest point on the property from residential use as feasible.
c. The borders of the property adjacent to or across the street from any district other than an industrial district shall be fenced with a solid fence, wall, or landscape material at least six (6) feet in height.
Part 13: Office and Professional Service
A permitted business office may not display or sell chattels or goods, wares or merchandise on the premises without special use approval, with the exception of limited sales of product in connection with professional services rendered on site. (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
Part 14: Outdoor Seating Associated with a Permitted Restaurant
Outdoor seating, when associated with a permitted restaurant, shall only be permitted in accordance with the following:
a. All seating areas must be enclosed by a fence or wall of at least 3 feet in height.
b. Where seating is permitted adjacent to a public sidewalk, at least 5 feet in width of said sidewalk must remain unobstructed.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 87
Part 15: Residence of the Proprietor of a Commercial Use
In the H-1 district, such use shall only be permitted in accordance with the following:
a) The commercial use must occupy the first floor street frontage space. (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
b) The commercial use must maintain a minimum depth of sixteen (16) feet from the front façade.
c) Separate secured entrances shall be provided for both the commercial and residential uses.
Part 16: Self-Service Storage Facility
a. Each self-service storage facility shall be governed by the provisions of the Illinois Self-Service Storage Facility Act, 770 ILCS 95/1 et seq.
b. A fence and landscaping shall be provided which completely encloses the facility and screens it from view on all sides.
Part 17: Telecommunication Stations and Transmission Devices
a. Intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to provide location and screening criteria to minimize the potential visual and health impacts of communication antenna facilities.
b. Applicability. This division identifies general regulations applicable Village wide for the location and screening of all telecommunication antenna facilities including: cellular, paging, and other wireless communication technologies, except satellite dishes.
c. Location in Residential Districts. In residential districts, free-standing towers are not permitted, except where authorized by special use permit for the provision of adequate public services, which does not include those services provided by non-governmental agencies. One parabolic satellite dish-type antennae per zoning lot, which is not more than two (2) feet in diameter is permitted. (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02) and (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
d. Base Standards. In the case where a special use permit is required the facility must meet all of the following requirements:
1. The use will not materially endanger the public health or safety if location where proposed and developed according to the plan submitted.
2. The use meets all required conditions and specifications.
3. The petitioner has satisfied the co-location requirements listed below.
4. The use will not substantially injure the value of adjoining or abutting property unless the use is a public necessity.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 88
5. The use meets all FAA and FCC standards and other applicable Federal or State standards.
6. The location and character of the use, if developed according to the plan as submitted and approved, will be in harmony with the area in which it is to be located and will be in conformity with the general plan of development for the area.
7. If the proposed device (other than a free-standing tower) is to be located in a residential zone, greater care will be taken in siting and construction of the device to minimize visual impacts and increase architectural harmony with adjacent structures (for example: housing the transmitter within a bell tower or church steeple).
e. Conformance with ANSI and EMF Emission Standards. Within six (6) months after the issuance of its occupancy permit, the applicant shall submit a project implementation report which provides cumulative field measurements of radio frequency (EMF) power densities of all antennae installed on the subject site. The report shall quantify the EMF emissions and compare the results with currently accepted ANSI standards. Said report shall be subject to review and approval by the Village staff for consistency with the project proposal report and the accepted ANSI standards. If on review, the Village finds that the project does not meet ANSI standards, the Village may revoke or modify the special use permit.
f. Placement Standards. The following placement standards shall apply to all installations in the Village:
1. Building Mounted Antenna
a) The total height of the building and the antenna shall not exceed that height limit of the underlying zoning district.
b) Building mounted antennas shall be screened from view if the antennas are visible to adjacent properties and adjacent public rights-of-way. Omni directional antenna may not be required to be screened if the screening device would create a greater visual impact than the unscreened antenna. The screening may include parapets, walls, or similar architectural elements provided that it is painted and texturized to integrate with the architecture of the building. As an alternative screening method, landscaping positioned on the premises to screen antenna from adjacent properties may be proposed in lieu of architectural screening.
c) When located on a building facade, building mounted antenna shall be painted and texturized to match the existing building.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 89
2. Support Structure Mounted Antenna.
a) Support structure antennas shall be sited on a premises to minimize visual impacts to adjacent properties and adjacent public rights-of-way.
b) The site around the antenna should be landscaped according to the standards below.
c) All support structure mounted antenna shall be setback from adjacent property lines the full height of the structure.
3. Co-location. Shared use of existing towers or tower site is encouraged. A new transmission tower shall not be permitted unless the applicant makes a good faith effort to substantially demonstrate that no existing or planned tower or tower site can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna/ transmitter as described below.
a) The applicant shall contact the owners of all existing or planned towers, of a height roughly equal to or greater than the height of the tower proposed by the applicant. A list shall be provided of all owners contacted, the date of such con-tact, and the form and content of such contact.
b) Such contact shall be made in a timely manner, that is, sufficiently before the filing of an application for a hearing to include a response into the application when filed.
c) Failure of a listed owner to respond shall not be relevant to the approval authority if a timely, good faith effort was made to obtain one. However, where an existing or planned tower is known to have capacity for additional antennas of the sort proposed, based an the decision regarding such tower, the application for a new tower shall not be complete until the owner of the existing or planned tower responds. Such response is to be required as a condition of approval.
d) The Code Official shall maintain and provide, on request, records of responses from each owner.
e) Once an owner demonstrates an antenna of the sort proposed by the applicant cannot be accommodated on the owner's tower as described below, the owner need not be contacted by future applicants for antennas of the sort proposed.
f) The applicant shall request the following information from each owner contacted:
i) Identification of the site by location, tax lot number, existing uses, and tower height.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 90
ii) Whether each such tower could structurally accommodate the antenna proposed by the applicant without requiring structural changes be made to the tower. To enable the owner to respond, the applicant shall provide each such owner with the height, length, weight, and other relevant data about the proposed antenna.
iii) Whether each such tower could structurally accommodate the proposed antenna if structural changes were made, not including totally rebuilding the tower. If so, the owner shall specify in general terms what structural changes would be required.
iv) If structurally able, would shared use by such existing tower be precluded for reasons related to radio frequency interference. If so, the owner shall describe in general terms what changes in either the existing or proposed antenna would be required to accommodate the proposed tower, if at all.
v) If shared use is possible based on (ii) and (iv) above, the fee an owner of an existing tower would charge for such shared use.
g) Shared use is not precluded simply because a reasonable fee for shared use is charged, or because of reasonable costs necessary to adapt the existing and proposed uses to a shared tower. The approval authority may consider expert testimony to determine whether the fee and costs are reasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development costs are presumed to be unreasonable.
g. Fencing. A black or green PVC-coated chain link fence or appropriate masonry wall of sufficient height for security purposes, as determined by the Plan Commission, shall be provided around each communication tower. Access to the tower shall be through a locked gate.
h. Landscaping. The visual impacts of a communication tower shall be mitigated for nearby viewers through landscaping or other screening materials at the base of the tower and ancillary structures. The following landscaping and buffering of communication tower shall be required around the perimeter of the tower and accessory structures, except that the standards may be waived by the Code Official for those sides of the proposed tower that are located adjacent to undevelopable lands or lands not in public view. It is preferable that the landscaping be installed on the outside of fences. Further, the use of existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable and may be used as a substitute of or in supplement towards meeting landscaping requirements.
1. At a minimum, a row of evergreen trees a minimum of 8 feet tall and a maximum of 10 feet apart shall be planted around the perimeter of the fence.
2. All landscaping shall be properly maintained to ensure good health and viability.
i. Variations. Any request to deviate from any of the requirements of this section shall require approval according to the standards of Article 3, Part B, Variations.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 91
j. Abandonment.
1. In the event the use of any communication tower has been discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, the tower shall be deemed to be abandoned. Determination of the date of abandonment shall be made by the Code Official who shall have the right to request documentation and/or affidavits from the communication tower owner/operator regarding the issue of tower usage. Upon such abandonment, the owner/operator of the tower shall have an additional one hundred eighty (180) days within which to:
a) Reactivate the use of the tower or transfer the tower to another owner/operator who makes actual use of the tower, or
b) Dismantle and remove the tower.
2) At the earlier of one hundred eighty one (181) days from the date of abandonment without reactivation or upon completion of dismantling and removal, any special exception and/or variation approval for the tower shall automatically expire.
Part 18: Towing Service with Storage of Vehicles
a. Disabled vehicles may not be stored longer than two weeks.
b. Where vehicles are stored outdoors, vehicles must be screened by a fence, wall, or solid landscape screen adequate to conceal such vehicles from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way. No vehicles may be stored at a height greater than the screening, and no vehicles may exceed ten (10) feet in height.
Part 19: Warehouse and Wholesale Establishments
a. Wholesale and warehouse uses may deal in commodities which are the product of a permitted industrial use.
b. Permitted wholesale and warehouse establishments where products are stored and distributed may contain a limited retail sales component where products can be sold “over-the-counter” to the general public, with special use approval. Said uses may possess a State of Illinois Department of Revenue Sales Tax Identification Number, however, retail sales shall not constitute the primary use of the property.
Part 20: Ambulance Service
(Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
a. Where vehicles are stored outdoors, vehicles must be screened by a fence, wall, or solid landscape screen adequate to conceal such facilities from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 92
b. Where fueling facilities are provided, all tanks, pumps, and associated fueling equipment must be screened by a fence, wall, or solid landscape screen adequate to conceal such facilities from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way.
Part 21: Animal Hospital / Kennel
(Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
a. Animal hospitals / kennels are prohibited within multi-tenant buildings.
b. All outdoor exercise / play areas must be completely enclosed by a minimum 6’ fence or wall adequate to conceal such facilities from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way.
c. No animals may be kept outdoors during non-business hours or overnight.
d. The sale of animals is prohibited within the I-1 and I-2 industrial districts.
e. All facilities are subject to the provisions of Article 6, Section D, Part 2.f, of this ordinance, relating to odorous matter.
Part 22: Taxicab Association
(Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
a. Where vehicles are stored outdoors, vehicles must be screened by a fence, wall, or solid landscape screen adequate to conceal such facilities from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way. No vehicles may be stored at a height greater than the screening, and no vehicles may exceed ten (10) feet in height.
b. Where fueling facilities are provided all tanks, pumps, and associated fueling equipment must be screened by a fence, wall, or solid landscape screen adequate to conceal such facilities from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way.
Part 23: Outdoor Recreation and Entertainment
(Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
a. Special use approval is not required for land set aside for a public park through the subdivision process provided park improvements comply with the bulk requirements of the underlying zoning district.
Part 24: Delivery Vehicles
(Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
a. Delivery vehicles may not occupy parking stalls designated for public/ patron use.
b. Storage of all delivery vehicles must be completely screened by a fence, wall, or solid landscape screen adequate to conceal the vehicles from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 93
c. One parking stall is required per delivery vehicle.
Part 25: Liquor Sales (all use categories)
(Am. Ord. 2643, passed 03.15. 10)
a. In addition to being in compliance with all applicable zoning requirements, any establishment providing for the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall also be subject to the regulations of the Village of Frankfort Code of Ordinances, Chapter 113 as amended from time to time.
b. No special use permit shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within 100 feet of any church, school, other than an institution of higher learning, hospital, home for the aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or children or any military or naval station provided this prohibition shall not apply to restaurants or other establishments where the sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business.
c. Any person, corporation or other entity that intends to provide alcoholic liquor for sale or consumption shall furnish proof of liquor liability insurance in accordance with Illinois State Statute.
d. Evidence of violation of any use standard or condition of approval shall be grounds to initiate a reversion hearing to rescind zoning rights granted for the sale of liquor at the non-compliant location.
e. In the event that the Liquor Commissioner revokes the liquor license of any individual, business or other entity, the Plan Commission shall initiate a public hearing to consider the reversion of zoning rights that permit the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors at the offending location.
Part 26: Accessory Liquor Sales
(Am. Ord. 2643, passed 03.15. 10)
a. The sale of alcoholic beverages must be a supplementary component of the business or operation and may not comprise the majority of the total revenues generated.
b. Retail liquor displays shall not exceed 10% of the gross floor area of the business.
Part 27: Packaged Liquor Store
(Am. Ord. 2643, passed 03.15. 10)
a. The consumption of alcoholic liquors is prohibited on the premises unless associated with a permitted and duly licensed tasting room.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 94
Part 28: Restaurant, full service, with liquor sales
(Am. Ord. 2643, passed 03.15. 10)
a. Bar and lounge areas within the restaurant shall not contain more than 25% of the total number of seats located within the premises nor shall they exceed 25% of the total customer floor area.
b. Bar and lounge areas within the restaurant shall be reasonably delineated from the dining area by a wall, partition or similar permanent and physical improvement.
c. Amusement devices are not permitted.
d. Electronic video displays and their accompanying audio, including but not limited to televisions and projection screens, shall not be located or transmitted outside of the dedicated bar or lounge area.
e. All menu items and specials shall be available until one hour prior to closing and shall be prepared and cooked by an on-site kitchen staff.
Part 29: Restaurant / Tavern
(Am. Ord. 2643, passed 03.15. 10)
a. Bar and lounge areas within the Restaurant / Tavern shall not contain more than 40% of the total number of seats located within the premises nor shall they exceed 40% of the total customer floor area.
b. Amusement devices may be provided in accordance with the Village of Frankfort Code of Ordinances, Chapter 111.
c. A full menu, including entrees and side dishes prepared and cooked by an on-site kitchen staff, shall be available to customers until ten o’clock (10:00) P.M daily. After ten o’clock (10:00) P.M., and in the event a full menu is no longer provided, a reduced menu that includes appetizers, sandwiches, snacks, hors d’oeuvres or other similar foods, shall be available to customers until one hour prior to close.
Part 30: Tasting Rooms
(Am. Ord. 2643, passed 03.15. 10)
a. Tasting rooms must be associated with a permitted retail establishment and shall not be the primary use of any property.
b. Tasting rooms shall not occupy more than 10% of the floor area of the business and shall not exceed a total of 250 square feet.
c. Tasting rooms shall be limited to those duly licensed retail establishments that possess a Class L liquor license and an approved special use permit for a packaged liquor store or accessory liquor sales.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 95
d. Hours of operation for tasting rooms shall be restricted to 12:00 pm to 9:00 pm.
Part 31: Taverns
(Am. Ord. 2643, passed 03.15. 10)
a. Amusement devices may be provided in accordance with the Village of Frankfort Code of Ordinances, Chapter 111.
Part 32: Crematoria
(Am. Ord. 2643, passed 03.15. 10)
a. Crematoria must be associated with a permitted undertaking establishment, funeral parlor or cemetery. Standalone crematoria are prohibited except when located within a permitted cemetery.
b. Crematoria operators must secure and maintain any and all required governmental and / or regulatory permits, licenses and certifications.
c. Crematoria shall not emit perceptible odor or particulates.
d. Undertaking establishments, funeral parlors containing crematoria and stand-alone crematoria within permitted cemetery shall maintain a minimum setback of 300’ from the nearest residential property.
e. Crematoria may operate between the hours of 7 am and 11 pm as established in paragraph 6.2.Q of this ordinance.
f. One single-chamber cremation apparatus is permitted per crematoria.
g. Emission stacks are subject to the maximum height restrictions of the underlying zoning district.
h. Emission stacks shall be compatible in design with the principal structure and constructed of approved building materials
Part 33: Tobacco Store
(Am. Ord. 2780, passed 06.04.12)
a. In addition to being in compliance with all applicable zoning requirements, any business providing for the sale of tobacco products shall be subject to the regulations of the Village of Frankfort Code of Ordinances, Chapter 119 as amended from time to time.
b. No tobacco store shall be located within one-thousand (1,000) feet of any school, child care facility, playground, recreational facility, park, library or any other youth oriented facility. For the purposes of this section a youth oriented facility is defined to include any facility with residents, customers, visitors, or inhabitants of which twenty-five percent (25%) or
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 96
more are regularly under the age of 21 or which sells, rents, or offers services or products that are consumed or used primarily by persons under the age of 21.
c. No tobacco store shall be located within two thousand (2,000) feet of any other licensed tobacco store.
d. Smoking and/or sampling of tobacco and tobacco related products is expressly prohibited within the indoor area of any licensed tobacco store. Smoking in outdoor areas shall comply with 410 ILCS 82/10 Smoke Free Illinois Act.
Part 34: Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center
(Am. Ord. 2894, passed 02.02.14)
a. Cultivations Centers located within the Village shall be established, operated and maintained in full compliance with the “Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act” (40 ILCS 130) and all other applicable Village Ordinances.
b. Cultivation Centers may not be located within 2,500 feet of the property line of a pre-existing public or private preschool or elementary or secondary school or day care center, day care home, group day care home, or part day child care facility, public parks, places of worship, or property zoned or utilized for residential purposes.
c. Cultivation Centers are prohibited within multi-tenant buildings.
d. All exterior signage associated with a Cultivation Center shall be in compliance with the Sign Regulations established by the Village of Frankfort Code of Ordinances. In addition, no exterior signage shall use the word "marijuana," "cannabis," or any other word, phrase or symbol commonly understood to refer to marijuana or cannabis
Part 35: Medical Cannabis Dispensary
(Am. Ord. 2894, passed 02.02.14)
a. Dispensaries located within the Village shall be established, operated and maintained in full compliance with the “Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act” (40 ILCS 130) and all other applicable Village Ordinances.
b. Dispensaries may not be located within 1,000 feet of the property line of a pre-existing public or private preschool or elementary or secondary school or day care center, day care home, group day care home, or part day child care facility, public parks, places of worship, or area zoned or utilized for residential purposes.
c. Drive-Thru Facilities accessory to dispensaries shall not be permitted.
d. Dispensaries are prohibited from operating within multi-tenant buildings.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 97
e. The area dedicated to accessory retail sales of merchandise or products related to medical cannabis shall not exceed 10% of the gross floor area of the business.
f. Outdoor, window, or on-site media displays of merchandize and/or products related to cannabis shall not be permitted.
g. Dispensaries may not permit any person to consume cannabis on the premises.
h. Hours of operation for dispensaries shall be limited to 7:00 am to 11:00 pm in accordance with the Village of Frankfort Zoning Ordinance, Article 6, Section C, Part 2.
i. All exterior signage associated with a Dispensary shall be in compliance with the Sign Regulations established by the Village of Frankfort Code of Ordinances. In addition, no exterior signage shall use the word “marijuana,” “cannabis,” or any other word, phrase or symbol commonly understood to refer to marijuana or cannabis.
Part 36: Microbrewery / Distillery / Winery with Sampling Area
(Am. Ord. 3041, passed 07.18.16)
a. Alcohol consumed and sold at retail on the premises shall be limited to beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages manufactured on site.
b. All alcohol samples shall be served to customers over a service counter as defined in Article 12, Section A, Part 2 of this ordinance. Dedicated wait staff and tableside service is prohibited.
c. Traditional bar counters with customer seating are prohibited.
d. Amusement devices and televisions are not permitted.
e. Live entertainment is prohibited unless permitted via a temporary use permit.
f. Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours of 10:00 am to 10:00 pm.
g. Sampling areas shall not exceed 25% of the gross floor area or 1,000 square feet whichever is less.
h. Retail displays of packaged alcohol shall not exceed 10% of the customer floor area.
Part 37: Sale, Distribution, or Indoor Discharge of Firearms
(Am. Ord. 3229, passed 10.07.19)
a. The exterior walls of any building in which the sale, distribution, or discharge of firearms occurs are to be of masonry construction. Alternative construction materials which afford equivalent protection may be permitted if approved by the Village Board upon receipt of the recommendation of the chief of police and the building inspector.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 98
b. When located in a multi-tenant building all partition walls that separate the unit in which firearms sales or distribution occur from the remainder of the building shall also be of masonry construction and must extend to the underside of the roof deck. Alternative construction materials which afford equivalent protection may be permitted if approved by the Village Board upon receipt of the recommendation of the chief of police and the building inspector.
c. The discharge of firearms or ammunition within a controlled indoor environment is prohibited within multi-tenant buildings;
d. All points of ingress / egress, window openings, and all other façade penetrations shall be gated and barred during non-business hours. No gating, baring, or other security measures shall be mounted to or accessible from the exterior of the building. The use of gating, barring, and security devices on exit doors must include emergency override devices to allow for exit in case of an emergency inside the building. In the event the emergency override devices require electricity to operate, they must be served by an alternate 12 hour power supply that automatically activates in the event of a power failure.
e. Structural safety bollards are required in front of all commercial storefront systems at a 48” spacing;
f. The entire interior of the building (except bathrooms) must be covered with video surveillance cameras. All exterior parking areas, points of ingress / egress, and window openings must also be covered by video surveillance cameras. The video surveillance camera recorders / hard drives must be located in a safe that is locked at all times, backed up in a remote location, and accessible remotely. Video surveillance camera recorders / hard drives shall have a minimum 14 day (336 hour) storage capacity. Adequate lighting must be supplied to ensure that the video surveillance cameras are capable of recording all activity at such lumens that will allow easy identification of any persons coming into their view, and such lighting must be maintained 24 hours a day. All cameras should be regularly maintained and checked for proper operation weekly.
g. Any building in which firearms sales occur must be protected by a silent alarm that is capable of being manually triggered by employees either by remote fobs carried by employees or at multiple points easily accessible during business hours in the event of an emergency, automatically triggered during non-business hours when forcible entry into the business is detected, and must automatically notify the police department of such emergency or attempted forcible entry.
h. During business hours all firearms on display must be contained in locked display cases which shall only be unlocked by an employee prior to presenting the firearm to a potential buyer for handling. Employees assisting in the sale of firearms must be supplied with a panic alarm that is tied to the building alarm system for immediate notification of the police department in the event of an emergency.
i. All firearm ammunition must be stored and displayed in a location that is not accessible to a customer without the assistance of an employee.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 99
j. A safe must be provided on site that is of sufficient size to accommodate all firearms on site at any given time. All firearms must be kept in the safe during non-business hours.
k. The sale, distribution, or discharge of firearms or ammunition within a controlled indoor environment is prohibited within 1,000 feet of the property line of any existing school, preschool or daycare center, park, church, or property zoned or utilized for residential purposes.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 100
Section D: Accessory Uses
Part 1: General Requirements
a. Accessory uses and structures, as defined in Article 12, are permitted in the E-R, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and H-R, and AG districts. Residential accessory uses and structures shall not involve the conduct of any business, trade, or industry.
b. Accessory uses and structures, as defined in Article 12, in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, OR, I-1, I-2, and H-1 districts must be approved during the site plan review process (as described in Article 3, Section H).
c. Accessory uses and structures must be in connection with a principal use which is permitted within such district.
d. Each accessory structure and use shall comply with the use limitations applicable in the zoning district in which it is located.
e. No accessory structure shall be constructed or occupied on any lot prior to the completion of the principal structure to which it is an accessory.
Part 2: Bulk Regulations
a. Accessory structures and uses must conform to the provisions of the table of Permitted Obstructions In Required Yards in Article 1, Section I, Part 1.
b. Accessory structures (except fences) and uses shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from all lot lines unless otherwise noted in the table of Permitted Obstructions In Required Yards in Article 1, Section I, Part 1.
c. Accessory structures and uses shall maintain the same required side yard setback as is required for the principal structure located on the zoning lot except where specifically permitted otherwise in the table of Permitted Obstructions In Required Yards in Article 1, Section I, Part 1.
d. No accessory structure or use shall be permitted in any front yard unless specifically permitted.
e. No part of any accessory structure or use shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to any principal structure, unless it is attached to or forms a part of such principal structure.
f. Each accessory structure and use shall otherwise comply with the bulk regulations applicable in the district in which it is located, including maximum lot coverage and maximum impervious coverage.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 101
Part 3: Permitted Accessory Uses
Any structure or use that complies with the terms of Part 1 above may be allowed as an accessory structure or use. Accessory structures and uses include, but are not limited to, the following list of examples, provided that in each case such structure must fit the general definitions of “accessory use” contained in Part 1 above and Article 12.
a. One private, detached garage per zoning lot and subject to the guidelines as listed below:
1. In the H-R, E-R, R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Districts:
a) No greater than fifteen (15) feet in height;
b) All garages greater than three-cars in size must be side-loaded in orientation and driveways shall have a minimum 26’ turning radius; and
c) Architecture, including pitch of roof, shall be similar and compatible to the principal structure.
In a permitted Manufactured Home park:
a) Not to exceed (600) square feet;
b) Must be constructed on a concrete pad.
c) All garages must be constructed as enclosed buildings.
b. A storage shed in the E-R, R-1, R-2, or H-R Districts, incidental to a permitted use, provided no structure that is accessory to a residential building shall exceed 144 square feet in gross floor area and fifteen (15) feet in height. One storage shed is permitted for each zoning lot in a permitted manufactured home park, not to exceed two hundred twenty-five (225) square feet.
c. A child’s playhouse, no larger than 144 square feet in size and fifteen (15) feet in height above the average grade of the lot.
d. Private swimming pools and cabanas, subject to the provisions of Part 7 below.
e. Statuary, arbors, gazebos, trellises, barbecue stoves, flag poles, fences, walls & hedges, gas lights and lanterns.
f. Signs, permitted in accordance with Village of Frankfort Sign Ordinance.
g. Off-street parking and loading spaces as required in Article 7, Part B of this Ordinance.
h. Outdoor parking of recreational equipment/vehicle and/or construction/commercial related vehicles, provided that:
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 102
1. If the owner is actively involved in maintenance, loading or unloading the equipment, it may be parked on a residential driveway, however duration does not exceed forty-eight (48) hours;
2. The Code Official may issue a Special Permit for out-of-town visitor parking for Recreational Vehicles parked on a driveway for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days. Not more than six (6) such permits may be issued in any calendar year;
3. Equipment/vehicle is parked on an approved paved surface;
4. No part of storage area for vehicles is located in any required front, side, or rear setback, as defined by the provisions of this Code;
5. The front of the vehicle does not extend in front of the front façade of the primary structure
6. Construction or commercial vehicles or equipment are not loaded or containing product or material, unless wholly enclosed or actively involved in a project within the lot;
7. Vehicle does not exceed an empty weight of four (4) tons or height in excess of ninety (90) inches;
8. Equipment/vehicle is screened from view from the public street by a fence or landscaping.
i. One parabolic satellite dish-type antennae per zoning lot, which is not more than two (2) feet in diameter. All roof-mounted antenna shall not exceed the maximum building height permitted in that zoning district. All satellite antenna facilities shall be located away from the street right-of-way, or otherwise screened from view from any street by an opaque fence, wall, or hedge of a minimum of 6 feet in height. (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02)
j. Storage of wood or any other combustible material which could be used in fireplaces, stoves or any other equipment for heating are not to exceed five (5) cords per zoning lot, one (1) cord being a cubic area of 128 cubic feet (4' x 4' x 8'). Firewood shall be used exclusively by dwelling occupants and stored in the rear yard. Material must be stacked in rear yard in cord measurements and must be a minimum of four (4) inches off the ground. No storage is permitted within the 100-year flood zone as defined by FEMA Maps.
k. Outdoor recreation areas or equipment (including, but not limited to tennis courts, basketball courts, playhouses, batting cages, etc.), provided they meet the requirements outlined below:
1. Total impervious coverage of the lot, including the accessory structure or playing area, shall not exceed the limitations of the zoning district as defined in Article 6;
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 103
2. The recreational facility or equipment does not exceed 15’ in height as measured from the ground or 144 square feet in area, unless a variation is specifically approved according to the provisions of Article 3, Section B. (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02)
3. Appropriate screening is provided;
4. Surfacing conforms to all established Village regulations, standards and ordinances; and
5. Lighting of the area conforms to all established Village regulations, standards and ordinances.
Part 4: Prohibited Accessory Uses (Am Ord #2312, passed 8.21.06)
None of the following shall be permitted accessory uses:
a. Outdoor storage or overnight parking of trucks with an empty weight in excess of four (4) tons, or height in excess of ninety (90) inches in residential district; construction or commercial vehicles or equipment, loaded or containing product or material, unless wholly enclosed, unless actively involved in a project within the lot; or buses designed for more than eleven (11) passengers during normal school year vacation periods in a residence district;
b. Any other outdoor storage, except as specifically permitted elsewhere in this Ordinance;
c. Manufactured homes;
d. Windmill towers, in excess of twelve (12) feet in height;
e. Cargo Containers, as defined by Article 12 of this ordinance shall be considered a form of outdoor storage that is strictly prohibited in all zones, except whereas:
1. Existing cargo containers located on properties with an approved special use for outdoor storage are a legal non-conforming use during an amortization period of one (1) year, after which the containers are considered illegal non-conforming and must be removed. No additional containers shall be added to the property during the amortization period, or;
2. A temporary permit is issued by the Village for the purpose of moving or relocating, either permanently or temporarily, personal or business property, subject to the following conditions:
a. In the ER, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and HR Districts, there shall be a fifteen dollar ($15) temporary permit fee. No more than one (1) temporary cargo container shall be permitted, and said container must be removed from the premises within thirty (30) days;
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 104
b. In the B-2, B-3, B-4, H-1, OR, I-1, and I-2 Districts, there shall be a ninety dollar ($90) temporary permit fee. No more than three (3) temporary cargo containers shall be permitted, and said containers(s) must be removed from the premises within ninety (90) days;
c. One (1) extension period equal to the corresponding time restriction in 2.a) or 2.b) may be permitted if extenuating circumstances are determined by the Code Official.
d. No more than two (2) temporary permits may be granted for the same property during a calendar year. If an extension is granted during a calendar year, the extension period shall constitute a second temporary permit.
Or:
e. The cargo container is used for the purpose of a construction project duly proceeding toward completion. Upon completion of the construction activity that the container supports, the container must be promptly removed from the site.
And;
f. At all times, any and all cargo containers must be maintained in a like-new condition.
f. Stand-alone Automated Teller Machines (ATM) not associated with a permitted drive up facility. (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
g. Outdoor vending machines. (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
Part 5: Home Occupations
It is the intent of this Section D, Part 5 to allow as home occupations only those uses that conform to the standards of this Section. In general, a home occupation is an incidental and secondary accessory use in the AG, E-R, R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 Districts, so located and conducted as to not change the character thereof or adversely affect the uses permitted in the residential district of which it is a part. The standards for home occupations are intended to ensure compatibility with other permitted uses and the residential character of the neighborhood, and to maintain the subordinate and incidental status of the home occupation.
a. Permitted Home Occupations. Any home occupation, as defined in Article 12, that is incidental and subordinate to the principal residential use of a building, shall be permitted in any dwelling unit, except those which are specifically prohibited under this Ordinance, and meets the regulations outlined in paragraph (c) below.
b. Limitations. Home occupations shall be operated in conformance with the following:
1. All employed persons must be related, with the total number of employees not to exceed three (3).
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 105
2. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation or home office shall be clearly incidental and secondary to its use for residential purposes.
3. No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the livable floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation or home office.
4. No outside display, storage, or use of land is permitted.
5. No signage shall advertise the presence or operation of home occupation.
6. There shall be no manufacturing or processing of any sort.
7. No wholesale, jobbing or retail business shall be permitted unless it is conducted entirely by mail or telephone and does not involve the receipt, sale, shipment, delivery or storage of merchandise on or from the premises, provided, however, that articles produced by members of the immediate family residing on the premises may be sold from and stored upon the premises.
8. There shall be no interior or exterior alteration of the principal residential building which changes the residential character thereof as a dwelling.
9. The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the principal residential building and shall not be visible from any existing dwelling on any adjacent lot.
10. No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation that creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to normal senses off the lot. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
11. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and in no case shall traffic volume be created by the home occupation greater than ten (10) trips per day in any one day, including deliveries.
12. Deliveries are limited to a maximum of two (2) per day, and are not to be conducted by a vehicle that exceeds a useful load of one ton. (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02)
13. Parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met by the off-street parking regulations, and be located in areas other than a required yard.
14. No home occupation shall cause an increase of more than ten percent (10%) in the use of any one or more utilities (water, sewer, electrical, telephone, garbage, etc.) so that the combined total use for dwelling and home occupation purposes exceeds the average for residences in the neighborhood.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 106
c. Particular Home Occupations Permitted. Customary home occupations include, but are not limited to, the following list of occupations, provided, however, that each listed occupation shall be subject to the requirements of this Part 5.
1. Dressmakers, seamstresses and tailors
2. Music teachers, with regular instruction, limited to one pupil at a time, except for occasional groups
3. Artists, sculptors and authors or composers
4. Office facilities for architects, brokers, engineers, lawyers, insurance agents and members of similar professions
5. Offices of duly ordained leaders of a religious or spiritual community
6. Office facilities for real estate and other sales representatives and manufacturers’ representatives, when no retail or wholesale transactions are conducted on the premises
7. Home crafts, such as model-making, rug-weaving, lapidary work, handcraft-woodworking, provided however, that no machinery or equipment shall be used or employed, other than that which would customarily be incidental to residential occupancy. Such machinery or equipment shall include that which would customarily be employed in connection with a hobby or a vocation not conducted for gain or profit
8. Telecommuting for an outside employer, company or organization.
d. Particular Home Occupations Prohibited. The following uses, by the nature of the investment or operation, have a pronounced tendency, once started, to rapidly increase beyond the limits permitted for home occupations, and thereby substantially impair the use and value of a residentially zoned property for residential purposes. Therefore, the uses specified below are prohibited in residential zones:
1. Barber shops, beauty shops and nail salons performing any personal service related to the betterment of physical appearance with more than 2 service stations (including but not limited to chairs, sinks, dryers, etc), unless specifically permitted by the district regulations
2. Dancing schools with more than five pupils in attendance at any given time
3. Funeral homes and mortuaries
4. Restaurants
5. Tourist homes and lodging houses, unless specifically permitted by the district regulations
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 107
6. Private clubs
7. Repair shops or service establishments, except the repair of electrical appliances, typewriters, cameras or other similar small items
8. Photo developing
9. Renting of trailers
10. Medical or dental offices, clinics or hospitals
11. Animal kennels, animal grooming, or hospitals
12. Auto repair and tune-up facilities
13. Catering or other food preparation businesses
14. Rooming houses
15. Sale of firearms and ammunition
16. Stables or kennels
17. Antique shops or sales
18. Home day care centers or preschools.
Part 6: Fences and Walls
a. Building Permit Required. No fence shall be erected, or substantially altered, without a building permit issued by the Code Official and payment of applicable fees. Any fence which shall be erected, or shall be in the process of erection, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this Code, is deemed a nuisance and it shall be the duty of the Building Inspector and Chief of Police to abate the same.
b. Definitions. A fence is defined as any structure, partition or enclosure, of wood, iron, metal, or other material, enclosing or dividing a piece of land. A fence shall not include naturally growing shrubs, bushes and other foliage. The following are common types of fences:
1. Decorative Fence. A fence used mostly for aesthetics, which adds to the visual beauty of the property. This fence may not exceed forty-eight (48) inches with its upper-most rail or fifty-four (54) inches to the top of its upper-most post when installed in a front yard. Fifty percent of the square footage of the overall dimensions of the fence shall be open. A woven or cyclone type fence is not a decorative fence.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 108
2. Hazard Enclosure. This fence is intended to enclose swimming pools, pets, excavations and similar uses. This fence must be a minimum of forty-eight (48) inches high, with the mesh material spaced close enough to prevent children and animals from entering. All gates are to be equipped with child-proof latches.
3. Security or Protection Fence (Business and Industrial). A fence used for enclosing the lot, or part of the lot, for security and protection of property.
4. Retention Fence (Residential and Historical). A fence to retain children, animals and other similar uses, or to prevent outside intrusion. This fence may be installed in rear yards only.
5. Solid Fence. A fence in which eighty (80) percent or more of the surface area of the fence is solid. Fencing shall be constructed with the finished or decorative side facing the adjacent or abutting property or street.
6. Railroad Screening Fence. A fence erected to provide screening of active railroad tracks. (Am. Ord. 2894, passed 11.19.09)
c. Locations in Rights-of-Way and Utility Easements. No private fences shall be allowed or constructed on public street, highway or alley right-of-ways. Fences may, by permit, be placed on public utility easements, so long as the structures do not interfere in any way with existing underground, ground or over ground utilities. Further, the Village or any utility company having authority to use such easements shall not be liable for repair or replacement of such fences, in the event they are moved, damaged or destroyed by virtue of the lawful use of said easement. Fences in violation may be summarily removed by the Village.
d. Barbed Wire. No barbed wire or barbed wire fences shall be allowed on private property in residential zones, or on lots in any zone being used for single or multiple family dwelling purposes. No barbed wire or barbed wire fences shall be allowed on private property in business or industrial zones where the property lines of such property abut lots or parcels zoned or being used for single or multiple family purposes, or on fences in front yards. Barbed wire may be allowed on the top of fencing in the I-2 district subject to special use approval by the Planning Commission.
e. Dangerous Fences. No fence shall be constructed of material obviously intended to inflict great bodily harm, should a person or animal attempt to climb or scale it. Such materials include, but are not limited to, electrically charged wires or other electrical conduit, broken glass, razor blades and sharp or ragged metal spikes or spears.
f. Construction Requirements. All fences shall be constructed in conformity with the wind stress, foundation, structural and other requirements of the building codes and laws of the Village.
g. Good Repair. All fences shall be maintained in good, structurally sound repair and in a neat, clean, presentable and attractive condition. If, on inspection by the Code Official, any fence, in their determination, does not meet these requirements, they shall order the
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 109
owner or occupier of the premises, by registered or certified mail, to make the necessary repairs or improvements within thirty (30) days. Should the owner or occupier of the premises fail to make repairs or improvements as directed, the owner of occupier shall be in violation of the Code and the Code Official shall cause a complaint to be issued and processed against said owner or occupier, in accordance with the rules of the Circuit Court of Will County, Illinois.
h. Residential District Fences. In residential zones, in front yards no fences may exceed four (4) feet above ground level to the upper most rail, or 54 inches to the top of the upper-most post. In such zones, fences along the side property lines to the rear of the front yard and along the rear lot line may not exceed five (5) feet in height above ground level except when permitted for a railroad screening fence. Residential district fences are subject to the following requirements:
1. All fences located in the front yard, or that abut or face street right-of-ways shall be a Decorative Fence, as defined in paragraph (b) above.
2. Woven or cyclone type fences are not permitted in any residential district.
3. A railroad screening fence, as defined in paragraph (b) above, may be permitted within residential zoning districts in accordance with the following standards:
Location:
1. The property on which the fence is to be constructed must be located as described by one of the following:
a) The property directly adjoins property used for an active railroad; or
b) The property is within two hundred (200) feet of property used for an active railroad and is not separated from the railroad property by residential property or a public right-of-way;
2. Railroad screening fences are only permitted along the property line that is parallel to the railroad tracks.
Height:
a) May not exceed seven (7) feet in height;
b) Within thirty (30) feet of a public right-of-way, railroad screening fences may not exceed five (5) feet in height;
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 110
i. Business or Industrial Fences. In business or industrial zoned districts, fences may not exceed six (6) feet in height in business areas, and eight (8) feet in industrial areas above ground level. No fence or wall, other than a decorative fence of 4 feet or less in height, shall be erected, constructed or maintained within fifty (50) feet from the front lot line. For purposes of security only, fences for business or industrial zoned districts may be provided along side and rear yard lot lines.
j. Non-Conforming Fences. Fences existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance which are not in violation of paragraph (e) above, and are not located on public street, highway and alley right-of-ways, but which violate other sections of this Ordinance may continue to be maintained and to exist, but may not be replaced if destroyed or removed, to the extent that the violations would be continued.
Part 7: Swimming Pools
a. Fencing. Every outdoor swimming pool, whether above ground or level with the ground, having a maximum depth of over two (2) feet, shall be completely surrounded by a fence not less than four (4) feet, nor more than five (5) feet in height. A building, existing wall, or pool wall may be used as part of such enclosure as long as the barrier requirements are met as required by the building code. Such required fence shall comply with all requirements of other Village ordinances pertaining to fences, and the provisions of this Section shall not be construed to require or permit any fence heights greater than permitted by such other ordinances. (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02) (Am. Ord. 2230, passed 10.17.05)
b. Gates or Doors. All gates or doors opening through the required fence shall be designed for security, in accordance with the Building Code of the Village of Frankfort.
c. Screening. If the fencing provided is anything other than solid fencing, the pool shall be effectively screened from view from outside the lot by densely-planted compact trees or hedges, providing at least fifty percent opacity when viewed between two (2) feet and five (5) feet above ground.
d. Setback Requirements. All outdoor swimming pools are considered accessory uses, and shall meet minimum yard requirements and, in addition thereto, shall be set back an additional two (2) feet for each one (1) foot of structure height exceeding five (5) feet. For the purpose of this section, the words “structure height” shall include any railings or other projections above the pool surface.
e. Water Discharge. The water discharged from a swimming pool shall be drained into the sanitary sewer or storm water system, as approved by the Village.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 111
Section E: Temporary Uses
The following uses of land are permitted in Commercial, Office, or Industrial districts (unless specifically restricted to a particular zoning district), subject to the specific regulations and time limits as described herein and to the other applicable regulations of the district or districts in which they are located. Such uses must be approved by the Code Official through issuance of a permit. The temporary use permit shall specify the location of the building, yard, or use, and the area of the permitted operation. Temporary uses must satisfy the applicable conditions as follows:
Part 1: Construction Trailers
A licensed contractor engaged in a construction project for which a Building Permit has been issued by the Building Inspection Department may temporarily use a construction trailer for office facilities in the location where work is being done, provided that such construction trailer shall:
a. Be placed only upon the property for which a Building Permit was issued authorizing construction, and not in any public right-of-way;
b. Not be placed more than fourteen (14) days prior to the commencement of the work for which the Building Permit was issued;
c. Not contain sleeping accommodations or cooking facilities; and
d. Be removed within fourteen (14) days after the completion of the work for which the Building Permit was issued.
e. Each permit shall be valid for a period of not more than six (6) calendar months, and shall not be renewed for more than two (2) successive periods at the same location.
Part 2: Office Facility, Excluding Real Estate Offices
A construction project for which a Building Permit has been issued by the Building Inspection Department may temporarily use a trailer for office facilities in the location where work is being done, provided that such temporary office facility shall:
a. Obtain permission for a special use according to the procedures of Article 3, Section E;
b. Abide by the conditions of the special use;
c. Be placed only upon the property for which a Building Permit was issued authorizing construction and identified on a plan submitted to the Plan Commission, and not located within any public right-of-way; and
d. Not contain sleeping accommodations or cooking facilities.
e. Each permit shall be valid for a period of not more than six (6) calendar months, and shall not be renewed for more than two (2) successive periods at the same location.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 112
Part 3: Real Estate Offices
A temporary real estate office incidental to a new housing development shall:
a. Not be used for sleeping or cooking purposes until the premises shall cease to be used as a real estate office;
b. Continue only until all dwelling units in the development have been first sold or leased; and
c. Be landscaped as approved by the Code Official.
d. Each permit shall be valid for a period of not more than six (6) calendar months, and shall not be renewed for more than two (2) successive periods at the same location.
Part 4: Seasonal Sales Lots
a. Material for seasonal sales (Christmas trees, pumpkins, etc.) shall not be located in any right of way;
b. The location of materials for sale are not to be located so as to block visibility for vehicles or pedestrians on or off the lot in a manner that would create a safety hazard;
c. The sales shall be limited to between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., and for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days;
d. Use of a public address system or loudspeaker is expressly prohibited;
e. All trash and debris is to be removed daily;
f. Written consent from the property owner, or the authorized agent of the property shall be provided to the Code Official;
g. All signage shall conform to the standards set forth in the Village of Frankfort Sign Ordinance; and
h. All materials shall be removed within forty-eight (48) hours of the end of operation.
Part 5: Seasonal Sales Of Farm Produce
Farm produce grown on the premises in the AG District may be sold on site, according to the following provisions:
a. Such sales shall not continue for more than four (4) months per year; and
b. Structures incidental to such sales, including roadside stands, must be portable, and removed at the end of the sales season. Roadside stands are permitted in the required front yard.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 113
Part 6: Temporary Outdoor Sales
Temporary outdoor sales, including garage sales, farmer’s markets, merchandising, and promotional displays, are permitted in all districts, subject to the following:
a. The use shall be located along and have direct vehicular access to a public street;
b. No sales or display activity shall be located on a public right-of-way;
c. The location of materials for sale are not to be located so as to block visibility for vehicles or pedestrians on or off the lot in a manner that would create a safety hazard;
d. All trash and debris is to be removed daily;
e. Written consent from the property owner, or the authorized agent of the property shall be provided to the Code Official;
f. All signage shall conform to the standards set forth in the Village of Frankfort Sign Ordinance;
g. Permits for temporary outdoor sales shall be valid for a period not to exceed 15 days. However, permits for promotional displays may be issued for shorter periods of time, as determined by the Code Official. Not more than 6 temporary outdoor sales permits may be issued per applicant in any calendar year. Consecutive permits may be issued as determined by the Code Official; and
h. All materials shall be removed within three (3) days of the end of the operation.
Part 7: Tents
(Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
a. No tent shall be erected, used, or maintained for living quarters.
b. A permit for the temporary use of tents for special events shall be limited in duration to 7 days. The permit holder shall remove all special event tents within 24 hours after the expiration of the permit.
c. No more than six special event tent permits shall be issued per applicant in any calendar year. A period of at least seven days shall be required between each permit period.
d. All tents shall be subject to the setback requirements of the underlying zoning district.
Village of Frankfort
Article 5: Use Regulations
September 17, 2001 114
Part 8: Temporary Recreational Areas or Equipment
a. Temporary outdoor recreation areas or equipment (including, but not limited to playhouses, batting cages, etc.) must conform to the requirements of Article 5, Section D, part (3)(k). In particular, the recreational facility or equipment must not exceed 15’ in height or 144 square feet in area, unless a variation is specifically approved according to the provisions of Article 3, Section B.
b. Temporary outdoor recreation areas or equipment may not be in place more than 4 months in any calendar year.
Part 9: Carnivals and Festivals
a. Activities may be conducted on public rights-of-way with the approval of the Village Board.
b. All trash and debris is to be removed daily.
c. Permits for temporary outdoor sales shall be valid for a period not to exceed 10 days.
d. The Code Official may restrict the hours of operation of a carnival or festival.
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 115
ARTICLE 6: DENSITY, DIMENSIONAL, AND OTHER STANDARDS
Section A: General Regulations
Part 1: Lot Size Requirements
a. No structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be built, moved or remodeled in such a way that increases the degree of non-conformance, and no structure or land shall hereafter be used, occupied, arranged or designed for use or occupancy on a zoning lot which is:
1. Smaller in area than the minimum lot area or minimum lot area per dwelling unit required in the zoning district in which the structure or land is located; or
2. Narrower than the minimum lot width required in the zoning district in which the structure or land is located.
These standards may be amended in accordance with a variation approval, as provided in Article 3, Section B, or as permitted in a Planned Development according to Article 3, Section F.
b. No existing structure shall hereafter be rebuilt, remodeled or otherwise altered or modified so as to conflict or further conflict with the lot area per dwelling unit or lot size requirements, as set forth herein, for the zoning district in which the structure is located.
c. No zoning lot which was made a lot of record and zoned prior to adoption of the current Village of Frankfort Zoning Ordinance which is:
1. Smaller than the required lot area or less than the minimum lot area per dwelling unit required by the zoning district within which the lot is located; or
2. Narrower than the minimum lot width required in the zoning district within which the lot is located;
shall be built upon unless a variation has been obtained in a manner described in Article 3, Section B, and within the parameters set forth in Article 10, Section I of this Ordinance.
Part 2: Bulk Regulations in General
In this Ordinance, bulk regulations are expressed in terms of maximum structure height, maximum lot coverage, maximum floor area ratio and minimum front, corner side, side and rear yards. No structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be built, moved or remodeled, and no structure or land shall hereafter be used, occupied or designed for use or occupancy so as to:
a. Exceed the maximum lot coverage percentage, the maximum structure height or the maximum floor area ratio specified for the zoning district in which the structure is located; or
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 116
b. Provide any setback or front, corner side, side or rear yard that is less than that specified for the zoning district in which such structure or use of land is located or maintained.
These standards may be amended in accordance with a variation approval, as provided in Article 3, Section B, or as permitted in a Planned Development according to Article 3, Section F.
Part 3: Yard Requirements in General
a. Minimum Lot Area: No part of the lot area, or of a yard, or other open space or off-street parking or loading space provided in connection with any structure or use in order to comply with this Ordinance shall, by reason of a change of ownership or otherwise, be included as a part of the minimum lot area or of a yard, or other open space or off-street parking or loading space required for any other structure or use, except as specifically permitted by this Ordinance.
b. Further Reduction: No lot area in yards and other open spaces provided in connection with any structure or use (including but not limited to any structure or use any amendment thereto) shall be subsequently reduced below, or further reduced if already less than, the minimum requirements of this Ordinance for equivalent new construction.
These standards may be amended in accordance with a variation approval, as provided in Article 3, Section B, or as permitted in a Planned Development according to Article 3, Section F.
Section B: Density, Dimensional and Other Standards for Residential Districts
Part 1: Table of Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards for Residential Districts
The Table of Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards lists standards which apply to structures in residential and agricultural districts according to the following:
a. Maximum density shall be the maximum number of dwelling units per net buildable area as defined in Article 12.
b. The minimum lot size refers to the separate ground area, herein called the zoning lot, which shall be designated, provided and continuously maintained for each structure containing a Permitted Use or a Special Use (with the exception of Planned Unit Developments).
c. All principal and accessory structures on all uses shall adhere to the bulk dimensions (see also Article 5, Section D, Accessory Uses).
d. The maximum rear yard coverage is the maximum percent of the required rear yard that may be covered by accessory uses (see also Article 5, Section D, Accessory Uses).
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 117
e. The minimum gross floor area is measured from the outside of the exterior wall, including utility rooms, but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes, except that enclosed space intended for habitable rooms which are to be completed within a reasonable time shall be considered in computing such floor areas.
f. The last two rows in the table refer to other development requirements (Part 2) and special standards (Part 3) that also govern development in that district.
Front Yard
Rear Yard
Rear Yard Coverage
Street
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 118
Table of Density, Dimensions, and Other Standards for Residential Districts
E-R R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 AG H-R Maximum Net Density (dwelling units per net buildable acre)
1
2
2.25
4
5
.05
- Minimum Lot Size (square feet)
General
-
-
-
-
28,500 (5,000 per dwelling unit)
20 acres
-
Single Family Dwelling
40,000
20,000
15,000
15,000
-
-
6,250
Two-Family Dwelling
-
-
-
15,000
-
-
-
Planned Unit Dev.
Article 3 F
Article 3 F
Article 3 F
Article 3 F
Article 3 F
-
Article 3 F
Non-Residential Use
80,000
40,000
30,000
30,000
12,500 Minimum Lot Width (feet)
General
-
-
-
-
120
-
-
Single Family Dwelling
150
100
100
100
-
-
50
Two-Family Dwelling
-
-
-
100
-
-
-
Planned Unit Dev.
-
Article 3 F
Article 3 F
Article 3 F
-
-
Article 3 F
Non-Residential Use
300
250
200
200
240
-
100
Lot Width of Corner Lot
165
120
120
120
145
-
- Minimum Lot Depth (feet)
Single Family Dwelling
267
200
150
150
--
--
-- Minimum Required Yards (feet) Front Yard
All Uses
-
-
-
-
40
75
-
Single Family (and Two Family in R-3) Dwelling
40
35
30
30
-
-
15
Non-Residential Use
80
60
60
60
30 Corner Lot Side Yard
All Uses
-
-
-
-
40
75
-
Single Family (and Two Family in R-3) Dwellings
40
35
30
30
-
-
15
Non-Residential Use
80
70
60
60
-
-
30 Side Yard
All Uses
-
-
-
-
15
100
-
Single Family (and Two Family in R-3) Dwelling
25
15
Total of 25 (not less than 10 on any side)
15
-
-
10
Non-Residential Use
50
30
20
30
-
-
20 Rear Yard
All Uses
-
-
-
-
40
100
-
Single Family (and Two Family in R-3) Dwellings (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02)
40
40
30
30
-
-
20
Non-Residential Uses (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02)
80
75
60
60
40
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 119
E-R R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 AG H-R
Landscaped Front Yard for non-residential uses (see Article 6.B.2.e)
25
25
25
25
-
-
25
Front Yard Setback from Centerline of Arterial (see Article 6.B.2.e)
125
125
125
125
-
-
-
Front Yard Setback from Centerline of Route 30 (see Article 6.B.2.e)
150
150
150
150
-
-
- Bulk Dimensions Maximum Height
Feet
40
40
35
35
35
35
35 Maximum Floor Area Ratio
-
-
-
-
.25
-
.50 Maximum Lot Coverage
Single Family Home
20%
20%
20% (but 25% for one story dwelling)
20% (but 25% for one story dwelling)
-
-
35% (not including up to 500 square feet for detached garage)
All Other Uses
30%
30%
30%
30%
-
10%
30% Maximum Impervious Coverage
Single Family Home
30%
35%
40%
40%
40%
-
60%
All Other Uses
50%
50%
50%
50%
50%
20%
60% Maximum Rear Yard Coverage
20%
25%
30%
30%
30%
30%
35% Minimum Gross Floor Area (square feet)
One story dwelling (Am. Ord. 2839, passed 04.29.13)
3,000
2,500
2,400
-
-
1,600
1,000
More than one story dwelling
5,000
4,000
2,600
-
-
2,000
1,500
Manufactured Home
-
-
-
-
-
-
- Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit Based on Number of Bedrooms in Unit (square feet)
Efficiency, and 1 bedroom
-
-
-
1,200
1,200
-
-
2 bedrooms
1,200
1,200
-
-
3 bedrooms
-
-
-
1,600
1,600
-
-
Each additional bedroom
-
-
-
Add 400 per bedroom over 3
Add 400 per bedroom over 3
-
-
Other Development Requirements, found in Article 6, Section B, Part 2
Article 6.B.2
Article 6.B.2
Article 6.B.2
Article 6.B.2
Article 6.B.2
Article 6.B.2
Article
6.B.2
Special Requirements for this District, found in Article 6, Section B, Part 3
-
-
-
6.B.3.a
6.B.3.b
-
6.B.3.c
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 120
Part 2: Other Residential Development Requirements
All uses in all residential districts shall conform to the following:
a. Site Development Standards. All uses, with the exception of single family detached dwellings, shall conform to the standards set forth in Article 7 of this Ordinance.
b. Water Discharge. Roof water and miscellaneous water outlets shall be expelled to lawn surface however in no instance shall such water be expelled closer than five (5) feet from side or rear lot lines. Above ground water may be expelled to storm sewers, or through front yards if piped underground and expelled directly to road ditch or curb line when properly graded to existing conditions. Sump pumps shall be directly piped and connected to storm sewers. (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02)
c. Lot Depth. The depth of a lot may be decreased by 20 feet if the rear lot line adjoins permanent open space.
d. Landscaping. The landscaping plan must meet all standards and guidelines established in the Village of Frankfort’s Landscape Ordinance.
e. Landscaped Front Yard. For non-residential uses in the E-R, R-1, R-2, and R-3 districts, a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the front property line shall be devoted to grass, trees and low living landscape materials as required in the Village of Frankfort’s Landscape Ordinance. A means of ingress and egress may encroach upon this first twenty-five (25) feet. On roadways classified as arterial in the Village Master Transportation Plan, all structures shall maintain a minimum setback of 125 feet from the centerline of the right-of-way, with the exception that the minimum setback from the center line Route 30 is 150 feet.
f. Landscape Plan and Cash Bond. In the R-3, R-4, and AG districts, a general landscaping plan must accompany all applications for building permits requested for the construction of a new building, and shall be approved by the Code Official. A cash bond in an amount required by the Code Official shall be submitted upon issuance of the landscape permit. The landscaping plan must meet all standards and guidelines established in the Village of Frankfort Landscape Regulations, and sections 150.75 and 150.76 of the Village Code. The owner and the Code Official shall determine the completion date, however, the date shall not exceed eighteen (18) months after the date of issuance of the building permit. The cash bond will be returned to the maker of said bond after completion of all landscaping.
g. Materials
1. Split face block shall not be permitted in any residential district.
2. In the E-R, R-1, and R-2 districts, all residences shall be constructed of brick, stone, masonry, or wood construction only. Each one story home shall be
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 121
constructed of brick, stone, or masonry materials, except as provided herein. All other one and one-half, two, or multi-story structures shall have the entire first floor level constructed of brick, stone, or masonry material, except as provided herein. Non-masonry may be permitted by the code official as a first floor building material when the non-masonry material is limited to architectural accent features only and is not a primary building material of any building façade. Unless a variance is obtained, non-masonry materials shall not exceed 15% of any first floor façade surface area. No plywood, vinyl, steel, or aluminum siding shall be used on any structure erected on any lot in any subdivision. (Am. Ord. 2313, passed 08.21.06)
h. Garages. No more than three (3) car bays in width may face a public ROW. All garages which have more than three (3) contiguous car bays in width shall be side-loaded in orientation. Side-loaded garages shall have a minimum turning radius of 26’.
i. Driveways. At the property line, a driveway shall have a maximum width of 28’, except for circular driveways with two curb cuts, in which case the maximum width shall be 14’. Within 20’ of the associated garage, the driveway may increase in width as it approaches the garage, to a width not greater than the associated garage. In the case of a side loaded garage a one foot (1’) encroachment of the required five foot (5’) pavement setback shall be permitted; however, no driveway or portion thereof shall encroach a platted easement. (Am. Ord. 2839, passed 04.29.13)
j. Signs. Signs shall be subject to the regulations contained in the Village of Frankfort Sign Regulations.
k. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required in Article 7, Section B of this Ordinance.
l. Basements. Each dwelling unit requires a basement equal to 80% of the ground floor area of the first story. (Am. Ord. 2839, passed 04.29.13)
m. Windows, doors and trim. Each single-family dwelling shall utilize the same or similar style and quality windows, doors, and trim on all facades. Decorative entry doors and enhanced window treatments such as mullions are often utilized on the front façade of a home. For the purposes of this section, it is not required that decorative entry doors, enhanced window treatments and other similar decorative elements be utilized on all facades. (Am. Ord. 2839, passed 04.29.13)
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 122
Part 3: Special Regulations for Individual Residential Districts
The regulations of this Part 3 apply to individual residential districts, in addition to the general regulations of Part 2 above.
a. R-3 Attached Two Family Residential District
1. A lot depth requirement of 150 feet is required of all uses.
2. Each dwelling unit shall provide separate front and rear entrance/exit to the outdoors.
3. No required living space can be provided below grade level.
4. Each dwelling unit requires a basement equal to 80% of the ground floor area of the first story.
5. Flat roofs shall not be permitted.
6. Parking requirements in addition to Article 7 Section B:
a) Each unit requires a two (2) stall enclosed garage. Carports and detached garages are not permitted.
b) One-half (0.5) off-street parking space in addition to the required enclosed garage spaces is required for each dwelling unit. Parking islands may be provided to satisfy this guest parking requirement, provided that no more than four parking spaces are provided in any given island. On-street parking may also be provided where the petitioner demonstrates that such parking is available within the applicable R-3 district.
c) The driveway shall not constitute a required parking space except to satisfy the requirement for guest parking spaces, where such driveway is at least 25’ in length.
d) In any R-3 development, at least 30% of all garages shall be side-loaded.
b. R-4 Attached Single Family Residential District
1. A separate ground area of not less than 5,000 square feet shall be designated, provided and continuously maintained for each multi-family dwelling unit as landscaped open space.
2. Each dwelling unit shall provide a separate front and rear entrance/exit to the outdoors unless special use approval is granted.
3. Each residential structure and/or building shall contain no more than four (4) attached units except with special use approval.
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 123
4. No required living space can be provided below grade level.
5. Each dwelling unit requires a basement equal to 80% of the ground floor area of the first story.
6. Flat roofs shall not be permitted.
7. Parking requirements in addition to Article 7 Section B:
a) Each unit requires a two (2) stall enclosed garage. Carports and detached garages are not permitted.
b) One-half (0.5) off-street parking space in addition to the required enclosed garage spaces is required for each dwelling unit. Parking islands may be provided to satisfy this guest parking requirement, provided that no more than four parking spaces are provided in any given island. On-street parking may also be provided where the petitioner demonstrates that such parking is available within the applicable R-4 district.
c) The driveway shall not constitute a required parking space except to satisfy the requirement for guest parking spaces, where such driveway is at least 25’ in length.
d) In any R-4 development, at least 30% of all garages shall be side-loaded.
c. H-R Historic Residential District
1. Development Approval
a) Application for new construction, or an addition to an existing building which will add more than 50% to the existing building by square footage, or a renovation, which will substantially alter the street facade, must be approved by the 1890's Theme Committee as to the appropriateness of exterior architectural features. The 1890’s Theme Committee shall be guided by the architectural standards in the Village of Frankfort Historic Preservation Design Guidelines.
b) An application for a permit to erect any outdoor sign or fence in the H-R Historic Residential District must be approved by the 1890's Theme Committee as to appropriateness before a permit may be issued.
2. Non-Conforming Uses. The non-conforming use provision of this Ordinance shall not apply to or be enforced against any buildings, structures or uses in the H-R District, which exist at time of adoption of this Ordinance. However, extensions or expansions of an existing building shall conform either to the existing building setbacks or to the bulk regulations of this Section B.
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 124
Part 4: Single-Family Residential Development Standards
a. Purpose and Intent. The purpose of these standards is to establish standards for the exterior design of single-family buildings and structures, to conserve property values, direct building development to the best advantage of the entire municipality, and ensure that homes are constructed of high quality and long lasting materials. The goals for single-family development are:
1. Construct new neighborhoods that age gracefully and become established over time with a consistent character and quality;
2. Construct residential infill such that it maintains and / or enhances the value and quality of existing neighborhoods;
3. Promote the development of attractive streetscapes, which increase curb appeal and create a “sense of place”;
4. Provide flexibility for architectural variety. The intent of these standards is to prohibit certain design elements that have negative impacts on communities while allowing flexibility for developers and architects to create interesting and attractive structures.
b. Administrative Approval. The residential development standards have been carefully crafted to allow flexibility in creative building solutions. Although the standards were drafted to be as comprehensive as possible, there may be instances where they might conflict with a unique architectural style or cannot be achieved due to site constraints. Minor deviations from these standards may be approved administratively by the Zoning Official upon request by the developer of a property, where such deviation will result in a home that complies with the spirit and intent of the standards contained herein. Should the Zoning Official deny any such requests an applicant may apply for relief through the variance process with the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with Article 3, Section B of this ordinance.
c. Applicability. These standards are applicable to all new construction or redevelopment of single-family dwelling units within the ER, R1, and R2 zoning districts platted after January 1, 2000 and constructed upon after April 29, 2013, the date of adoption .
d. Building Materials. Each one story home shall be constructed entirely of brick, stone or masonry materials. All other one and one-half, two, or multi-story structures shall have the entire first floor constructed of brick, stone, or masonry materials and shall include a minimum of two (2) masonry elements that extend from the first floor into the second floor. For the purposes of this section “masonry elements” shall include gable ends, recessed or projecting entrance elements, turrets, or any other similar masonry elements with a width greater than ten (10) feet. One of the two required second floor masonry elements shall extend a minimum of eight (8) feet above the first floor ceiling height.
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 125
1. Each building façade shall exhibit identical or substantially similar materials treatments to provide a consistent architectural appearance and appeal on all sides of a structure.
2. Changes from masonry to non-masonry materials on the same plane of the front façade shall be delineated by an architectural element or decorative trim board.
3. Where utilized, siding shall incorporate decorative trim boards at both inside and outside corners, around windows, to define gable ends and at all transitions to masonry materials.
4. Chimneys must be constructed of 100% masonry.
5. No plywood, vinyl, steel, or aluminum siding shall be used on any structure erected on any lot in any subdivision.
e. Wall Massing. There shall be no more than one (1) uninterrupted wall length of thirty-five (35) feet or greater along any façade of a primary structure, except as permitted herein. Walls with an uninterrupted length greater than 35’ are not permitted facing a public right-of-way. For the purposes of this section an interruption shall be defined as an offset in a wall plane and underlying foundation measuring a minimum of one foot (1’).
To encourage side loaded garages in accordance with Section H below, where a side load garage is proposed a home may be constructed with a maximum of two (2) uninterrupted wall lengths greater than thirty-five (35) feet. Walls with an uninterrupted length greater than 35’ are not permitted facing a public right-of-way.
f. Architectural Relief. No single-family residential structure shall have more than one side with fewer than four (4) outside corners as measured at the foundation plan and carried through the exterior wall plane(s). To qualify as an outside corner, the corner must be located within thirty feet (30’) of the side in question. Outside corners shall be defined according to the following illustrations. For the purposes of this section rounded corners with a radius of 90 degrees or more shall be counted as an outside corner. (Am. Ord. 3229, passed 10.07.19)
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 126
Figure 1. Prohibited Design
Figure 2. Permitted Design
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 127
g. Architectural Accent Elements. Exterior ornamentation enhances a home’s overall appearance while serving both functional and aesthetic purposes. All homes shall incorporate a minimum of five (5) of the following accent elements on their front façade. Accent elements shall be incorporated on interior side and rear facades, where appropriate to create a cohesive architectural design.
1. stone accents
2. stone lintels
3. keystones
4. brick solider coursing and other similar details
5. wing walls
6. balconies
7. bay / oriel windows
8. covered front porch
9. arbor / trellis
10. shutters
11. columns
12. cupola
13. ornate chimney pots
14. window planting boxes
15. decorative gable vents
16. decorative light fixtures
17. other similar accent elements as approved by the code official.
h. Garage Orientation and Design. Side load garages are preferred. All front loaded three (3) car garages must have a break in the roofline by stepping one door back a minimum of two (2) feet. Garages larger than three (3) cars must be side loaded. All garage doors shall be of a minimum height of eight feet (8’).
Given their utilitarian nature, garage doors can have a substantial impact on the architectural character of a home, streetscape and neighborhood. To soften their appearance and create additional architectural interest all garage doors must incorporate a minimum of two (2) of the following design details: transom windows, permanently affixed decorative brackets and handles, raised / recessed panels, faux half-timbering and / or other similar design elements as approved by the building official.
i. Roof Construction and Materials. A minimum roof pitch of 8/12 is required for all single-family residential structures. Roof pitch requirements shall not apply to architectural design elements including bay windows covered front porches, etc. Reduced roof pitches may be considered if intended to accommodate a specific historical architectural style (i.e. Prairie Style). Flat roofs are prohibited. Roofs shall be constructed of heavyweight architectural shingles, wood, slate, or other similar materials. Metallic roofing materials and non-architectural asphalt shingles are prohibited except exposed copper may be used for flashing and decorative features such as roof areas above bay windows.
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 128
(Am. Ord. 2839, passed 04.29.13)
Section C: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards for Non-Residential Districts
Part 1: Table of Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards for Non-Residential Districts
The Table of Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards lists standards which apply to structures in all non-residential districts according to the following:
a. The minimum lot size refers to the separate ground area, herein called the zoning lot, which shall be designated, provided and continuously maintained for each structure containing a Permitted Use or a Special Use (with the exception of Planned Unit Developments).
b. All permitted and special uses shall conform to the minimum required yard requirements. For purposes of determining the side or rear yard adjacent to residential use, the adjacent property is considered to be residential where the property is located in a residential district, occupied by an existing residential use, or designated for residential use in the Comprehensive Plan of the Village of Frankfort.
c. All principal and accessory structures on all uses shall adhere to the bulk dimensions.
d. The minimum gross floor area is measured from the outside of the exterior wall, including utility rooms, but excluding cellars, basements, open porches, breezeways, garages and other spaces that are not used frequently or during extended periods for living, eating or sleeping purposes, except that enclosed space intended for habitable rooms which are to be completed within a reasonable time shall be considered in computing such floor areas.
e. The last two rows in the table refer to other development requirements (Part 2) and special standards (Part 3) that also govern development in that district.
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 129
Table of Density, Dimensions, and Other Standards for Non-Residential Districts
B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OR I-1 I-2 H-1 Minimum Lot Dimensions
Lot Size (square feet) (Am. Ord 1887, passed 04.15.02)
20,000
20,000
10 acres
20,000
3 acres
1 acre
1 acre
5,000
Lot Width (feet)
100
100
100
100
250
100
100
50 Minimum Required Yards (feet)
Front Yard
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
-
Landscaped Front Yard (see 6.C.2.d)
(Am. Ord. 3230 Passed 10.07.19)
25
25
25
25
50
20
20
-
Front Yard Setback from ROW Centerline of major highway or major industrial roadway, except Route 30 and Laraway Road (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02)
125
125
125
125
125
125
125
-
Front Yard Setback from ROW Centerline of Route 30 and Laraway Road (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02)
150
150
150
150
150
150
150
-
Corner Side Yard
50
50
50
50
50
50
50
10
Interior Side Yard
15
15
15
15
25
20
20
5
Side Yard Adjacent to Residential Use
30
50
50
30
50
75
100
10
Rear Yard
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
10
Rear Yard Adjacent to Residential Use
50
50
50
50
100
100
100
20 Bulk Dimensions
Maximum Height (feet)
35
35
35
35
60
35
35
35
Maximum Impervious Lot Coverage
80%
75%
70%
70%
70%
80%
85%
-
Other Development Requirements
6.C.3.a
6.C.3.b
6.C.3.c
-
6.C.3.d
6.C.3.e
6.C.3.f
6.C.3.g
Performance Standards (Article 6, Section D)
Level A
Level A
Level A
Level A
Level A
Level A
Level B
Level A
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 130
Part 2: Other Non-Residential Development Requirements
All uses in all non-residential districts shall conform to the following:
a. Site Plan Review Standards. All uses shall conform to the standards set forth in Article 7 of this Ordinance.
b. Water Discharge. Roof water and miscellaneous water outlets shall be expelled to lawn surface not less than five (5) feet from side or rear lot lines; above water may be expelled to storm sewers, or through front yards if piped underground and expelled directly to road ditch or curb line, when properly graded to existing conditions. For all new construction, sump pumps shall be directly piped and connected to storm sewers. (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02)
c. Landscaping. A general landscaping plan must accompany all applications for building permits requested for the construction of new buildings and the use of lot, and must be approved by the Code Official. The landscaping plan must meet all applicable Village standards and guidelines, particularly those established in the Village of Frankfort Landscape Regulations.
If landscaping, sidewalks, parking lots and other external improvements are not completed at the time of issuance of the occupancy permit, the owner and Code Official will determine the completion date. However, that date shall not exceed eighteen (18) months after the date of issuance of the building permit. If improvements are not completed within this time, the Village may use funds provided by the owner as security to complete the remaining work.
d. Landscaped Setback
The Landscaped Front Yard shall be devoted to grass, trees and low living landscape materials, as required in the Village of Frankfort Landscape Regulations, and a means of ingress and egress only. In addition, all parking and signs must maintain a setback at least as large as the Landscaped Front Yard. In the I-1 and I-2 zoning districts a 25’ landscaped Front Yard is required along both arterial and collector roads as identified in the Village of Frankfort Transportation Master Plan. Along all other roadways in I-1 and I-2 zoned districts a 20’ Landscaped Front Yard is required in accordance with Article 6, Section C, Table of Density, Dimensions, and Other Standards for Non-Residential Districts. (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02 and Ord. 3230, passed 10.07.19)
e. Enclosure of Operations. All businesses, servicing or processing shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings, except:
1. Off-street parking or loading.
2. Outdoor accessory uses which are approved as a special use.
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 131
f. Outdoor Sales
1. In the B-3 district, all outdoor sales space shall be provided with a permanent durable, and dustless surface, and shall be graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water. Adequate screening must be provided to screen sales areas from adjacent residential uses and such space shall comply with the Village landscape regulations.
2. Permanent outdoor sales are not permitted in districts other than the B-3 district.
3. Temporary outdoor sales shall be regulated by the provisions of Article 5, Section E.
g. Outdoor Storage
1. In the B-3 and I-1 district, outdoor storage shall require special use approval and shall not include uncontained bulk materials. All outdoor storage facilities for accessory uses and products shall be enclosed by a fence, wall or plant materials adequate to conceal such facilities from adjacent properties and the public right-of-way. All outdoor storage areas shall be located on a paved surface, unless such storage area is located in the rear yard and is enclosed by a fence, wall or plant materials adequate to conceal such facility.
2. In the I-2 district, the storing of junk and like materials is prohibited, and storage of uncontained bulk materials shall require special use approval. All other storage of materials must comply with setback requirements and bulk regulations as outlined in this Part, as well as screened by a minimum four (4) foot screen from all street frontages. No items shall be stored at a height greater than the screen and under no condition shall outdoor storage exceed ten (10) feet in height. All outdoor storage areas shall be located on a paved surface, unless such storage area is located in the rear yard behind the rear façade of the primary structure and is enclosed by a fence, wall or plant materials adequate to conceal such facility. Accessory storage uses must follow all other applicable Village standards.
3. Outdoor storage is not permitted in districts other than the B-3, I-1, and I-2 as described above.
h. Performance Standards
1. All activities shall conform to the performance standards contained in Article 6 Section D. Where the performance standards are differentiated between Level A and Level B:
a) In the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, OR and I-1 districts, all activities shall conform to the Level A performance standards.
b) In the I-2 district, all activities shall conform to the Level B performance standards.
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 132
i. Waste Materials. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form that they may be transferred off the property by natural causes or forces.
j. Screening. Where a business or industrial use abuts or is across the street from a Residential District, such use shall be screened from view. A landscape plan must meet all applicable Village standards and guidelines, particularly those established in the Village of Frankfort Landscape Regulations.
k. Fencing Required. Where any non-residential permitted or special use borders a residential zone, fencing or landscaping must be provided along all common boundaries to shield the residential zone from the non-residential permitted or special use. All fencing must follow guidelines established in Article 5, Section D of this Ordinance and the requirements of Village of Frankfort Landscape Regulations.
l. Storm Drainage and Entrance Curbs. Storm Drainage and entrance curbs are required on all street frontages, and shall meet the approval of the Village Engineer and all applicable Village Standards. In the OR, I-1, and I-2 districts, curb and gutter facilities are also required.
m. Curbs. Concrete curbs are required for all paved areas to define the edge of paving from landscaped areas.
n. Ingress and Egress
1. On all business and industrial lots with less than 200 feet frontage on a public road, access shall be limited to one combined ingress and egress with a minimum width of twenty (20) feet, and a maximum width of thirty-two (32) feet, measured from the inside of curbs at the property line (location determined by Village Engineer or others appointed by the Village).
2. On all business lots of 200 feet and over with frontage on a public road, access shall be limited to two (2) combined ingresses and egresses, with a minimum width of thirty-two (32) feet measured from inside of curbs at property line locations (determined by the Village Engineer or others appointed by the Village). Details of ingresses and egresses are to meet State, County and Village requirements.
3. On industrial lots of 200 feet and over with frontage on a minor roadway (those roadways not classified as a Major Industrial Roadway), access is limited to two combined ingresses and egress with a minimum width of twenty (20) feet, and a maximum width of thirty-two (32) feet, measured from the inside of curbs at the property line (location determined by Village Engineer or others appointed by the Village).
o. Signs. Signs shall be subject to the regulations contained in the Village of Frankfort Sign Regulations.
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 133
p. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required in Article 7, Section B. Delivery trucks, and any vehicles on which advertising for a place of business is placed, shall be parked behind the structure.
q. Hours of Operation. Non-residential uses may be open for business between the hours of 7 am and 11 pm. Establishments with operating hours outside of these normal operating hours must be approved as a special use according to the regulations of Article 3, Section E.
Part 3: Special Regulations for Individual Non-Residential Districts
The regulations of this Part 3 apply to individual non-residential districts, in addition to the general regulations of Part 2 above.
a. B-1 Local Business District
1. The parking of trucks when accessory to the conduct of a permitted use shall be limited to vehicles having not over one and one-half (1 1/2) tons capacity, except for delivery services, which may be parked for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours.
b. B-2 Community Business District
To ensure that large-scale development in this district is designed as an integrated project, each B-2 development of twenty (20) acres or more shall be administered as a Planned Unit Development.
1. Signs. In addition to the requirements of Article 7, Section F, all developments in this district shall submit a comprehensive sign plan for the entire development.
c. B-3 General Business District
To ensure that large-scale development in this district is designed as an integrated project, each B-3 development of twenty (20) acres or more shall be administered as a Planned Unit Development.
Properties with a B-3 designation should be located on Regional Arterials or Community Arterials (as identified in the Master Transportation Plan) only.
1. Signs. In addition to the requirements of Article 7, Section F, all developments in this district shall submit a comprehensive sign plan for the entire development.
d. OR Office/Research/Limited Industrial District
1. Development Size. To ensure that development in this district is designed and planned as an integrated campus-like environment, each OR development of thirty (30) acres or more shall be administered as a Planned Unit Development.
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 134
2. Enclosure of Use. All industrial operations shall take place within completely enclosed buildings, unless otherwise specified (see Article 6, Section C, Part 2).
3. Village Standards. All developments within this District must meet all applicable Village Standards, and the standards and guidelines established in the Village of Frankfort Engineering Design Standards.
4. Exterior Building Materials
a) Exterior walls shall be of face brick, architectural steel and aluminum, stone, glass, exposed aggregate panels, textured or architecturally finished concrete, steel, or wood. Equivalent or better materials, or any combination of the above, may be used in a well-conceived or creative application.
b) Common brick, concrete block, split face block, corrugated metal or pre-engineered metals installed with exposed fasteners are prohibited as exterior building materials.
5. Parking and Loading Requirements. In addition to the requirements of Article 7, Section B:
a) All parking lots must be paved, with curbs and gutter.
b) Loading areas shall be paved and shall be completely contained on-site.
6. Signs. In addition to the requirements of Article 7, Section F, all developments in this district shall submit a comprehensive sign plan for the entire development.
7. Underground fuel storage tanks are not permitted.
e. I-1 Limited Industrial District
1. Enclosure of Use. All industrial operations shall take place within completely enclosed buildings, unless otherwise specified (see Article 6, Section C, Part 2).
2. Village Standards. All developments within this District must meet all applicable Village Standards, and the standards and guidelines established in the Village of Frankfort Engineering Design Standards.
3. Exterior Building Materials
a) Exterior walls shall be of face brick, architectural steel and aluminum, stone, glass, exposed aggregate panels, textured or architecturally finished concrete, steel, or wood. Equivalent or better materials, or any combination of the above, may be used in a well-conceived or creative application.
b) Common brick and concrete block are prohibited as exterior building materials.
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 135
c) Split face block is only permitted on front and side facades where architectural features (such as columns, horizontal bands, etc.) are incorporated into said façades.
d) Corrugated metal or pre-engineered metals installed with exposed fasteners are only permitted on front facades if 50% of said front façade is masonry, and are only permitted on side facades where architectural features (such as columns, horizontal bands, etc.) are incorporated into said side façades.
4. Parking and Loading Requirements. In addition to the requirements of Article 7, Section B:
a) All parking lots must be paved, with curbs and gutter.
b) Loading areas shall be paved and shall be completely contained on-site.
5. Signs. In addition to the requirements of Article 7, Section F, all developments in this district shall submit a comprehensive sign plan for the entire development.
Underground fuel storage tanks are not permitted.
f. I-2 General Industrial District
1. Village Standards. All developments within this District must meet all applicable Village standards, and the standards and guidelines established in the Village of Frankfort Engineering Design Standards.
2. Landscaping. A general landscaping plan must accompany all applications for building permits requested for the construction of new buildings and the use of lot and must be approved by a Code Official. The landscaping plan must meet all applicable Village standards and guidelines, particularly those established in the Village of Frankfort Landscape Regulations, and sections 150.75 and 150.76 of the Village Code.
If landscaping, sidewalks, parking lots and other external improvements are not completed at the time of issuance of the occupancy permit, the owner and Code Official will determine the completion date, however, that date shall not exceed eighteen (18) months after the date of issuance of the building permit. The promissory note will be canceled and returned to the maker of said note after completion of all landscaping.
3. Exterior Building Materials
a) Exterior walls shall be of face brick, architectural steel and aluminum, stone, glass, exposed aggregate panels, textured or architecturally finished concrete, steel, or wood. Equivalent or better materials, or any combination of the above, may be used in a well-conceived or creative application.
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 136
b) Common brick and concrete block are prohibited as exterior building materials except on the rear facade.
c) Split face block is only permitted on the front facade where architectural features (such as columns, horizontal bands, etc.) are incorporated into said façade.
d) Corrugated metal or pre-engineered metals installed with exposed fasteners are only permitted on front facades if 50% of said front façade is masonry.
4. Parking and Loading Requirements. In addition to the requirements of Article 7, Section B:
a) All parking lots must be paved, with curbs and gutter.
b) Loading areas shall be paved and shall be completely contained on-site.
5. Fences. Chain link fences are prohibited where visible from a public road, unless such fence is concealed with landscaping. Chain link fences may be permitted in the rear of a property or behind the front extent of the primary building, and shall include privacy slats.
g. H-1 Historic District
1. Front Yard. For buildings or additions to existing buildings constructed after the date of adoption of this Ordinance, the minimum required front yard setback shall be the average of the front yard setbacks of the two closest developed properties on either side. A front yard setback shall be devoted to living landscape materials.
2. Corner Side Yard. The corner yard setback shall be devoted to landscaping.
3. Rear Yard. The rear yard setback shall not apply to structures that exist on the date of the adoption of this Ordinance, provided that such existing structures shall not be altered so as to decrease the existing rear yard setback.
4. Development Approval
a) Application for building permits in the H-1 Historic District must be approved by the 1890 Theme Committee as to the appropriateness of exterior architectural features. The 1890’s Theme Committee shall be guided by the architectural standards in the Village of Frankfort Historic Preservation Design Guidelines.
b) An application for a permit to erect any outdoor sign, fence, or structure in the H-1 Historic District must be approved by the 1890 Theme Committee as to appropriateness before a permit may be issued.
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 137
5. Non-Conforming Uses. The non-conforming use provision of this Ordinance shall not apply to or be enforced against any residential structures or uses in the Historic District, which exist at time of adoption of this Ordinance. In particular, residential structures or uses existing at the date of adoption of this Ordinance in the H-1 district may be continued, repaired, and rebuilt if damaged without the need for variation approval as provided in Article 10, Section I. However, extensions or expansions shall conform to the bulk regulations of this Section C.
6. Parking Requirements. The Village Board has determined that it may be unreasonable and impractical for individual building uses within the historic district to provide auxiliary parking facilities on site. Parking facilities to accommodate the requirements of the uses within the designated area may best be provided by the Village in public parking areas developed in compliance with a general plan of parking facilities. Therefore, any new building or structure, or any expansion to an existing building, or any change in use to a use which requires additional parking as compared to the original use, may be relieved from providing the normally required off-site parking through the approval of a variation. The Village Board may require, as a condition of the variation approval, compensation toward a public parking area. Shared parking is also encouraged in this district.
7. Signs. No signs may be internally illuminated.
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 138
Section D: Environmental Performance Standards
Part 1: General Regulations
a. Procedures & Purpose. The purpose of the performance standards procedure is to ensure that an objective, unbiased determination is made in those cases where there may be substantial doubt as to whether an individual land use or group of land uses comply with the performance standards of this Part, and to formulate practical ways for the alleviation of such non-compliance.
b. Performance Standards. All permitted non-residential uses shall comply with the Performance Standards set forth in Part 2 below. All uses in the I-2 General Industrial District shall comply with Level B standards, where provided. All uses in all other districts shall comply with the Level A standards. Where there is no distinction between Level A and Level B standards, the standards as provided shall apply equally to all uses in all districts.
c. Compliance. Should the Code Official determine that the proposed use may violate the performance standards set forth herein, the Code Official shall require information from the owner or operator and initiate an investigation. Should such additional data be required, the Code Official shall request information including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Plans of the existing or proposed construction and development.
2. A description of the existing or proposed machinery, processes and products.
3. Specifications for the mechanisms and techniques used or proposed to be used in restricting the possible emission of any dangerous and objectionable elements as set forth in this Part.
4. Measurements of the amount or rate of emission of said dangerous and objectionable elements.
Failure to submit data requested by a Code Official shall constitute grounds for denying a permit of compliance.
d. Report By Expert Consultants. A Code Official may require any person, firm or corporation to retain an expert consultant or consultants to study and report as to compliance or non-compliance with performance standards, and to advise how a proposed use can be brought into compliance with performance standards. Such consultants shall be persons or firms mutually agreeable to the Code Official and to the owner or operator of the use in question. In the event of inability to select a mutually agreeable consultant, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall select the consultant. The cost of the consultant’s services shall be borne by the owner or operator of said use.
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 139
e. Action By the Code Official. Within sixty (60) days following the receipt of the acquired evidence, or receipt of the reports of appointed consultants, the Code Official shall make a determination as to compliance or non-compliance with the performance standards. The Code Official may require modification or alterations in the existing or proposed construction or the operational procedures to ensure that compliance with the performance standards will be maintained. The operator shall be given a reasonable length of time to enact any changes prescribed by the Code Official for the purpose of securing compliance with the performance standards.
f. Enforcement. The Code Official shall investigate any purported violation of performance standards and, if there are reasonable grounds for the same, shall investigate the alleged violation. For such investigation, the Code Official may employ qualified experts. If, after public hearing on due notice, the Village finds that a violation occurred or exists, a copy of said findings shall be forwarded to the owner or operator with instructions to correct the violation. The services of any qualified experts employed by the Village of Frankfort to advise in establishing a violation shall be borne by the Village of Frankfort.
g. Cancellation of Permits. If, after the conclusion of the time granted for compliance with the performance standards, the Code Official finds the violation is still in existence, any compliance permits previously issued shall be void and the operator shall be required to cease operation until the violation is remedied.
Part 2: Performance Standards
a. Noise
1. No land use or other activity within the Village shall be conducted in such a manner that it generates a level of sound on another property greater than that allowed under the Noise Regulations of the State of Illinois, adopted by the State Pollution Control Board pursuant to the Environmental Protection Act, 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq., as amended, and appearing in Title 35, Subtitle H, of the Illinois Administrative Code, as amended.
2. In addition to the standards set forth above, no land use or other activity within the Village, other than those specified in paragraph 4 below, shall be conducted in such a manner that it generates a level of sound on another property which is greater than the sound level set forth in the table of A-Weighted Sound Level Limits below.
3. Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter manufactured according to the standards prescribed by the American National Standards Institute or its successor body.
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 140
4. The limits set forth in the table of A-Weighted Sound Level Limits below shall not apply to the following: noises not directly under the control of the owner or occupant of the property; noises emanating from construction, repair, and maintenance activities conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. and such other times as may be specifically authorized by the Code Administrator; noises emanating from safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure relief valves; and transient noises emanating from moving sources, such as trucks, automobiles, airplanes, and railroads.
A-Weighted Sound Level Limits
District Classification of "Receiving" Property
Time of Day
Maximum "A-Weighted” Sound Level
Residential Districts
7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
50 dB(A)
7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
45 dB(A)
All Others
7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
60 dB(A)
7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
55 dB(A)
Exceptions: The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise level regulations in the I-1 District:
1. Noises not directly under control of the proper user.
2. Noises emanating from construction and maintenance activities between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Such activities are those which are non-routine operations accessory to the primary activities and which are temporary in nature, or conducted infrequently.
3. The noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure relief valves.
4. Transient noises at moving sources such as automobiles, trucks, airplanes and railroads.
Impact noises shall not exceed the following peak intensities:
Along Residence District Boundaries Along Adjacent Lot Boundaries Overall Peak (decibels)
80
86
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 141
b. Vibration
1. Level A. Any operation or activity which shall cause at any time, and at any point along the nearest adjacent lot line, earth borne vibrations in excess of the limits set forth in Column I below is prohibited. In addition, any industrial operation or activity which shall cause at any time, and at any point along a Residence District boundary line, earth borne vibrations in excess of the limits set forth in Column II below is prohibited.
Exceptions: The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the vibration level regulations:
a) Vibrations not directly under the control of the property user.
b) Vibrations emanating from construction and maintenance activities between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Such activities are those which are non-routine operations accessory to the primary activities and which are temporary in nature, or conducted infrequently.
c) Transient vibrations of moving sources such as automobiles, trucks, airplanes and railroads.
Vibrations shall be expressed as displacement in inches and shall be measured with a three-component measuring system approved by a Code Official.
Vibration Displacements Frequency (Cycles Per Second) Column I Displacement (Inches) Column II Displacement (Inches)
0 to 10
.0008
.0004
10 to 20
.0005
.0002
20 to 30
.0002
.0001
30 to 40
.0002
.0001
40 and over
.0001
.0001
Steady-state vibrations, for purposes of this Ordinance, are vibrations which are continuous, or vibrations in discrete impulses more frequent than 100 per minute. Discrete impulses which do not exceed 100 per minute, shall be considered impact vibrations and shall not cause an excess of twice the displacements stipulated.
2. Level B. Any industrial operation or activity which shall cause at any time and at any point along the nearest adjacent lot line, earth borne vibrations in excess of the limits set forth in Column I and Column II is prohibited.
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 142
In addition, any industrial operation or activity which shall cause at any time and at any point along a Residence District boundary line, earth borne vibrations in access of the limits set forth in Column III is prohibited.
Exceptions: The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the vibration level regulations:
a) Vibrations not directly under the control of the property user.
b) Vibrations emanating from construction and maintenance activities between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Such activities are those which are non-routine operations accessory to the primary activities and which are temporary in nature, or conducted infrequently.
c) Transient vibrations of moving sources such as automobiles, trucks, airplanes and railroads.
Vibrations shall be expressed as displacement in inches and shall be measured with a three-component measuring system approved by a Code Official.
Vibration Displacements Frequency (Cycles Per Second) Column I Displacement (Inches) Column II Displacement (Inches) Column III Displacement (Inches)
0 to 10
.0020
.0100
.0004
10 to 20
.0010
.0050
.0002
20 to 30
.0006
.0030
.0001
30 to 40
.0004
.0020
.0001
40 to 50
.0003
.0015
.0001
50 and over
.0002
.0010
.0001
Steady-state vibrations, for purposes of this Ordinance, are vibrations which are continuous, or vibrations in discrete impulses more frequent than 100 per minute. Discrete impulses which do not exceed 100 per minute, shall be considered impact vibrations and shall not cause an excess of twice the displacements stipulated.
Impacts no more often than eight (8) times per twenty-four (24) hour period; vibrations occurring in discrete pulses separated by an interval of at least one minute and numbering no more than eight (8) in any twenty-four (24) hour period.
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 143
c. Air Pollution
1. Any land use or other activity in the Village which involves the emission of smoke, particulate matter, or other air pollutants shall comply with all applicable standards set forth in State and Federal statutes and regulations regarding the emission of air pollutants. Any such land use or other activity shall also obtain and maintain all necessary licenses and permits from the appropriate State and Federal agencies, such as the United States Environmental Protection Agency and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
2. Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such sources as storage areas, yards, roads and so forth, within lot boundaries shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling or other acceptable means.
d. Water Pollution. The State of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency Water Pollution Regulations, as adopted by the Illinois Pollution Control Board on March 7, 1972 and published by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and all amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this Section.
e. Noxious Matter. No activity or operation shall cause, at any time, the discharge of matter across lot lines in a noxious concentration.
f. Odorous Matter. The emission of matter in such quantities which is readily detectable as an odor at any point along lot lines is prohibited.
g. Fire and Explosive Hazards. The storage, utilization or manufacture of materials characterized by fire and explosive hazards shall be governed by the codes and guidelines of the International Building Code, the National Fire Protection Association, and the International Fire Code, as amended from time to time.
h. Glare and Heat. Any operation or activity producing glare shall be performed within a completely enclosed building and be conducted so that direct and indirect illumination from the source of light on the lot shall not cause illumination in excess of one-half () foot candle when measured at the lot line. Exposed sources of light shall be shielded, and flickering or intense sources of light shall be controlled so as not to cause a nuisance across lot lines. Any operation producing intense heat shall be performed within a completely enclosed building in such a manner as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines.
i. Toxic, Hazardous, and Radioactive Materials. Any land use or other activity in the Village which involves the use of toxic, hazardous, or radioactive materials shall comply with all applicable standards set forth in State and Federal statutes and regulations regarding the use, storage, transportation, emission, and disposal of such materials. Any such land use or other activity shall also obtain and maintain all necessary licenses and
Village of Frankfort
Article 6: Density, Dimensional, and Other Standards
September 17, 2001 144
permits from the appropriate State and Federal agencies, such as the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the Illinois Department of Nuclear Safety.
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 145
ARTICLE 7: SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Section A: Site Plan & Architectural Review Standards
Part 1: Purpose
The Site Plan and Architectural Review Standards were created with the intention of creating and maintaining an identity exclusive to the Village of Frankfort. Preservation of this identity, which has independently emerged through the course of history within the Village, will help to avoid monotonous and inappropriate design and appearance of properties. These standards were created to assist in the promotion of orderly, consistent and harmonious growth; protection of land values and investments; and enhancement of the general welfare of Village residents.
The Site Plan Review Standards shall serve to encourage and promote attractiveness, cohesiveness and compatibility of new development so as to maintain and improve the established standards of property values throughout the Village. The standards will assist both Village Staff and prospective developers in creating and approving project plans consistent with the identity set forth in this Section.
Part 2: Procedures
Site Plan Review shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures and submission requirements listed in Article 3, Section H.
Part 3: General Site Planning Standards
To promote a functional and attractive development, to minimize adverse impacts, and ensure that development is an asset to the Village, the following development standards shall apply to all developments requiring Site Plan Review (as described in Article 3, Section H of this Zoning Ordinance), unless a waiver is approved by the Plan Commission for any or all of the conditions.
a. Preservation of Natural and Historic Resources
1. The site design shall minimize disruption of existing natural features, and wherever possible incorporate them into the overall design concept.
2. The following specific areas shall be preserved as undeveloped open space or shall be mitigated:
a) Wetlands as regulated by the Army Corps of Engineers.
b) Lands in a designated floodway.
c) Significant trees or woodlands as regulated by the Village of Frankfort Landscape Regulations.
d) Steep slopes in excess of twenty (20%) percent as measured over a ten (10') foot interval, unless appropriate engineering measures are taken.
e) Habitats of endangered wildlife as identified by the Federal and/or Illinois Department of Natural Resources.
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 146
3. Site plans shall be designed to enhance historic architectural resources as identified by the National Register of Historic Places, or local landmark designation. Owners are encouraged to allow site research for archaeological resources.
b. Traffic and Off-Street Parking
1. Site plans should minimize dangerous traffic movements and congestion, while achieving efficient traffic flow and providing the minimum number of off-street parking spaces in accordance with the standards of Section B of this Article 7.
2. Along roads classified as Collector or greater, the number of curb cuts should be minimized and located as far as possible from intersections.
3. In business and industrial areas, vehicular access shall be minimized and designed comprehensively where feasible. Site to site access shall be granted through cross-access easement agreements where feasible, and frontage roads are encouraged along arterial roads.
4. Traffic studies may be required by the Village. Such traffic studies should address:
a) Projected number of motor vehicle trips to enter or leave the site, estimated for daily and peak hour traffic levels;
b) Projected traffic flow patterns, including vehicular movements at all major intersections likely to be affected by the proposed use of the site;
c) Impact of traffic upon abutting roads in relation to existing road capacities, and
d) Combined traffic impact of approved, but not yet fully developed projects within the Village.
5. Every lot shall have sufficient access for emergency vehicles.
6. Off-street parking areas shall not be allowed to dominate the image of any development.
c. Service/Utility Areas: All service and utility areas which include, but are not limited to, loading docks, exterior storage areas, dumpsters and mechanical equipment such as plumbing vent stacks, HVAC transformers, fans and cooling towers, shall be screened from view by:
1. Locating all service/utility areas away from public rights of way and concealing them from building entrances, pedestrian areas and adjacent residential structures.
2. Providing for joint use of service areas by multiple adjoining buildings.
3. Incorporating trash enclosures into building design.
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 147
4. Screening utility service areas from public view with building elements/materials similar in appearance to the main structure.
5. Providing below ground utility connections for all new developments.
6. Locating mechanical equipment such as air conditioners/exchangers out of view from public rights of way and circulation paths, and away from residential living or sleeping areas.
7. Screening rooftop mechanical equipment from view from adjoining properties by building elements such as parapet walls.
8. Permanent or temporary exterior storage or display of inventory, business vehicles or personal vehicles is prohibited without the issuance of a permit.
9. Providing landscape screening in accordance with the Village of Frankfort Landscape Regulations.
d. Public Spaces and Paths: Public spaces and paths intended for pedestrian use should be designed to incorporate natural features, building and landscape elements to create safe, comfortable, and attractive environments.
1. All areas intended for pedestrian use shall be well lit in accordance with the lighting standards in Section E.
2. Pedestrian paths or sidewalks should be clearly distinguished from vehicular paths by landscaping, paving materials or architectural elements.
3. All pedestrian paths shall be handicap accessible, using ramps and curb cuts conforming to State and Federal ADA standards.
e. Residential Subdivision Plans
1. The road system shall be designed to serve the needs of the neighborhood and to discourage use by through traffic, unless there is a need for a collector street on the site. Roads should follow existing contours to minimize cut and fill.
2. In residential subdivisions with more than 30 dwelling units, at least two points of vehicular access are required. Temporary access points for construction or emergency traffic may be considered in phased developments.
3. Lot lines should follow existing natural features, such as tree lines or contours.
4. When feasible, and not in conflict with other governmental regulations, manmade, engineered structures should make use of natural materials. The use of stone or brick culverts is encouraged.
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 148
5. All lots shall abut on a publicly dedicated or private street.
6. Double frontage lots are discouraged except where topography of the land might render subdividing otherwise unreasonable, or where lots back upon a primary street (major thoroughfare), and vehicular access from the major thoroughfare is prohibited. Such lots shall have an additional depth to accommodate a landscaped buffer yard in accordance with the Village of Frankfort Landscape Regulations.
7. On lots abutting or including a detention area, floodplain, wetland, water course, drainage way, channel or stream, a distance equal to or greater than the required rear yard (as provided in Article 6) shall be provided between the primary building and such floodplain, wetland, water course, drainage way, channel or stream. Such features may not constitute more than 33% of the minimum lot area as required by the applicable zoning district.
8. No street names may be used which will duplicate, or be confused with, the names of existing streets. Existing street names must be projected wherever possible.
Part 4: Improvements to Be Provided on Site Plans
In furtherance of the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance and to assure the public safety and general welfare, no site plan shall be approved unless the Code Official is assured that the following improvements will be made:
a. Construction of pedestrian walkways so that occupants/patrons may have safe means of access to buildings, parking areas and adjacent properties. Wherever possible, connection shall be made to walkways in adjacent developments.
b. Streets shall be provided in accordance with the following:
1. All rights-of-way shall conform to the minimum dimensions as provided by the Subdivision Ordinance.
2. All streets within the corporate limits of the Village of Frankfort shall be improved in accordance with the requirements of the Village of Frankfort Engineering Design Standards.
c. Construction of vehicular travel lanes, service drives, driveways or other access connections, which will permit vehicular travel on the site and to and from adjacent properties in accordance with the following:
1. Adjacent to any major or minor arterial street a travel lane not less than twenty-four (24') feet in width shall be constructed to afford access to adjoining properties.
2. The Plan Commission may waive the requirement for constructing a travel lane as is set forth in this Subsection when:
a) There is no existing or proposed vehicular travel lane abutting the subject property on either side, and
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 149
b) The adjoining property(s) is used or zoned for single family detached dwellings, or
c) The adjoining property(s) is occupied by a use, which by its nature would suggest that there will be a limited desire for travel between such use and the one proposed.
d. Construction of curb and gutter within all parking areas and access lands as required by the Village of Frankfort engineering design standards.
e. Provision of landscaped islands in cul-de-sacs are encouraged. Where such islands are provided, the cul-de-sac shall have a minimum diameter of 125’, the island shall not be more than 40’ in diameter, and roll-over curbs shall be provided. All landscaped material shall be at least 5’ from the curb of the island, and mailboxes shall be clustered in the landscaped area.
f. Dedications of land for bike trails is encouraged where recommended by the Official Map and the Bike Trail Master Plan of the Village of Frankfort.
g. Construction of recreational facilities and other improvements to common open spaces serving a PUD shall commence prior to the completion of not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the dwelling units in the development, or fifty percent (50%) of the total gross floor area of commercial and industrial uses.
h. Installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures as required by Village of Frankfort Engineering Design Standards.
i. All utilities provided by the developer shall be installed underground provided, however, that:
1. Equipment such as the electric distribution transformers, switchgear, meter pedestals and telephone pedestals, which are normally installed above ground, may continue to be so installed, in accordance with accepted utility practices for underground distribution;
2. Meters, service connections and similar equipment normally attached to the outside wall of the premises they serve may be so installed;
3. Temporary overhead facilities required for construction purposes shall be permitted;
j. All other improvements required by the provisions of the Village Code.
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 150
Part 5: Building & Structure Design
In the R-3, R-4, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, OR, I-1, and I-2 districts, all applicable buildings and structures, and all major exterior renovations, additions, and façade changes shall conform to the following regulations:
a. Architecture must be consistent with the quality and character of Frankfort architecture and the Village’s policy for original and unique design.
b. Buildings and structures shall be consistent with the architectural design, height, massing, materials, and rhythm of windows and doors of the vicinity and of adjacent property.
c. Building materials shall be selected for suitability in the context of the neighborhood. Buildings shall use the same materials, or those which are architecturally harmonious, for all building walls and other exterior components that are wholly or partially visible from public ways. In commercial areas, EFIS should only be used for accents.
d. Building materials shall be of durable quality.
e. Brick, other masonry materials, or other attractive materials where permitted by the applicable zoning district regulations in Article 6, shall be used for all sides of all nonresidential development and shall be installed per Village Building Code specifications.
f. Flat roofs and mansard roofs are discouraged except where such roofs are the predominant style in the neighborhood.
g. All multi-family, duplex, townhouse and other non-single family residential dwelling units shall contain face brick or stone on not less than fifty (50) percent of the area of exterior walls, and shall contain face brick or stone on ninety (90) percent of the first floors or ground levels of such units. All materials for the remaining ground level wall surfaces shall be approved by the Code Official. All materials used shall be compatible as a group and with the surrounding structures. Split face block shall not be permitted.
h. Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves and parapets, shall be consistent in proportion and style with the predominant character of the neighborhood.
i. While it is recognized that color is a very subjective matter and that creativity should not be stifled, colors should nonetheless be used harmoniously and with some restraint. Color schemes should consider and respect the character and quality of structures in the area. Excessively bright or brilliant colors should be used only for accent. Materials and colors should withstand the weather well over a twenty-five (25) year period.
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 151
Part 6: Residential Monotony
In new residential subdivisions, monotony shall be avoided, although styles should be complementary and relate to indigenous architecture. As determined and enforced by the Village of Frankfort Development Services Department, no two (2) dwellings of substantially similar or identical front elevation or façade shall be constructed within three (3) lots on either side of a subject property and within the seven (7) nearest lots across the street. For corner lots the direction that the front façade of the home faces shall not be taken into consideration and anti-monotony provisions applied to homes on both streets that adjoin the subject property. For the purposes of this section a public right-of-way shall be counted as a lot. To be considered dissimilar the elevations of a proposed home must differ from other homes in a minimum of four (4) of the following characteristics:
1. Roof type (gable, hip, mansard, gambrel or combination)
2. Number of stories
3. Shape of the front elevation silhouette.
4. Relative location and size of windows on the front elevation.
5. Entry treatments, including but not limited to covered / uncovered porches, recessed or projected entries, etc.
6. Garage orientation.
7. Building materials and color scheme
8. Distinctly different architectural style including but not limited to colonial, craftsman, Victorian, etc.
(Am. Ord. 2839, passed 04.29.13 and Ord. 3229, passed 10.07.19)
Part 7: Relationship of Building to Site
a. The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition with the streetscape and to provide for adequate planting, pedestrian movement and parking areas.
Part 8: Relationship of Building and Site to Adjoining Area
a. Attractive landscape transition to adjoining properties shall be provided.
b. Harmony in texture, lines and masses shall be required.
c. Building areas shall have similar scale to those in the surrounding area.
Part 9: Utility Services
Newly installed utility services, and service revisions that are necessitated by exterior alterations, shall be located underground.
Part 10: Screening
a. Screening of service yards, utility meters and hardware, mechanical equipment, refuse areas, and/or other potentially unattractive places from public view, shall be accomplished by the use of walls, fencing, planting or combinations of all of the measures that follow. Screening shall be equally effective in the winter and the summer seasons.
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 152
1. Adjusting the architectural or landscape profile to screen those elements from view;
2. Placing those elements on service courts or other locations not usable by the general public; or
3. Integrating those elements into the architecture or landscaping of the site.
b. The degree of visibility and screening of service yards, utility meters and hardware, mechanical equipment, refuse areas and/or potentially unattractive places shall be evaluated using the following criteria:
1. The degree of visibility from all adjacent pubic ways;
2. The architectural compatibility of the design and color of the yards, meters and equipment of the building;
3. Possible visibility from future buildings and public ways; and
4. Internal overall appearance in relation to the site.
Part 11: Landscape Requirements
Specific landscape requirements are referenced in Section D of this Article 7.
Part 12: Lighting
Outdoor lighting, where provided, should enhance the building design and the adjoining landscape. Lighting standards, fixtures and all exposed accessories shall comply with Section E of this Article 7, and shall be of a design and size that are harmonious with the design of the building and adjacent areas.
Part 13: Signs
Signs shall be reviewed as part of a Site Plan Review, in accordance with the standards of Section F of this Article 7.
Part 14: Parking Areas
Parking areas should be consistent with and adhere to the guidelines set forth in Section B of this Article 7. They shall also be treated with decorative elements, building wall extensions, plantings, berms or other innovative means so as to largely screen parking areas from view from public ways.
Part 15: Miscellaneous Structures
Miscellaneous structures located on private property, public ways and other public property, including light standards, utility poles, newspaper stands, bus shelters, plants, traffic signs and signals, benches, guardrails, rockeries, retaining walls, mailboxes and fire hydrants shall be designed to be part of the architectural concept of design and landscape. Materials shall be compatible with buildings, scale
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 153
should be appropriate and colors should be in harmony with nearby buildings and surroundings, and proportions shall be attractive.
Section B: Off-Street Parking & Loading
No structure shall hereafter be built or moved, and no structure or land shall hereafter be used, occupied or designed for use or occupancy, unless the minimum off-street parking and off-street loading spaces required by this Article 7, Section B of this Ordinance are provided. No structure or use already established on the effective date of this Ordinance shall be enlarged unless the minimum off-street parking and loading spaces which would be required for such enlargement are provided.
Part 1: Off-Street Parking General Requirements
a. Exemption. When the application of the off-street parking provisions specified in Section B of this Article 7 results in a requirement of not more than three (3) spaces on a single zoning lot in any business district, such parking spaces need not be provided; however, where two (2) or more uses are located on a single zoning lot, only one (1) of those uses shall be eligible for the above exemption.
b. Location. All parking spaces required to serve buildings or uses erected or established after the effective date of this Ordinance shall be located on the same zoning lots as the building or use served, except as permitted in Part 5 of this Article 7, Section B.
Off-street parking spaces, open to the sky, may be located in any yard, with the exception of the landscaped front yard required in business and industrial districts according to Article 6, Section C. Residential District parking is limited to enclosed buildings, carports or driveways and shall be subject to yard and other applicable requirements.
No parking areas shall be located within five (5) feet from any lot line.
c. Size. Except for parallel parking spaces, each required off-street parking space shall be at least nine (9) feet in width, and at least eighteen (18) feet in length. Such space shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven feet six inches (7'6"), and shall be measured at right angles to the ground. For parallel parking, the length of the parking space shall be increased to twenty-two (22) feet.
d. Access. Except on lots accommodating single-family dwellings, each off-street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway at least the width as provided in the table below, based upon the angle of the parking stalls provided and whether the aisle serves one or two rows of parking spaces to provide safe and efficient means of vehicular access to such parking space. (Am. Ord. 3229, passed 10.07.19)
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 154
Parking Angle Minimum Aisle Width Serving One Row Serving Two Rows
parallel
12'
12'
30º
12'
12'
45º
13'
14'
60º
18'
19'
90º
20'
24'
No driveways or aisles shall be located within five (5) feet from adjoining lot lines. All off-street parking facilities shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movement. Access to parking areas in business districts should be provided by a single access entrance/exit and/or an access road where feasible. Access to such parking areas by curb cuts or driveways across the front lot line should be avoided.
e. Computation. When determination of the number of off-street parking spaces required by this Ordinance results in a requirement of a fractional space, a fraction shall be counted as one (1) parking space. Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall be based on the maximum number of employees on duty, or residing, or both, on the premises at any one time.
f. Utilization. Excluding exceptions provided for the parking of trucks in the granting of special uses, required accessory off-street parking facilities provided for uses listed in this Article 7, Section B shall be solely for the parking of passenger automobiles of patrons, occupants or employees of such uses.
g. Design and Maintenance. The following shall serve as guidelines for the design and maintenance of off-street parking and loading facilities:
1. Plan. Except for single-family residential uses, the design of parking lots or areas shall be subject to the approval of the Code Official, in accordance with standards approved by the Plan Commission and Board of Trustees, and no building permit shall be approved unless there is included a plot plan showing the location of off-street parking areas on other than single family residential lots.
2. Character. Accessory parking spaces may be open to the sky, or enclosed in a building.
3. Surfacing. All open off-street parking, except in a single-family district, shall be improved with concrete curb and gutter and paved surface. The design shall meet the loading requirements for the intended use and comply with Village of Frankfort Ordinance Engineering Design Standards.
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 155
4. Landscaping. All landscaping plans shall meet the standards and requirements set forth in Village of Frankfort Landscape Ordinance and sections 150.75 and 150.76 of the Village Code.
5. Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be directed away from residential properties and public streets in such a way as not to create a nuisance. All lighting systems shall be approved by the Planning Commission and comply with Article 7, Section E of this Code.
6. Cleaning and Maintenance. In Residential Districts, no cleaning or maintenance of parking lots utilizing motorized equipment, except for snow removal, may be performed between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. each day. Such cleaning and maintenance shall comply with the performance standards established in Article 6, Section D.
7. Shelter Building. No parking lot for accessory off-street parking shall have more than one (1) attendant shelter building, which shall conform to all set-back requirements for structures in the district and accessory structure requirements set forth in Article 5, Section D of this Ordinance, subject to Planning Committee approval.
8. Signs. Accessory Signs shall be permitted in parking areas in accordance with the provisions specified in the Village of Frankfort Sign Regulations.
9. Motor Vehicle Repair and Service:
a) Residence Districts. No motor vehicle work or service of any kind shall be permitted in association with parking facilities provided in residence districts.
b) Business Districts. No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with parking facilities in a B-1 District.
c) Industrial Districts. No motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind shall be permitted in conjunction with any open accessory parking facilities provided in an Industrial District if such parking facilities are within 500 feet of a Residence or Business District. Washing of accessory vehicles and emergency services required to start vehicles shall be permitted if vehicles are located behind the front facade of a building and adequately screened.
10. Loud Speakers. Loud speaker or public address systems are not permitted in any zoning district.
h. Driveways in all Residential Districts. Driveways in all Residential Districts shall follow the guidelines set forth in Article 6, Section B, Part 2(i).
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 156
Part 2: Off Street Parking Specific Regulations
All uses shall provide off-street parking in accordance with the following:
a. Residential Uses:
1. Single- and Two-Family Dwellings. Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit.
2. Attached-Family Dwellings. Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit; plus 0.05 guest spaces for each 1,200 square feet of the dwelling unit.
3. Housing for the Elderly:
a) Independent Living. One (1) space per bedroom.
b) Assisted Living. One-half (0.5) space per dwelling unit; plus one (1) space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees.
c) Nursing Home. One (1) space per six (6) dwelling units or beds; plus one-quarter (0.25) space per dwelling unit or bed for guest parking; plus one (1) space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees.
b. Hotels and Motels. One (1) space per room plus two (2) spaces per each three employees, plus one (1) space per three persons of maximum capacity of each meeting/banquet room, plus parking as required for bars, restaurants, and gift shops as applicable.
c. Civic and Cultural Facilities. Three (3) spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area plus three (3) spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross land area.
d. Schools, Institutions, and Related Uses:
1. Elementary Schools and High Schools. One (1) space per employee; plus one-half (0.5) space per classroom, plus one (1) space per five (5) students aged sixteen years or older.
2. Colleges and Universities. One-half (0.5) space per classroom seat or the maximum number of students that can be accommodated in accordance with design capacity, whichever is greater.
3. Trade Schools. One (1) space per student based upon the maximum number of students that can be accommodated in accordance with design capacity.
4. Day Care Center or Preschool. One (1) space per employee plus one (1) space per ten (10) client children or adults.
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 157
5. Religious Institutions. One (1) space per four (4) seats based upon maximum capacity of the facility, plus adequate space for all vehicles associated with the institution.
6. Libraries. One (1) space per three (3) persons based upon maximum capacity of the building, plus one (1) space per employee.
7. Hospitals. One (1) space per two (2) beds; plus one (1) space per employee.
8. Museum. One (1) space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
9. Auditoriums, Theaters, and Other Places of Assembly. One (1) space per four (4) seats based upon the maximum capacity of the facility.
e. Recreational Uses:
1. Bowling Alleys. Five (5) spaces per alley; plus one (1) space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees; plus additional spaces as required for bars, restaurants, etc.
2. Dance Hall. One (1) space per each three (3) patrons based on the maximum capacity of the facility; plus one (1) space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees.
3. Golf Courses. Fifty (50) spaces per nine (9) holes; plus one (1) space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees.
4. Golf Driving Range. One (1) space per tee; plus one (1) space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees.
5. Health and Athletic Club. One-half (0.5) space per exercise station; plus one (1) space per 1,000 square feet of activity area; plus one (1) space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees.
6. Playing Fields. One (1) space per 4,000 square feet of active recreation area; plus one (1) space per half acre of passive recreation area.
7. Swimming Pool. One (1) space per 100 square feet of pool area; plus one (1) space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees.
8. Other Indoor Recreational Uses. One (1) space per four (4) patrons based upon the maximum capacity of the facility; plus one (1) space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees.
9. Other Outdoor Recreation Uses. One (1) space per 10,000 square feet of gross land area.
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 158
f. Business Establishments. One (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area; plus one (1) space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees; except as specifically set forth below:
1. Animal Hospitals. Three (3) patron parking spaces per veterinarian; plus one (1) space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees.
2. Automobile Fueling Stations. One (1) space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees, plus one (1) space per 150 square feet of gross floor area for any convenience store. Spaces at fueling positions may be counted as parking spaces.
3. Convenience Store. One (1) space per 150 square feet of gross floor area.
4. Dry Cleaners. One (1) space per 200 square feet of gross floor area; plus one (1) space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees; plus sufficient space shall be provided for a minimum five (5) waiting vehicles at each drive-thru lane with special use approval
5. Financial Institutions. One (1) space per 200 square feet of gross floor area; plus one (1) space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees; plus sufficient space shall be provided for a minimum five (5) waiting vehicles at each drive-thru lane with special use approval.
6. Funeral Homes. One (1) space per three (3) patron seats based upon maximum facility capacity; plus one (1) space per employee; plus one (1) space per vehicle owned by the establishment; plus on-site queuing for a minimum of eight (8) vehicles.
7. Grocery Stores or Supermarkets. Five (5) spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area; plus one (1) space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees. (Am. Ord. 3229, passed 10.07.19)
8. Laundromat. One (1) space per washer or per dryer (whichever is greater in number); plus one (1) space per employee.
9. Motor Vehicle Sales Establishments. Two (2) customer parking spaces per salesperson for the work shift with the largest number of employees; plus one (1) employee parking space per employee (including salespersons) for the work shift with the largest number of employees.
10. Personal Services. One (1) space per 200 square feet of gross floor area; plus one (1) space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees.
11. Repair Services. One (1) space per 400 square feet of gross floor area; plus one (1) space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees.
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 159
12. Restaurant, Full Service. One (1) space per 100 square feet of gross floor area; plus one (1) space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees.
13. Restaurant, Fast-Food. One (1) space per 75 square feet of gross floor area; plus one (1) space per two (2) employees for the work shift with the largest number of employees; plus on-site queuing for a minimum of eight (8) vehicles waiting at a drive-thru which has been approved as a special use.
14. Taverns, Night Clubs, and Lounges. One (1) space per 100 of gross floor area; plus one (1) space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees.
15. Vehicular Repair and Maintenance Shops. Three (3) spaces per service bay; plus one (1) space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees.
16. Microbrewery/ Distillery / Winery with Sampling Area. Two (2) spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area dedicated to brewing/distilling/wine making operations and cold / warm storage, and one (1) space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area dedicated to sampling area, retail displays, customer seating, and other non-production related uses. (Am. Ord. 3041, passed 07.18.16)
17. Shooting Range. One and half (1.5) spaces per shooting lane plus four (4) spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area dedicated retail sales and merchandise displays. (Am. Ord. 3229, passed 10.07.19)
g. Offices:
1. Government, Professional, and Business Offices. One (1) space per 200 square feet of gross floor area.
2. Health Clinics/Offices. Three (3) patron parking spaces per exam room; plus one (1) space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees.
h. Industrial and Related Uses:
1. Light Industry. Two (2) spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
2. Heavy Industry. One (1) space per employee for the two consecutive work shifts with the largest number of employees.
3. Self-Service Storage Facility. One (1) space per ten (10) storage cubicles.
4. Warehouse. One (1) space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees; plus one (1) space per 5,000 square feet of gross floor area.
5. Wholesale Business. One (1) space per employee for the work shift with the largest number of employees; plus one (1) space per 2,500 square feet of gross floor area.
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 160
i. Other Uses. Parking spaces for uses not listed shall be provided in accordance with recommendations of the Planning Commission and the Village Board.
Part 3: Off-Street Loading General Requirements
In connection with any building or structure which is to be erected or substantially altered, and which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or similar vehicles, there shall be provided off-street loading berths not less than the minimum requirements specified in this Section B.
a. Location. All required loading berths shall be located on the same lots as the use to be served and no portion of the vehicles, shall project past the front facade of the principal structure or into a street or alley. No portion of vehicles parked in a loading location at the side or rear of a structure shall project into a street or alley. Loading areas are not permitted in the front yard.
In Industrial Districts, no loading berth for vehicles of more than a two ton capacity shall be located less than 50 feet from any Residence District. No nearest point of intersection of any two streets, nor shall it be located in a required front yard or side yard.
All loading berths shall be screened from abutting Residential Districts in accordance with the Village of Frankfort Landscape Regulations.
b. Size. A required off-street loading berth shall be at least twelve (12) feet in width by at least fifty (50) feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have vehicle clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet.
c. Access. Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movements, and shall be subject to approval of the Code Official.
Appropriate means of access for structures which are located on Industrial Major Roadways (Laraway Road, Center Road, U.S. Route 45 and Harlem Avenue) include front entry only. No backing of vehicles into loading docks will be permitted on properties with ingresses and egresses abutting these roadways.
d. Surfacing. Shall be in accordance with Village of Frankfort Engineering Design Standards.
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 161
e. Repair and Service. No storage of any kind, nor motor vehicle repair work or service of any kind, shall be permitted within any required loading berth, except emergency repair service.
f. Utilization. Space allocated to any off-street loading shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facilities or portions thereof.
g. Central Loading. Central Loading facilities may be substituted for loading berths on individual zoning lots provided the following conditions are fulfilled:
1. Each zoning lot served shall have direct access to the central loading area without crossing streets or alleys at-grade.
2. Total berths provided shall meet the requirements based on the sum of the several types of uses served (area types of uses may be totaled before computing the number of required loading berths).
3. No zoning lot served shall be more than 500 feet removed from the central loading area.
4. The tunnel or ramp connecting the central loading area with the zoning lot served shall be not less than seven (7) feet in width and have a clearance of not less than seven (7) feet.
h. Minimum Facilities. Uses for which off-street loading facilities are required herein, but which are located in buildings of less floor area than the minimum prescribed for such required facilities, shall be provided with adequate receiving facilities, accessible by motor vehicle off any adjacent alley, service drive or open space on the same zoning lot.
i. Planned Unit Developments. Loading berths shall be provided on the basis of the required berths for each individual use.
Part 4: Off-Street Loading Specific Requirements
For the uses herein listed and other similar uses, loading berths shall be provided as specified.
a. Required Loading Berths By Use
1. For the uses listed hereunder, one (1) loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing 10,000 to 100,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one (1) additional loading berth for each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.
a) Airports;
b) Banks and other financial institutions;
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 162
c) Business and other professional offices;
d) Convention and exhibition halls;
e) Health and medical institutions;
f) Hotels and motels containing retail shops, business or professional offices, convention or exhibition halls or auditoriums;
g) Indoor recreation and entertainment facilities;
h) Public and administration buildings;
i) Radio and television studios;
j) Theaters (indoors); or
k) Undertaking establishments.
2. For the uses listed hereunder, one (1) loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing 10,000 to 20,000 square feet of gross floor area, plus one (1) additional loading berth for each additional 200,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.
a) Auditoriums.
b) Charitable institutions.
c) Clubs and lodges.
d) Hotels and motels containing no retail shops, business or professional offices, convention or exhibition halls or auditoriums.
e) Meeting halls.
f) Multiple-family dwellings with more than four dwelling units per building.
g) Religious institutions.
h) Schools and educational facilities.
3. For the uses listed hereunder, one (1) loading berth shall be provided for buildings containing 5,000 to 40,000 square feet of gross floor area. For buildings containing 40,000 to 100,000 square feet of gross floor area, two (2) loading berths shall be provided plus one (1) additional loading berth for each additional 100,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.
a) Cartage, express and motor freight facilities.
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 163
b) Cleaning, repairing, servicing and testing establishments.
c) Heavy or light industry.
d) Laundries and dry cleaning facilities.
e) Mail-order houses.
f) Printing and publishing.
g) Research facilities.
h) Warehousing, storage and wholesale establishments.
4. For all other uses, including, but not limited to those listed hereunder, loading berths shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule:
Schedule of Loading Berths Square Feet of Floor Area Minimum Number
5,000 to 20,000
1
20,000 to 60,000
2
60,000 to 100,000
3
For each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof
one additional
a) Convenience stores
b) Furniture and appliance stores;
c) Grocery stores;
d) Retail stores; or
e) Restaurants and other establishments handling the sale or consumption of food or beverage on the premises.
Part 5: Adjustments to Required Parking
a. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow adjustments to the minimum number of parking spaces required to avoid construction of unnecessary and excessive off-street parking facilities. Reducing the requirements for off-street parking facilities is intended
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 164
to provide for more cost-efficient site development, to minimize impervious surface, to minimize storm water runoff, to avoid construction of unnecessarily large storm water management facilities, and to provide more landscape areas and open space on business and industrial sites. To achieve these purposes, the Plan Commission may reduce the minimum number of required off-street parking spaces in specific cases as described in this Part 5.
b. Adjustments. In all business and industrial districts, the minimum number of required parking spaces may be adjusted by the Plan Commission on a case-by-case basis. The petitioner for such an adjustment shall show to the satisfaction of the Plan Commission that adequate parking will be provided for customers, clients, visitors, and employees. The following provisions and factors shall be used as a basis to adjust parking requirements:
1. Evidence That Actual Parking Demands will be Less Than Ordinance Requirements. The petitioner shall submit written documentation and data to the satisfaction of the Plan Commission that the operation will require less parking than the Ordinance requires.
2. Availability of Joint, Shared or Off-Site Parking. The petitioner shall submit written documentation to the satisfaction of the Plan Commission that joint, shared or off-site parking spaces are available to satisfy the parking demand.
a) Agreements shall be provided which demonstrate evidence that either parking lots are large enough to accommodate multiple users (joint parking) or that parking spaces will be shared at specific times of the day (shared parking, where one activity uses the spaces during daytime hours and another activity uses the spaces during evening hours.)
b) Off-site parking lots may account for not more than 50-percent of the required parking and shall be located not more than three-hundred (300) feet from the principal use that it is intended to serve.
When a reduction of parking spaces attributable to shared parking or off-site parking is requested, the petitioner shall submit written verification that such parking is available and shall include copies of any contracts, joint lease agreements, purchase agreements, and other such documentation to show that shared parking can be accomplished. Off-site shared parking spaces shall be clearly posted for the joint use of employees, and/or tenants, or customers of each respective use sharing those spaces.
3. Use of Alternative Transportation. Upon demonstration to the Plan Commission that effective alternative transportation to the automobile will occur, the Plan Commission may reduce parking requirements. Alternative transportation may include, but is not limited to, bus transit, van pool operations, car pool/ride sharing, and bicycles. Proposals for adjustments of parking under this section shall show how the alternative transportation modes will be implemented, the permanency of
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 165
such modes, extent of the program, the number of vehicles the mode will replace, and other pertinent information.
c. Banked Parking Spaces. As a condition of a reduction in parking requirements, the Plan Commission may require banked parking spaces. In such cases, the site plan for the business or industrial use shall provide sufficient open space on the subject site to accommodate the additional parking space otherwise required by this Ordinance. Such open space shall be in addition to required yards, setbacks, driveways, private streets, loading and service areas. Sufficient open space shall be provided which, if converted to parking spaces, would:
1. provide off-street parking to meet the full requirements of this Ordinance at the time of application, and
2. ensure that the site shall not exceed the maximum impervious lot coverage as set forth in Article 6.
d. Change in Occupancy or Use. When the use of a building, structure, or land is changed to another use or occupant that required more parking spaces than required for the use existing prior to such change, additional parking spaces shall be constructed for the new use or occupant in the amount necessary to conform to this Ordinance.
e. Changes in Intensity of Use. When the intensity of use of a building, structure, or land is increased by an addition of employees, gross floor area, seating capacity, or other unit of measurement, additional parking spaces shall be constructed for the new use or occupant in the amount necessary to conform to this Ordinance.
Part 6: Americans with Disabilities Act Requirements
a. In any self park facility, a certain number of spaces must be set aside for wheel chair access as summarized in the following table:
Total Number of Parking Spaces Minimum Accessible Spaces
1 to 25
1
26 to 50
2
51 to 75
3
76 to 100
4
101 to 150
5
151 to 200
6
201 to 300
7
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 166
301 to 400
8
401 to 500
9
501 to 1000
2% of total
1001 and over
20 plus 1 per 100 over 1000 spaces
b. Exceptions to minimum requirements in paragraph (a):
Outpatient units at medical care facilities: 10% of total spaces for that facility.
Medical Care Facilities specifically for treatment of the mobility impaired: 20% of the total spaces for that facility.
c. Accessible Parking Space Dimensions
Standard Accessible Spaces: Accessible spaces shall consist of an eight foot (8') wide parking stall adjacent to an eight foot (8') wide access aisle.
Vertical Clearance: Along at least one aisle to and from each accessible space, a minimum clearance of eight feet two inches (98 inches) is required.
d. Location of Accessible Spaces
Accessible parking spaces serving a particular building shall be located on the shortest accessible route of travel to an accessible entrance.
Accessible parking spaces may be provided on one level of a multi-level parking structure.
e. Accessible Route
At least one accessible route with a continuous minimum clearance of thirty-six (36") inches must be provided from accessible parking spaces to the nearest accessible pedestrian entrance.
If an accessible route has less than sixty (60") inches clear width then passing spaces at least sixty (60") inches by sixty (60") inches must be located at reasonable intervals not to exceed every two hundred (200') feet.
The floor slope along an accessible route shall not exceed 1:12 with a maximum rise of thirty (30") inches for any run.
A level landing shall be provided at the bottom of each ramp and top of each ramp run. The width of the landing shall be at least as wide as the ramp run and at least sixty (60") inches long. At changes in direction a sixty (60") inch by sixty (60") inch landing shall be provided.
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 167
The cross slope of ramps shall not exceed 1:50.
The floor slope at loading zones shall not exceed 1:50.
It is preferable to provide the accessible route at the front of the stalls. Also, the accessible route shall avoid crossing lanes of vehicular travel. When crossing vehicular travel lanes is necessary, the route of travel shall be designated and marked by a crosswalk.
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 168
Section C: Sewer & Water Facilities
All structures built hereafter, in and within 1,000 feet of the Village’s water and sewer distribution system, must be connected to a public sanitary sewer disposal system and water distribution system, if available. The pumping and draining of basements storm lines shall be piped directly to storm sewers, road ditches, curb and gutters or any public water course to eliminate damage to adjoining properties.
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 169
Section D: Landscape Plans
Part 1: Landscape Plans
All requests for site plan review, building permits, zoning amendments or special use permits must be accompanied by a landscape plan, as required by the Village of Frankfort Landscape Regulations, and sections 150.75 and 150.76 of the Village Code.
Part 2: Hedges
Hedges, plantings, shrubbery and other like materials, when used as a screen or fence in the front yard in all zoning districts, shall be maintained and trimmed at a maximum of four (4) feet above ground level.
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 170
Section E: Lighting
Part 1: Exterior Lighting Plan
A Lighting Plan shall be submitted to the Code Official to determine whether the requirements of this Code have been met. The Lighting Plan shall include the following:
a. A catalogue page or photo of the luminaire including the mounting method.
b. A photometric data test report of the proposed luminaire showing the lighting distribution around the luminaire.
c. A plot plan drawn to scale indicating the location of the proposed luminaires, the overall height of the luminaires, and the overall illumination levels in foot-candles on the entire property and at the property lines. Light intensities shall be measured one foot above grade level.
Part 2: General Lighting Requirements
a. The majority of parking lot lights on non-residential properties shall be turned off after hours, except where required for security purposes.
b. In the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4 and OR districts, light standards shall have a decorative base.
c. Light standards in required landscaped parking lot islands shall not interfere with required landscaping.
Part 3: Permitted Illumination
The photometric plan must demonstrate:
a. The maximum permitted illumination in all zoning districts shall be 0.5 foot-candles as measured at the property line, excepting that the code official may authorize reasonable allowances when commercial property adjoins another commercial property, or to allow for proper illumination of drive entrances and exits. (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
b. For building and ground surfaces, the average maintained light level shall not exceed the following foot-candles:
floodlights directed toward buildings and ground signs:
light colored surfaces 5.0 foot-candles
medium-light colored surfaces 10.0 foot-candles
medium-dark surfaces 15.0 foot-candles
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 171
dark surfaces 20.0 foot-candles
parking areas: 4.5 foot-candles
building entrances and exits: 0.5 foot-candles
c. The minimum permitted light intensity over paved areas shall be 0.25 foot-candles when buildings are occupied.
d. Within parking lots, the uniformity ratios shall not exceed the following:
maximum to minimum: 8:1, average to minimum: 4:1
Part 4: Luminaire Heights
Luminaire heights shall measure from grade to the top of the fixture or pole, whichever is higher.
a. When a light source or luminaire has no cut-off type luminaire the maximum permitted luminaire height shall be as set forth as follows:
1. E-R, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 —Twelve (12) feet.
2. B-1 —Fifteen (15) feet.
3. B-2, B-3, B-4, OR —Twenty (20) feet.
4. I-1, I-2—Twenty (20) feet.
5. H-1, H-R –As approved by the 1890s Theme Committee.
b. When a light source or luminaire has a cut-off type luminaire, the maximum permitted luminaire height shall be as set forth as follows:
1. E-R, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 —Eighteen (18) feet.
2. B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, OR —Twenty-five (25) feet, or height of the primary structure, whichever is less.
3. I-1, I-2—Twenty-five (25) feet, or height of the primary structure, whichever is less.
4. H-1, H-R – As approved by the 1890s Theme Committee, but not to exceed 18’.
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 172
Part 5: Outdoor Recreational Uses
Outdoor public or community recreational uses including, but not limited to ball diamonds, playing fields, golf driving ranges, volleyball courts, and tennis courts have unique requirements for nighttime visibility and have limited hours of operation. These uses may be exempted from the exterior lighting standards if the applicant can satisfy the Code Official, upon Site Plan Review, that the following conditions are met:
a. The Site Plan must meet all other requirements of this Code.
b. Exterior light sources shall not exceed fifty (50) feet in height as measured from grade.
c. If the luminaire is shielded by its orientation to prevent the spillage of light to adjacent residential properties, the luminaire may exceed a total cut-off angle of ninety (90) degrees. The maximum permitted illumination at the property boundary shall not exceed one-half (0.5) foot-candles.
d. A Lighting Plan is required to be submitted to the Code Official for review and approval as delineated in Article 3, Section H of this Code.
Part 6: Automobile Service Station (Gas Stations)
Automobile service stations require nighttime visibility to ensure safe operation of gas pumps, and security for users and employees at night. As a result, light levels may be higher than for other uses as follows:
a. The average maintained light level shall not exceed 30 foot-candles.
b. The maximum light level shall not exceed 45 foot-candles.
c. All other requirements of this Section E, including the maximum permitted illumination at the property boundary of one-half (0.5) foot-candles, must be met.
d. Cut-off type luminaires shall be used to minimize off-site glare.
Part 7: Searchlights
Searchlights for the purposes of advertising are not permitted in any zoning district.
Part 8: Flickering And Flashing Lights
Flickering and flashing lights are not permitted with the exception of seasonal lighting between November 1 and January 31.
Part 9: Non-Conforming Lighting
All lighting fixtures shall be brought into conformity when at such time as fifty (50) percent or more of the poles are changed, replaced, or added on a property.
Village of Frankfort
Article 7: Site Development Regulations
September 17, 2001 173
Section F: Signs
All signs shall be subject to the regulations contained in Chapter 151, the Village of Frankfort Sign Regulations.
Village of Frankfort
Article 8: Subdivisions
September 17, 2001 174
ARTICLE 8: SUBDIVISIONS
Reserved
Village of Frankfort
Article 9: School and Park Dedications
September 17, 2001 175
ARTICLE 9: SCHOOL AND PARK DEDICATIONS
Reserved
Village of Frankfort
Article10: Non-Conformities
September 17, 2001 176
ARTICLE 10: NON-CONFORMITIES
Section A: Statement of Purpose
This Ordinance establishes separate districts, each of which is an appropriate area for the location of the uses which are permitted in that district. The purpose of this Article 10 is to provide for the regulation of non-conforming buildings, structures and uses, and to specify those circumstances and conditions under which those non-conforming buildings, structures and uses shall be permitted to continue.
Section B: Authority to Continue Non-Conforming Buildings, Structures & Uses
Any non-conforming building, structure or use which existed lawfully at the time of adoption of this Ordinance and which remains non-conforming upon the adoption of this Ordinance, or of any subsequent amendments thereto, is subject to the regulations which follow.
Section C: Repairs & Alterations
Normal maintenance of a nonconforming building, structure, or use is permitted, including necessary non-structural repairs and incidental alterations that do not extend or intensify the nonconforming building, structure, or use, may be made in accordance with the following:
Part 1: Building or Structure Designed or Intended for a Non-Conforming Use
a. Repairs and alterations may be made to a non-conforming building or structure, provided that no structural alterations which increase the bulk of the building or structure shall be made in or to a building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for use not permitted in the district in which it is located, except when those structures, and uses thereof, conform to the district in which it is located, or unless a variation has been obtained in a manner described in Article 3, Section B, and within the parameters set forth in Article 10, Section I. For the purpose of this Section, repairs shall include items where the safety of operation of the installation requires such replacement, and other equipment not involving structural alterations to the building or structure, except as herein provided.
b. No structural alteration or structural repair shall be made in a nonconforming building, structure, or use except in the following situations:
1. When the alteration is required by law.
2. When the alteration will result in the elimination of the nonconforming use.
3. When a structure is on a residential zoning lot containing residential nonconforming structures, said structure may be altered to improve livability, provided that no structural alterations will increase the number of dwelling units, or the bulk of the structure.
Village of Frankfort
Article10: Non-Conformities
September 17, 2001 177
Part 2: Building or Structure Designed or Intended for a Permitted Use
(Am. Ord. #2313, passed 8.21.06)
Repairs, alterations and structural changes may be made to a non-conforming building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use permitted in the district in which it is located; provided such repairs, alterations or structural changes conform to the regulations of the district in which said building or structure is located, except when the existing building or structure does not comply with Article 6: Section B: Part 2.g.2, repairs or alterations shall not be required to comply with the provisions of Article 6: Section B: Part 2.g.2 provided that the repair or alteration utilizes the same or similar approved materials as the existing non-conforming structure; or unless a variation has been obtained in a manner described in Article 3, Section B, and within the parameters set forth in Article 10, Section I.
Section D: Additions & Enlargements
(Am. Ord. #2313, passed 8.21.06)
A non-conforming building or structure which is non-conforming as to bulk, and is designed or intended for a permitted use, shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such additions or enlargements thereto are made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located, except when the existing building or structure does not comply with Article 6: Section B: Part 2.g.2, additions, enlargements or accessory structures shall not be required to comply with the provisions of Article 6: Section B: Part 2.g.2 provided that said addition, enlargement or accessory structure utilizes the same or similar approved materials as the existing non-conforming structure and the addition or enlargement does not constitute more than a fifty percent (50%) increase in total floor area of the building or structure; or unless a variation has been obtained in a manner described in Article 3, Section B, and the parameters set forth in Article 10, Section I.
Section E: Relocation of Building or Structure
No building or structure shall be moved in whole, or in part, to any other location on the same or any other lot unless every portion of such building or structure which is moved, and the use thereof, is made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is to be located.
Section F: Restoration of Damaged Non-Conforming Building or Structure
a. Non-conforming building or structure which is destroyed or damaged by any means to the extent that he cost of restoration exceeds fifty (50) percent of its equalized assessed value prior to said destruction, the building or structure shall be rebuilt according to the provisions of the zoning district in which it is located.
b. In the event that the cost of reconstruction caused by damage or destruction is less than 50 percent of the equalized assessed value of the entire building prior to said destruction, no repairs or reconstruction shall be made unless such restoration is started within six (6) months from the date of partial destruction (unless an extension is granted by the Village Board), and is completed within one (1) year thereafter. If the restoration is not started within six (6) months of said calamity and diligently progressed to
Village of Frankfort
Article10: Non-Conformities
September 17, 2001 178
completion, the building or structure shall be removed and the area cleared by the owner, or at the owner’s expense.
Section G: Discontinuance of a Non-Conforming Use
If the non-conforming use of a building, structure, or premises is discontinued for a continuous period of six (6) months, it shall not be renewed unless an extension is granted by the Village Board, and any subsequent use of the building, structure or premises shall conform to the regulations of the district in which said building, structure or premises is located.
Section H: Expansion of Non-Conforming Use
Part 1: Building or Structure Designed or Intended for a Non-Conforming Use
The non-conforming use of a part of a building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located, may extend throughout the building structure in which said use it is presently located, however no changes or structural alterations which increase the bulk of the building or structure shall be made unless a variation has been obtained in a manner described in Article 3, Section B, and within the parameters set forth in Article10, Section I.
Part 2: Land:
The non-conforming use of land, not involving a building or structure, or in conjunction with which any building or structure thereon is incidental or accessory to the principal use of the land, shall not be expanded or extended beyond the area it occupies.
Section I: Variations for Non-Conforming Buildings, Structures, Lots or Uses
Variations for existing non-conforming buildings, structures, lots or uses may be reviewed and granted by the Village Board, after a public hearing by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Review of variation applications for non-conforming buildings, structures, lots or uses shall be made in accordance with the standards for variation application review set forth in Article 3, Section B; and may be granted only within the following parameters:
a. To reduce any required yard setback, lot area, or lot dimension, or to increase lot coverage percentage, floor area ratio (FAR) or structure height for any lot in any zoning district.
b. To reduce the number of required off-street parking and loading spaces.
Section J: Change of Non-Conforming Use
Part 1: Building or Structure Designed or Intended for a Non-Conforming Use:
The non-conforming use of a part of a building or structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which it is located, may be only changed to a permitted use allowed in the district in which the non-conforming use is located.
Village of Frankfort
Article10: Non-Conformities
September 17, 2001 179
Section K: Records
The Code Official shall make and keep a record, including photographs, of all buildings, structures and land uses which do not conform to the use regulations of the district in which they are located.
Section L: Substandard Lots with Continuous Frontage Under the Same Ownership
If two (2) or more substandard lots with contiguous frontage have the same ownership as of the effective date of this Code, the lots involved shall be considered an individual parcel for this Code. Said lots shall be combined into lots which conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, by a re-subdivision plat, prepared in accordance with the Subdivision Ordinance, consolidating the lots prior to the granting of any permit.
Village of Frankfort
Article11: Fees and Penalties
September 17, 2001 180
ARTICLE 11: FEES AND PENALTIES
Section A: Fees
Part 1: Assessment of Fees
An appeal of a Code Official decision, or application for an annexation, variation, map amendment or special use permit, including a planned unit development, or any other application specified in this Ordinance, shall be accompanied by a fee. The fee shall be as listed on a schedule of fees adopted by the Village Board from time to time. The applicant shall also reimburse the Village of Frankfort upon presentation of a statement for its attorneys and engineering fees together with any other consultants’ fees reasonably required by the Village to assist it in reviewing the proposed project/development. There shall be no fee required, however, in the case of an application filed by the Village of Frankfort.
Part 2: Payment
All fees payable pursuant to this Article, except for attorney or consultant fees, shall be paid at the time of filing unless otherwise specified herein, and shall be paid by cash or check.
Part 3: Notification
As a convenience to the applicants, the Village of Frankfort may publish notification of public hearings, but expressly disclaims any liability or responsibility for any acts or omissions whether careless, negligent or intentionally caused or occasioned by its officers, agents or representatives and resulting in the failure to give proper notice or the content or form of such notice. As a condition of and prior to holding a public hearing the applicant, upon receipt of a statement for the Village legal publication and notification fees, shall reimburse the Village for said costs.
Part 4: Compliance
Any person, firm, company, corporation or agent, employees or contractors of such who shall violate, disobey, omit, neglect or refuse to comply with or resist enforcement of any provision of this Ordinance shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation of this Ordinance shall be permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
Part 5: Equity
If any building, structure or improvement is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this Ordinance, the Village of Frankfort, or any other person whose property is, or may be affected by such violation, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in equity.
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 181
ARTICLE 12: RULES AND DEFINITIONS
Section A: Rules and Definitions
In the construction of this Ordinance and any subsequent amendment, the rules and definitions contained in this Article shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise.
Part 1: Rules
The following shall be the rules that are to be used in interpreting and reading the text of this Ordinance:
a. Words used in the present tense shall include the future;
b. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural singular;
c. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary;
d. The word "may" is permissive;
e. The word "lot" shall include the words "piece" and "parcel;"
f. The word "building" shall include the word "structure" and shall include all other improvements of every kind, regardless of similarity to buildings;
g. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for" and "occupied for;"
h. The word "person" shall include a "firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well as an individual;" and
i. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
Part 2: Definitions
The following words and terms shall have the meaning set forth, except where otherwise specifically indicated. Words and terms not defined shall have the meaning indicated by common dictionary definition.
“1890's” Theme: The architectural style, external building wall veneer, window treatment, exterior design, decor and signs characteristic and reminiscent of a small, rural, tranquil, Midwestern village of the late 19th century.
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 182
Accessory Structure or Use: An “accessory structure or use” is one which:
a. Is subordinate to and serves a principal structure or principal use;
b. Is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal structure or principal use served;
c. Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants of the principal structure or principal use served; and
d. Is on the same zoning lot as the principal structure or principal use served.
Accessory Liquor Sales: The sale of alcoholic beverages as a supplementary component of a business or operation.
Active Open Space: An appropriately-sized and usable open space area, a minimum of one hundred twenty-five feet (125') wide, capable of comfortably supporting one or more active recreational activities, such as playgrounds, ball fields, tennis courts, swimming pools, recreation buildings, jogging trails/fitness courses, detention basins designed for recreational use, and other miscellaneous recreational activities.
Adult Use: Any establishment, including but not limited to arcades, bookstores, cabaret, hotel/motel, motion picture theatre, massage parlor, modeling studio, sexual encounter establishment, or store, charging any form of consideration; or a point of transmission or broadcast of video, internet content or other electronic media; at which a substantial portion of the stock-in-trade or business activities are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 183
Adult Use, Specified Anatomical Areas: As used herein, includes any of the following: (1) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or (2) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Adult Use, Specified Sexual Activities: As used herein, includes any of the following: (1) the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; (2) sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; (3) masturbation, actual or simulated; or (4) excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities (1) through (3).
Agriculture: Land including necessary buildings and structures for the raising of soil crops, or the raising of domestic animals, as the principal occupation of the residents or users thereof. It shall also include truck-farming, bee-keeping, the raising of fruit and berries and the sale of products thereof, but shall not include the feeding of garbage to animals.
Agricultural Warehouse: A place in which agricultural goods or equipment are stored; a storehouse. (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
Airport: An area of land or water which is used, or intended for the use, for the landing and taking-off of aircraft and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended for use for airport buildings or other airport facilities or rights-of-ways, including all necessary taxiways, aircraft storage and tie down areas, hangars and other necessary buildings and open spaces.
Alley: A dedicated public right-of-way, other than a street, that provides a secondary means of access to abutting property.
Alteration, Structural (for non-conforming structures): Any change which would tend to prolong the life of the supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.
Ambulance Service: A service that transports injured or sick persons, often to a hospital, in vehicles equipped for transporting such persons. The business may include facilities for servicing, repairing, and fueling the ambulances.
Amusement Device: Any device or game whether mechanical or electronic which may be operated by the public for use as a game, entertainment or amusement. For the purposes of this definition amusement devices include but are not limited to pool tables, dart boards, electronic / video games, pinball machines, jukeboxes, bean bag toss, horseshoes or similar games or devices. Those machines commonly referred to as mechanical “kiddie” rides and / or are intended primarily for use of children six years of age and younger shall be excluded from this definition.
Animal Clinic: A structure, or portion thereof, designed or used for the veterinary care, observation or treatment of domestic animals for periods which shall not include overnight stays.
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 184
Animal Feed Preparation: A manufacturing establishment which processes raw materials into food for animals such as dogs.
Animal Hospital: A structure, or portion thereof, designed or used for the veterinary care, observation or treatment of domestic animals for periods which may include overnight stays.
Animal Kennel: Any premise or portion thereof, on which dogs, cats or other domestic animals are kept, boarded, bred or cared for, in return for payment, or are kept for the purpose of sale.
Ammunition: Any self-contained cartridge or shell, by whatever name known, which is designed to be used or adaptable to use in a firearm; excluding however:
a. Any ammunition designed for use with a device used exclusively for signaling or safety and required by the United States Coast Guard or the Interstate Commerce Commission; or
b. Any ammunition designed exclusively for use with a stud or rivet driver or other similar industrial ammunition.
(Am. Ord. 2240, passed 11.21.05)
Arboretum/ Botanical Garden: An area, generally greater than five (5) acres in size, where trees, shrubs, and herbaceous plants are cultivated for scientific, educational, and ornamental purposes for the use and enjoyment of the general public. For the purposes of this definition, landscape plantings within a public park site shall not constitute an arboretum or botanical garden. (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
Assisted Living Facility: A combination of housing and maintenance services provided to residents on-site within the same building and in response to the individual needs of residents. Supportive services may include meals, housekeeping, transportation to shopping and medical appointments, social activities, educational activities, and security and response systems on-site within the same building to meet resident needs. These services can also include on-site medication management or intermittent health care services from qualified providers located within the same building. Services are furnished in a manner that promotes self-direction and participation in decisions that emphasize independence, individuality, and privacy in a residential surrounding. This definition shall not include group homes, health clinics, hospitals or treatment facilities, as defined by this Ordinance. (Am. Ord. 2247, passed 12.05.05)
Automobile, Boat, Camper, Equipment, Manufactured Home, Or Motorcycle Sales and Service: The sale of new and used automobiles, trucks, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural equipment, and similar industrial equipment, and other vehicles in operating condition; the storage of such vehicles in operating condition, but not including storage of trucks of more than five tons in weight or buses; and the repair and servicing of such vehicles, including body work, painting and motor rebuilding, when conducted within a completely enclosed building.
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 185
Automobile Rental Agency: Rental of automobiles, light trucks and vans, including incidental parking and servicing of vehicles for rent or lease.
Automobile Service Station (Gas Station): A place where gasoline, kerosene, lubricating oil, or grease for operation of automobiles are offered for sale directly to the public, on the premises, and including minor accessories and servicing of automobiles. Automobile service stations shall not include sales, rental, or storage of automobiles or trailers.
Automobile Wrecking: The dismantling of used motor vehicles or trailers; the burning of combustible parts thereof; or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled or wrecked motor vehicles or their parts.
Awning: A roof-like cover that is temporary in nature, and that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the elements.
Balcony: A level plane or platform which, for the purpose of this Ordinance, is located adjacent to one or more faces of the principal structure.
Banks and Financial Institutions: Commercial banks, savings and loan associations, brokerage offices and other similar financial institutions, but not including pawn shops.
Basement: That portion of a building having more than one-half (1/2) of its height below the average lot grade.
Bed and Breakfast: A residential building containing lodging rooms offered for rent to transient guests, for a continuous period of fourteen (14) days or less, and containing the owner's principal residence.
Billboard: A surface whereon advertising matter is set in view conspicuously and which advertising does not apply to premises or any use of premises wherein it is displayed or posted.
Billiard or Pool Hall: A business establishment containing more than two pool or billiard tables for the use of patrons.
Block: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, bulkhead lines, shore lines of waterways or corporate lines of the Village.
Body Piercing Establishment: An establishment whose principal business activity, either in terms of operation or as held out to the public, is the practice of piercing patrons’ bodies with sharp instruments in order to allow insertion of rings, pieces of jewelry, or other ornamental devices through the orifices thus created.
(Am. Ord. 2174, passed 07.05.05)
Bowling Alley: An establishment that devotes more than 50 percent of its gross floor area to bowling lanes, equipment, and playing area.
Breeding Facility: An establishment in which more than four (4) domestic animals, such as cattle or horses, are bred for commercial purposes.
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 186
Buffer Area: A landscaped area intended to separate and partially obstruct the view of two (2) adjacent
land uses or properties from one another.
Building: A permanently located, roofed structure affixed to the land which is designed or intended for
the enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals or moveable property of any
kind.
Building Height: The vertical distance measured from the sidewalk level or the established grade at the
curb, opposite the middle of the front of the building, to the highest elevation of the
roof. However, where buildings are set back from the street lines, the height of the
building may be measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade at the
front of the building.
The following appurtenances shall not be included in the calculation of building height:
a. Chimneys, flues, stacks, fire escapes, gas holders, elevator enclosures, ventilators,
skylights, water tanks and similar roof structures needed to operate and maintain the
building on which they are located.
b. Flag poles, television aerials mounted on rooftops, and water towers and tanks.
c. Decorative rooftop finials or spires up to four feet in height. (Am. Ord. 3229, passed
10.07.19)
Building Line: The line nearest the front of, and across a zoning lot, establishing the minimum open
space to be provided between the front line of a building or structure and the street
right-of-way line.
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 187
Building, Principal: A non-accessory building in which a principal use of the lot on which it is located is conducted.
Bulk: The size and placement of structures, including setbacks from streets, gross floor area of a building in relation to the lot area, the height of the structure, and the percentage of land coverage allowable for each building on a zoning lot.
Business District: Any zoning district designated with a "B" or “OR” classification, as outlined and defined in Article 4 of this Ordinance.
Cannabis: Marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as including any
parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin
extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives.
(Am. Ord. 2894, passed 02.05.14)
Cantilever: A projecting structure, such as a beam, supported at only one end that carries a load at the other end or along its length.
(Am. Ord. 2360, passed 01.25.07)
Capacity (in Persons): The maximum number of persons that can avail themselves of services (or goods) of an establishment, at any one time, with reasonable comfort.
Car Wash: A building, or portion thereof, containing facilities for washing vehicles; using automatic production-line methods with a chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device, or other mechanical devices; or providing space, water and equipment for the hand washing of automobiles, whether by the customer or the operator.
Cargo Container: A standardized, reusable vessel, designed without an axle or wheels, which was:
1. Originally, specifically, or formerly designed for or used in the packing, shipping, movement or transportation of freight, articles, goods or commodities, and/or,
2. Designed for or capable of being mounted or moved on a rail car, and/or,
3. Designed for or capable of being mounted on a chassis for movement by a truck trailer or loaded on a ship.
(Am. Ord. #2312, passed 8.21.06)
Carport: An open sided, roofed automobile shelter, usually formed by extension of the roof from the side of a building.
Cemetery: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such cemetery.
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 188
Club, Private (non-profit): A non-profit association of persons, who are bona fide members paying annual dues, which owns, hires or leases a building or portion thereof; the use of such premises being restricted to members and their guests. The affairs and management of such "private club" are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee or similar body chosen by the members. It shall be permissible to serve food and meals on the premises, providing adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available. The sale of alcoholic beverages to members and their guests shall be subject to compliance with the Village, State and Federal ordinances.
Code Official: A Code Official shall be defined as any duly authorized Village employee or employees who may, from time to time, administer the various codes and ordinances of the Village, including, but not limited to this Ordinance.
College or University: An institution providing full-time or part-time education beyond the high school level, including any dormitories, lodging rooms or other housing for students or faculty.
Columbarium: A vault with niches for cinerary urns.
Commercial Use: An occupation, employment or enterprise that is carried on for profit by the owner, lessee or licensee.
Common Open Space: Land that is devoid of structures, other than recreational and pedestrian facilities and uses accessory thereto, and is suitable for active and passive recreational activities. Common open space specifically excludes parking lots; street rights of way; front, rear and side yard setbacks if buildings and lots are subdivided and individually owned; private yard use areas; school sites; and retention ponds unless they are capable of sustaining water-based recreation. There are two types of common open space: active open space, and passive open space.
Condominium: All land, property, and space on which is built one or more attached, individually owned single-family residences or units.
Construction or Demolition Landfill: A lot of land used for the disposal of non-biodegradable, non-hazardous waste resulting from road building construction, remodeling, repair, or demolition of structures. (Does not include sanitary landfills or dumps)
Contiguous: In contact, adjoining or touching another object or item as distinguished from being adjacent.
Contiguous Area, Minimum: The area that may constitute a separate or detached part of any zoning district classification as set forth in this Ordinance.
Convenience Store: A small retail establishment with a floor area of 5,000 square feet or less offering for sale a limited line of groceries and household items intended for the convenience of the neighborhood.
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 189
Country Club: A private recreational facility operated for bona fide members paying annual dues for the use of a golf course and ancillary uses such as restaurants (including the sale of alcoholic beverages), residential uses for quests, managers and other employees, but not including commercially operated driving ranges or miniature golf courses.
Crematoria: Buildings containing a furnace for the incineration of corpses
Dairy Farm: An area of land on which cows are kept for the purpose of producing dairy products in commercial quantities, as well as the related buildings, equipment, and processes.
Day Care Center: A State licensed facility where a person, other than a relative or guardian, provides care and supervision for four (4) or more children under seven (7) years of age, or for four (4) or more seniors or adults requiring care, for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day for compensation.
Decibel: A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound. Sound level meters which are employed to measure the intensity of sound are calibrated in decibels.
Deck: A structure attached to or closely adjacent to any dwelling unit that is:
a. Designed and intended for the support of people;
b. Open to the sky and has no permanent roof; and
c. Is greater than fifty (50) square feet in area.
Density, Gross: The total number of dwelling units per gross acre of land determined by dividing the total gross acreage of a site by the minimum lot or dwelling unit size of the appropriate residential district.
Density, Net: The total number of dwelling units per net acre of land determined by dividing the calculated Net Acreage by the minimum lot or dwelling unit size of the appropriate residential district.
Detention Basin: A manmade or natural depression below the surrounding grade level designed to collect surface and subsurface water so that it might impede the water flow and to gradually release the same into natural or manmade outlets.
District: A section of the Village of Frankfort within which the regulations governing the use of land are the same.
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 190
Drive-In and Drive-Thru Establishment or Facility: Any commercial retail, personal service, or service establishment designed or intended to enable a customer in a motor vehicle parked on or moving through the premises to transact business with a person located within the principal structure, including an establishment or facility that by design of physical facilities or by service or packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive a service or obtain a product while staying within a motor vehicle. Such establishments include, but are not limited to, financial institutions, restaurants, and dry cleaning stores.
Driveway. On residential properties, a driveway shall be the paved area which provides exclusive access to the garage. For the purposes of calculating impervious surface coverage, a driveway shall not be wider than the width of the entrance to the associated garage,
Dump: A lot of land or part thereof used primarily for the disposal, by abandonment, dumping, burial, burning or any other means, of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, or waste material of any kind.
Dwellings: A building, or portion thereof, but not a mobile or manufactured home, designed or used for residential occupancy.
Dwelling, Attached: A residential building which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or walls.
Dwelling, Detached: A residential building which is entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot.
Dwelling, Multiple Family: A residential building containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
Dwelling, Single Family: A residential building containing one (1) dwelling unit only.
Dwelling, Two-Family: A residential building containing two (2) dwelling units only.
Dwelling Unit: One or more rooms in a residential building, or residential portion of a building, which are arranged, designed, used or intended for use by one family, and which includes cooking space and lawful, sanitary facilities reserved for the occupants thereof.
Easement: The area of land set aside or over or through which a privilege, distinct from ownership of the land, is granted to the public or some particular person, quasi-public entity (such as a homeowners’ association), or part of the public.
Efficiency Apartment: A dwelling unit containing one or more rooms, but no bedroom, designed for occupancy by one family.
Environmental Performance Standards: A criterion to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, or glare or heat generated by or inherent to uses of land or buildings.
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 191
Façade: The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view or that wall viewed by persons not within the building.
Factory-Built Housing: A factory-built structure designed for long-term residential use. For the purposes of these regulations, factory-built housing consists of three types: modular homes, manufactured homes, and mobile homes.
Family: Either (a) an individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit; (b) a group of not more than four (4) persons who are not related by blood, marriage, or adoptions living as a common household in a dwelling unit; or (c) a group of individuals not related by blood, marriage or adoption, living as a common household in a group home.
Farm: Land used for agricultural purposes.
Fence: A free standing structure of metal, masonry composition or wood, or any combination thereof, resting on, or partially buried in the ground, and rising above ground level, and used for confinement, screening, decorative or partition purposes.
Firearm: Any device, by whatever name known, which is designed to expel a projectile or projectiles by the action of an explosion, or expansion or escape of gas, pneumatic force, or other: excluding however:
a. Any device used exclusively for signaling or safety and required or recommended by the United States Coast Guard or the Interstate Commerce Commission;
b. Any device used exclusively for the firing of stud cartridges, explosive rivets, or similar industrial/construction ammunition;
c. Any firearm manufactured on or before 1898 or any replica thereof, if such replica is not designed or redesigned for using and discharging ammunition;
d. Any other firearm which, although designed as a weapon, the Department of Law Enforcement of the State of Illinois finds, by reason of the date of its manufacture, value, design, and other characteristics, is primarily a collector’s item that is not likely to be used as a weapon; and;
e. Any non-lethal device commonly used for recreational purposes including but not limited to air guns, bb-guns, and paintball guns.
(Am. Ord. 2240, passed 11.21.05)
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 192
Floor Area: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, or from the center line of walls separating two buildings, computed as follows:
a. For Determining Floor Area Ratio. The sum of the following areas:
1. The basement floor area, when more than one-half of the basement height is above the finished lot grade level where curb level has not been established;
2. Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor;
3. Floor space used for mechanical equipment (except equipment, open or enclosed, located on the roof);
4. Penthouses;
5. Attic space having headroom of seven feet, ten inches (7' 10") or more;
6. Interior balconies and mezzanines;
7. Enclosed porches; and
8. Floor area devoted to accessory uses.
Space devoted to off-street parking or loading shall not be included in the floor area of structures devoted to bulk storage of materials. The floor area of such structures shall be computed by counting each ten feet of height, or fraction thereof, as being equal to one floor.
b. For Determining Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements. The sum of the following areas:
1. Floor space devoted to the principal use of the premises, including accessory storage areas located within selling or working space such as counters, racks or closets;
2. Any basement floor area devoted to retailing activities; and
3. Floor area devoted to the production or processing of goods, or to business or professional offices.
For this purpose, floor area shall not include space devoted primarily to storage purposes (except as otherwise noted herein), off-street parking or loading facilities (including aisles, ramps and maneuvering space) or basement floor area other than area devoted to retailing activities, the production or processing of goods, or business or professional offices.
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 193
Floor Area Ratio (FAR): The ratio determined by dividing the floor area of a building or structure by the area of the lot on which the building or structure is located. When more than one building or structure is located on a lot, then the floor area ratio is determined by dividing the total floor area of all buildings or structures by the area of the lot, or, in the case of planned development, by the net acreage. The floor area ratio requirements, as set forth under each zoning district, shall determine the maximum floor area allowable for a building or other structure (including both principal and accessory buildings) in direct ratio to the gross area of the lot.
Foot-Candle: A unit of illumination. Technically, the illumination at all points one foot distance from a uniform point source of one candle power.
Frontage: The length of a front lot line or lines.
Frontage, Zoning Lot: All the property of such zoning lot frontage on a street, and measured between side lot lines.
Garage, Private: A building for the private use of the owner or occupant of a principal building situated on the same lot of the principal building for the storage of motor vehicles with no facilities for mechanical service or repair of a commercial or public nature.
Grade: The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building or structure.
Grocery Store: A retail establishment with a floor area of more than 5,000 square feet offering for sale a full line of groceries and household items.
Gross Acreage: The total acreage of a site less land within the platted rights-of-way of existing roads, utilities, and easements of access.
Group Home: A dwelling used to provide a socially dependent family environment for developmentally or mentally disabled patients, as specified in the 1988 Fair Housing Act Amendments of the Civil Rights Act of 1968. For purposes of this Ordinance, this definition shall not include “halfway houses,” uses for the recovering chemically dependent, prison work release programs or any use that does not house solely the developmentally or mentally disabled.
Group Home, Large: A group home of nine (9) to fifteen (15) residents, including live-in staff.
Group Home, Small: A group home of eight (8) or fewer residents, including live-in staff.
Guest House: Living quarters within a detached accessory building on the same premises with the principal building for use by temporary guests of the occupants of the premises.
Hatchery: An establishment specializing in hatching eggs (as of poultry or fish).
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 194
Hazardous Substances: Any substances or materials that, by reason of their toxic, caustic, corrosive, abrasive or otherwise injurious properties, may be detrimental or deleterious to the health of any person handling or otherwise coming into contact with such material or substance.
Health Clinic: An establishment, other than a hospital as defined herein, where human patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination and treatment by one or more physicians, dentists, other health care professionals, or similar professions.
Height, Maximum: A horizontal plane above and parallel to the average finished grade of the entire zoning lot at the height shown in the district regulations. The height of a structure, as defined in “Building Height” above, may not project through said plane.
Heliport: An area of land and/or a structure or building which is used or intended for use for the landing and taking off of helicopters, and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended for use for heliport buildings or other heliport facilities or rights-of-way, including all necessary pads, helicopter storage and tie down areas, hangars and other necessary buildings and open spaces.
Historic District: An area containing buildings or places in which historic events occurred or having special public value because of notable architectural or other features relating to the cultural or artistic heritage of the community, of such significance as to warrant conservation and preservation.
Home Day Care Center: A family home which receives up to three (3) children, or up to three (3) seniors or adults requiring care, for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day for compensation.
Home Occupation: A gainful occupation or profession engaged in by an occupant of a dwelling unit as a use that is clearly incidental to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes.
Homeowners’ Association: A non-profit membership corporation or entity which serves as an association of homeowners within a Subdivision, Certified Survey Plat, or Condominium who have shared common interest responsibilities with respect to the costs and upkeep of common private property of such Subdivision, Certified Survey Plat, or Condominium. Such common property includes private recreation and open space areas within the Subdivision, Certified Survey Plat, or Condominium. For the purposes of this Code, Homeowners’ Associations include Condominium Associations.
Hospital: An institution devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of facilities for the diagnosis, treatment, or care for not less than twenty-four (24) hours in any week, of three (3) or more non-related individuals suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity or other abnormal physical conditions. The term “hospital” as used in this Ordinance does not apply to institutions operating primarily for treatment of mental illness, drug addicts, liquor addicts, or other types of cases necessitating restraint of patients, and the term “hospital” shall not include assisted or independent living facilities, nursing homes, shelters or boarding houses.
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 195
Hotel: An establishment which is open to transient guests, in contradistinction to a boarding house, lodging house or apartment hotel, and is commonly known as a hotel in the community in which it is located; and which provides customary hotel services such as maid service, the furnishing and laundering of linen, telephone and secretarial or desk service, the use and upkeep of furniture, and bellboy service.
Impervious Lot Coverage: A ratio determined by dividing that area of a lot which is occupied or covered by all impervious surfaces, by the gross area of that lot. For purposes of calculating residential impervious lot coverage, impervious surfaces shall include accessory structures such as swimming pools, tennis and basketball courts, but shall not include residential sidewalks or a residential driveway as defined above.
Impervious Surface: A surface which does not absorb water. Impervious surfaces consist of all buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks, and any areas of concrete or asphalt. For lumberyards or similar uses, areas of stored lumber constitute impervious surfaces.
Independent Living Facility: Specially planned, designed, and managed multi-unit housing for the elderly with self-contained dwelling units. These communities are typically designed to provide supportive environments for older adults and to accommodate a relatively independent lifestyle. A limited number of support services, such as meals, laundry, housekeeping, transportation, and social and recreational activities may be provided. This definition shall not include group homes, health clinics, hospitals or treatment facilities, as defined by this Ordinance. (Am. Ord. 2247, passed 12.05.05)
Indoor Business Sales and Service: Uses which display or conduct, entirely within an enclosed building, the sale or rental of business-oriented products, equipment, merchandise, or services that are non-personal and non-professional in nature. Examples may include: duplicating or photocopying sales and service; addressing, mailing, or stenographic sales and services; locksmith shops; computer sales and service; employment agencies; and similar land uses.
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 196
Indoor Civic, Cultural, Religious, or Institutional Use: Civic, cultural, religious, or institutional uses which occur within an enclosed building. Examples may include: government offices, libraries, museums, aquariums, community centers, post office, fire/police/rescue station, hospitals, convention center, service/fraternal club or lodge, civic/social organization, labor union/organization, political organization, charitable organization, church, synagogue, temple, mosque, non-profit organization, educational institution (including schools, preschools, colleges and universities), and similar land uses. (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
Indoor Recreation and Entertainment: The indoor recreation and entertainment use classification applies to all uses which provide recreation or entertainment services entirely within an enclosed building. Examples may include: skating rink, arcades, billiards, bowling alley, dance hall/club, dance/music school or studio, gymnastic facility, martial arts facility, sports training facility, health/fitness club, country club indoor facilities, and similar land uses. (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
Indoor Retail Sales of Goods: The indoor retail sales of goods use classification applies to retail uses which display or conduct the sale or rental of merchandise entirely within an enclosed building. Examples may include: antique shops, furniture stores, hardware stores, grocery or food stores, department stores, clothing/wearing apparel stores, book stores, sporting goods stores, drug stores, pharmacies, florist shops, and similar land uses.
Industrial District: Any zoning district designated with an ”I” classification, for example “I-1.”
Junk: Old, dilapidated, scrap or abandoned metal, paper, building material and equipment, bottles, glass, appliances, furniture, beds and bedding, rags, rubber, motor vehicles and parts thereof.
Kitchen: Any room used, or intended or designed to be used, for cooking or the preparation of food.
Landscaping: The improvement of a lot, parcel or tract of land with grass, shrubs and trees. Landscaping may include pedestrian walks, flower beds, ornamental objects such as fountains, statuary and other similar natural and artificial objects designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing effect.
Landscaping Company: A company engaging in the cultivation, installation and or maintenance of flowers, grass, shrubs, and trees. (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
Laundromat/launderette: Any place, building, structure, room, establishment, or portion thereof having within such premises one or more self-service washing machines, which are rented, leased, or hired out to the general public for use upon such premises.
(Am. Ord. 2240, passed 11.21.05)
Laundry Equipment: Pole and wire or line used to suspend items to facilitate drying.
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 197
Limited Retail Sales in Connection with a Warehouse Use: Wholesale and warehouse establishments where products are stored and distributed, and contain a limited retail sales component where products can be sold “over the counter” to the general public. Said uses may possess a State of Illinois Department of Revenue Sales Tax Identification Number.
(Am. Ord. 2240, passed 11.21.05)
Lodging House: A building or premises where lodging is provided for compensation, for three (3) or more regular patrons and not to exceed twenty (20) patrons, and not for transients.
Long-Term Care Facility: A building or premises which must be licensed pursuant to the Illinois Nursing Home Care Act (210 ILCS 45/1-101 et seq.). This definition shall not include group homes, health clinics, hospitals or treatment facilities, as defined by this Ordinance. (Am. Ord. 2247, passed 12.05.05)
Lot: A platted parcel of land intended to be separately owned, developed and otherwise used as a unit.
Lot Area, Minimum: The minimum area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear lot lines.
Lot, Corner: A lot which adjoins the point of intersection or meeting of two or more streets, and in which the interior angle formed by the street lines is 135 degrees or less. If the street lines are curved, the angle shall be measured at the point of intersection of the extensions of the street lines in the directions which they take at the intersections of the street line, with the side lot line and with the rear lot line of the lot. If the street line is curved at its point of intersection with the side lot line or rear lot line, the tangent to the curve at that point shall be considered the direction of the street.
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 198
Lot Coverage: That percentage of a lot which, when viewed directly from above, would be covered by primary and accessory structures, or any part thereof, excluding projecting roof areas. For purposes of calculating maximum lot coverage, structures shall not include swimming pools, open porches, patios, decks, outdoor tennis or basketball courts, or similar open accessory uses.
Lot Depth: The distance between the midpoints of the front lot line and the midpoint of the rear lot line.
Lot Frontage, Minimum: The boundary of a lot along a public or private street.
Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot Line: A property boundary line of a lot.
Lot Line, Front: The boundary between a lot and the street right-of-way on which it fronts. On a corner lot, the shortest line adjacent to a street right-of-way shall be the front lot line.
Lot Line, Rear: The boundary of a lot which is most distant from, and is most nearly parallel to, the front lot line or front lot lines.
Lot Line, Side: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
Lot Line, Side (Corner Lot). Any side lot line on a corner lot which is adjacent to a street right-of-way.
Lot Width: The distance on a horizontal plane between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth at the established front building line.
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 199
Lot, Zoning: A parcel of land that is designated by its owner or developer, at the time of applying for a zoning certificate, as a tract all of which is to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit under single ownership. As long as it satisfies the above requirements, such lot may consist of:
a. A single lot of record;
b. A portion of a lot of record; or
c. A combination of complete lots of record, complete lots and portions of lots of record or portions of lots of record.
Major Highways: All roads, streets, avenues, thoroughfares or other types of vehicular traveled ways designated by a United States or State of Illinois route number.
Major Industrial Roadways: For purposes of this Ordinance, major industrial roadways shall be defined as Harlem Avenue, Center Road, U.S. Route 45 and Laraway Road.
Mansard Roof: A form of hipped roof in which the plane of each surface slopes up steeply from the eaves to a height sufficient to allow windows and headroom over a greater area, and then slopes much less steeply over the rest of the building.
Manufactured Housing: Single-family detached housing that is built to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 41 United States Code Sec. 5401 et seq., and the regulations promulgated there under. No manufactured home shall be constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than for the purpose of moving to a permanent site and no manufactured home shall have any wheels or axles permanently attached to its body or frame. For purposes of this Ordinance, regulations related to manufactured housing shall also be applied to mobile homes.
Manufactured Housing Park: A parcel of land under single ownership that has been planned and improved for the placement of manufactured housing for dwelling purposes.
Massage: A system of structured palpation or movement of the soft tissue of the body. The system may include, but is not limited to, techniques such as effleurage or stroking and gliding, petrissage or kneading, tapotement or percussion, friction, vibration, compression, and stretching activities. These techniques may be applied with or without the aid of lubricants, salt or herbal preparations, hydromassage, thermal massage, or a massage device that mimics or enhances the actions possible by human hands. “Massage” does not include actions taken by licensed acupuncturists, chiropractors, cosmetologists, estheticians, nail technicians, naprapaths, nurses, occupational therapists, physical therapists, physicians, or podiatrists in a manner consistent with their training and the code of ethics or their respective professions.
(Am. Ord. 2174, passed 07.05.05)
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 200
Massage Establishment: An establishment having a fixed place of business where any person, firm, association, or corporation receives compensation for engaging in or carrying on or permitting to be engaged in or carried on any of the activities constituting massage.
(Am. Ord. 2174, passed 07.05.05)
Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center: A facility operated by an organization or business
that is registered by the Department of Agriculture to perform necessary activities to
provide only registered medical cannabis dispensaries with usable medical cannabis.
(Am. Ord. 2894. Passed 02.03.14)
Medical Cannabis Dispensary: A facility operated by an organization or business that is
registered by the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a registered cultivation center solely for the purpose of dispensing cannabis, cannabis paraphernalia, or related supplies and associated educational materials to registered qualifying patients.
(Am. Ord. 2894. Passed 02.03.14)
Microbrewery / Distillery / Winery with Sampling Area: A facility in which beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages are brewed, fermented, or distilled for distribution and off-site consumption and / or limited on site consumption and which possesses the appropriate license from the State of Illinois. Retail sales and on site consumption of products is permitted in accordance with Article 5, Section C, Part 36 of this ordinance. (Am. Ord. 3041, passed 07.18.16)
Minimum Contiguous Area: The area that may constitute a separate or detached part of any zoning district classification as set forth in this Ordinance.
Mining: The development or extraction of a mineral from its natural occurrences on affected land.
Mobile Home: A factory-built structure transportable in one or more sections which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width and forty (40) body feet or more in length, or when erected on the site is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein, being built prior to enactment of the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 as amended, 41 United States Code Sec. 5401 et seq. No mobile home shall be constructed or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than for the purpose of moving to a permanent site and no mobile home shall have any wheels or axles permanently attached to its body or frame. For purposes of this Ordinance, mobile homes shall be subject to all regulations related to manufactured housing.
Modular Home: A dwelling unit not completely factory built or assembled, that when assembled takes on all the indications of a residential home in that it has siding, shingled roof, and is completely attached to a solid permanent foundation and not on jacks or wheels. In addition, a modular home is defined as a home that is constructed and placed on the owner’s land with the intent that the structure could not or would not be relocated.
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 201
Such homes must be certified as meeting the Building Code of the Village of Frankfort, and once certified, shall be subject to the same standards as site-built homes. Any structure constituting a mobile home or manufactured home as defined in this ordinance is expressly excluded from the definition of modular home.
Motel: A building, or portion thereof, or a group of buildings which provides sleeping accommodations without cooking facilities for transients on a daily or weekly basis, whether such establishments are designed as a hotel, inn, automobile court, motel, motor inn, motor lodge, tourist court or otherwise.
Motor Freight Terminal: A building or area in which freight brought by truck is assembled and/or stored for routing in intrastate and interstate shipment by truck or in which semi-trailers, including tractor and/or trailer units and other trucks are parked or stored.
Net Acreage: The gross acreage minus the acreage devoted to existing street rights-of-way, storm water retention and detention basins, bodies of water, public parks, school sites, municipal sites, wetlands, floodplains, and areas with slopes greater than twenty percent (20%).
Non-Conforming Building: A building or structure, or portion thereof, lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, which was designed, erected, or structurally altered after the effective date of this Code for a use that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
Non-Conforming Lot: A lot that lawfully existed prior to the enactment of the requirements of this ordinance, but which does not meet the minimum lot size or lot width requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
Non-Conforming Use: Any building, structure, or land lawfully occupied by a use which was lawfully established at the time of the adoption of this Code, or amendments hereto, and which does not conform after the effective date of this Code, or amendments hereto, with the use regulations of this Code. Said use shall be an active and actual use of the land and/or buildings which existed prior to the effective date of this Code.
Obstruction: Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, bridge conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock gravel, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or regulatory flood hazard area which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or that is placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to the damage of life or property.
Odor Threshold: The lowest concentration of odorous matter in air that will produce an olfactory response in a human being.
Office and Professional Service: The office of an engineer, doctor, dentist, attorney, real estate broker, insurance broker, architect or other similar professional person, and any office used
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 202
primarily for accounting, banking, correspondence, research, editing or administration. (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02)
Office Supplies Store: A retail store specializing in the sale of goods used in professional or business offices, such as paper, writing instruments, etc.
Official Newspaper: A newspaper of general circulation in the Village.
Open Porch: A roofed structure attached to a building and open on two or more sides. A porch shall not be considered open if enclosed by either a permanent or detachable glass sash.
Open Space: An area that is intended to provide light and air, and is designed for either environmental, scenic or recreational purposes. Open space may include, but is not limited to, lawns, decorative planting, walkways, active and passive recreation areas, playgrounds, fountains, swimming pools, wooded areas and water courses. Open space shall not be deemed to include driveways, parking lots or other surfaces designed or intended for vehicular travel (see also Active Open Space, Common Open Space, and Passive Open Space).
Outdoor Seating: An area of designated size used as a seating area with tables and chairs, associated with a contiguous restaurant and including the sale of food to patrons.
Outdoor Recreation and Entertainment: Uses which involve recreational activities or provide entertainment services partially or wholly outside of an enclosed building, on public or
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 203
private property. Examples may include: arboretums, natural areas, open grassed areas, picnic areas, picnic shelters, gardens, fishing areas, country clubs, playcourts (tennis, basketball, etc.), tot lots, outdoor swimming pools, swimming beach areas, fitness courses, golf courses, driving ranges, hiking/biking/cross country ski trails, horse trails, pet walking areas, miniature golf facilities, amusement parks, go-kart tracks, racetracks, and similar land uses.
Outdoor Storage: The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise or vehicles in the same place for more than twenty-four (24) hours.
Packaged Liquor Store: Any establishment selling beer, wine or alcoholic liquor at retail to the general public in sealed bottles, or other sealed containers, for consumption or use away from the premises where paid establishment is located.
Parcel: A continuous quantity of land in the possession of, or owned by, or recorded as the property of, the same person or persons.
Particulate Matter: Material other than water which is suspended in or discharged into the atmosphere in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid.
Passive Open Space: Open space a minimum of fifty feet (50') wide that is planned for passive use such as paths, picnic areas, wildlife or plant habitats, etc.
Personal Services: Personal service uses are exclusively indoor land uses in which personal
services are provided to individuals on a walk-in or on an appointment basis. Examples may include: barber shops, beauty shops, shoe repair/shoe shine shops, tailor/garment repair shops, small household appliance repair shops, dry cleaning shops (without plant facilities), travel office, and similar land uses. (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
Planned Unit Development (PUD): A parcel or tract of land, initially under single ownership or control, to be developed as a unified project and single entity which may contain two or more principal buildings and/or more than one principal use. The PUD is planned as a functionally and physically integrated development as a single entity, under single ownership or control, although portions of the parcel may be sold off to another party to be developed according to the approved PUD plan.
Preschool: A facility providing day care with or without educational services for children primarily between the ages of three and five.
Principal Structure: A structure in which a principal use of the lot on which the structure is located is conducted.
Principal Use: The primary use of land or structures as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use.
Public Garage: A publicly owned structure designed to accommodate vehicular parking spaces that are fully or partially enclosed or located on the deck surface of a building.
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 204
Queuing Space: On-site area required, as to the number of vehicles that must be accommodated, while awaiting ingress or egress to specified business or service establishments.
Recreational Equipment: Travel trailers, pick-up campers or coaches, motorized dwellings, tent trailers, boats, snowmobiles, trailers, dune buggies, airplanes and other equipment designated for recreational use, pick-up camper units, pick-up covers and similar accessory appurtenances. Vehicles used primarily as the family car or as daily transportation to and from work are excluded from this definition.
Recreational Vehicle: Any vehicle, used or so constructed as to permit it being used as a conveyance upon the public streets and highways, and licensable as such, which is constructed in such a manner that will permit occupancy as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons, including also a self propelled vehicle having body designed as living quarters.
Remodeling: Any change in a structure, including a structural alteration (other than incidental repairs and normal maintenance) which may prolong its useful life, or the useful life of its supporting members such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, girders or foundations; or the construction of any addition to, or enlargement of, a structure; or the removal of a structure.
Research Facilities: A building or group of buildings with facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing, or experimentation, but not primarily facilities for the manufacture or sale of products.
Residence District: Any zoning district designated with and “R” for example, “R-2.”
Residential Building: A building all or part of which contains one or more dwelling units, including single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, multiple-family dwellings, and lodging houses.
Restaurant, Full Service: A public eating house where customers order their meal from a menu containing a wide selection of hot and cold foods, including but not limited to a variety of soups and salads, appetizers, lunch and dinner entrees, and desserts that are prepared on site and are served at a table by a waiter or waitress, dining tables and chairs or booths occupy the customer floor area during all operating hours, all menu items and specials are regularly available until one hour prior to closing, and food sales comprise the majority of all revenues generated by the business
Restaurant / Tavern: A public eating-house where customers order their meal from a menu containing a wide selection of hot and cold foods, including but not limited to a variety of soups and salads, appetizers, lunch and dinner entrees, and desserts that are prepared on site and are served at a table by a waiter or waitress. Restaurants / Taverns often provide a reduced menu after ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. and include sources of entertainment not typically provided in a full service restaurant. Food sales comprise the majority of all revenues generated by the business.
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 205
Restaurant, Carry-Out: A restaurant whose principal business operation is the dispensing of edible foodstuff and/or beverage, without full table services. Food sold may be eaten at indoor seating (without table service), at stand-up counters, or to be carried off the premises.
Retail Sales: The sale of goods, merchandise and commodities for use or consumption.
Retention Basin: A manmade or natural body of water designed to contain water at all times, the level of which will be increased from the flow of surface and subsurface water, collected therein and released gradually into natural or manmade outlets.
Right-of-Way: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees or other special use.
Road, Public: A public property right-of-way reserved or dedicated for street traffic.
Road, Private: A way open to vehicular ingress and egress, not under public ownership, established as a separate tract for the benefit of certain, adjacent properties. This shall not apply to driveways.
Roadside Stand: A structure for the display and sale of agricultural products, with no space for customers within the structure itself.
ROW: Abbreviation for Right-of-Way. (Am. Ord. 1887, passed 04.15.02)
Rowhouse: See Townhouse.
Sanitary Landfill: A lot of land used for the compaction and burial of non-hazardous and non-medical farm, residential, institutional, commercial, or industrial waste.
Self-Service Storage Facility: A building consisting of individual, small, self-contained units that are leased or owned for the storage of business and household goods or contractors’ supplies.
Service Counter: A counter at which food and / or beverages are served to customers and that does not include any customer seating. (Am. Ord. 3041, passed 07.18.16)
School: A facility that provides a curriculum of elementary and secondary academic instruction, including kindergartens, elementary schools, junior high schools and high schools.
Screening: Decorative fencing or evergreen vegetation maintained for the purpose of concealing from view the area behind such structures or evergreen vegetation.
Setback: The distance between the lot line and the principal building on the lot.
Shopping Center: A group of commercial establishments located on the same parcel of land, not having interior access to each individual establishment.
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 206
Shopping Mall: A group of commercial establishments located under one roof and having interior access to each individual establishment.
Sign: Any writing (including letters, words, or numerals), pictorial representation (including devices, symbols, or trademarks), flag, banner, streamer, pennant, string or lights, or display calculated to attract the attention of the public for purposes of advertising services, displays, products, image, or corporate identity, or any other figure of similar character which:
a. Is a structure or any part thereof, or a portable display, or is attached to, painted on or in any other manner represented on a building or other structure or on the ground.
b. Is used to announce, direct attention to or advertise.
Sign, Double-Faced: A double faced sign has two faces with identical copy on each face and with the maximum angle between said faces no greater than forty-five (45) degrees.
Sign Location: The sign location is determined by measuring from the furthermost projecting point of the sign to the front lot line.
Site Plan: A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensions, the boundaries of a site and the location of all buildings, structures, uses and principal site development features proposed for a specific parcel of land.
Smoke: Small gas-borne particles other than water that form a visible plume in the air.
Standard Cubic Feet (SCF): Standard cubic feet, which is the measure of the volume of a gas reduced to 14.73 pounds per square inch pressure absolute and 60% F.
Street: A public or private thoroughfare used, or intended to be used, for passage or travel by motor vehicles. Streets are further classified by the functions they perform. See also Major Highway; Major Industrial Roadway; Road, Private; Road, Public; Street, Arterial; Street, Major Collector; Street, Minor; and Street, Neighborhood Collector.
Street, Arterial: A federal, state, or county marked route normally having four (4) lanes for traffic and some form of median marker or may be a Village-designated “arterial street” in the adopted Comprehensive Plan. Parking may be banned. A street used, or intended to be used, primarily for fast or heavy through traffic providing for the expeditious movement of through traffic into, out of, and within the community. Arterial streets shall be located to minimize the penetration of such streets through existing and proposed residential areas. Arterial streets shall be designed to convey an average daily traffic (ADT) of ten thousand (10,000) and greater.
Street, Major Collector: A street used, or intended to be used, to carry traffic from minor streets to the system of arterial streets including principal entrance streets to residential developments and/or activity/employment centers. Collector streets shall be designed to convey an average daily traffic (ADT) of between five thousand (5,000) and ten thousand (10,000).
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 207
Street, Minor: A street used, or intended to be used, primarily to access abutting properties. Residential minor streets designed as either looped or through streets shall be designed so that no section conveys an average daily traffic (ADT) in excess of five hundred (500). Residential minor land access streets designed as permanent cul-de-sacs shall be designed so that no section conveys an average daily traffic (ADT) greater than two hundred-fifty (250).
Street, Neighborhood Collector: A street used, or intended to be used, to carry traffic to and from neighborhoods within the community it serves. Neighborhood collector streets shall be expected and designed to convey an average daily traffic (ADT) of less than two thousand (2,000).
Structure: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground including buildings, fences, walls and signs.
Surety Bond: A bond guaranteeing performance of a contract or obligation through forfeiture of the bond if said contract or obligation is unfulfilled.
Swimming Pools: Any structure having a depth of two feet (2’) or more at any point, including inflatable or temporary structures, basins, chambers, or tanks containing an artificial body of water for swimming and wading, with or without circulation pumps/filtrate systems or which is dug into the ground, not to include hot tubs, storm water detention or retention ponds, or other bodies of water not specifically designed for swimming.
(Am. Ord. 2230, passed 10.17.05)
Tattooing Establishment: An establishment whose principle business activity, either in terms of operation or as held out to the public, is the practice of placing designs, letters, figures symbols, or other marks upon or under the skin of any person, using ink or other substances that result in the permanent coloration of the skin by means of the use of needles or other instruments designed to contact or puncture the skin.
Tasting Room: A permanent location dedicated to the tasting of beer or wine within a duly licensed retail establishment within which beer or wine may be provided for sale and / or consumption by the customer prior to their retail purchase.
Tavern: An establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. Food sales are often provided however do not comprise the majority of all revenue generated by the business.
Taxicab Association: A service that offers transportation to persons including those who are handicapped in return for remuneration. The business may include facilities for servicing, repairing, and fueling the taxicabs or vans.
Telecommunications Antenna: A specific device, the surface of which is used to transmit and/or receive electromagnetic waves or other signals transmitted to or from other antennas for commercial purposes.
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 208
Telecommunication Station and Transmission Tower: A tower, pole, or similar structure that supports a telecommunications antenna operated for commercial purpose above ground in a fixed location, freestanding, guyed, or on a building or other structure; and the land and accessory buildings and equipment associated with said tower, pole or structure.
Telecommuting: The relocation of work activities to a home or satellite work site to eliminate or reduce the distance traveled in a commute. Telecommunications, computers, and other supporting activities may be employed during telecommuting.
Temporary Use: A prospective use, intended for limited duration, to be located in a zoning district not permitting such use, and not continuing a non-conforming use or building.
Terrace/Patio: A level plane or platform which, for the purposes of this Ordinance, is located adjacent to one or more faces of the principal structure, and which is constructed more than four (4) feet in height above the average level of the adjoining ground.
Theater, Indoor: A building or rooms specifically designed for the purpose of showing motion pictures, lectures and seminars, live performances such as theatrical plays and performances, concerts, church services or school graduations.
Tobacco Store: A retail establishment that derives more than 10% of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, tobacco plants, cigars, cigarettes, pipes, and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and related smoking accessories including electronic cigarettes, personal vaporizers, and electronic nicotine delivery systems, or which devotes more than 10% of its gross floor area to the display, advertising, merchandising and/or stock of said products and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental.
(Am. Ord. 2780, passed 06.04.12)(Am. Ord. 2957, passed 12.01.14)
Townhouse: An attached dwelling unit, separated by vertical fire walls, in which each dwelling unit has its own front and rear yards, and has appropriated to it the entire building between the fire wall.
Toxic Matter: Any solid, liquid, or gaseous matter, including but not limited to, gases, vapors, dusts, fumes, and mists, containing properties which by chemical means are inherently harmful and likely to destroy life or impair health, or capable of causing injury to the well-being of persons or damage to property.
Trailer: A vehicle standing on wheels or on rigid supports which is used for transporting boats, cargo, or property.
Transit and Transportation Facilities: Improvements and facilities associated with bus, rail, or other modes used primarily to move passengers, including bus stations, railroad stations, rail yards, and areas for passenger parking, pickup, drop off, and waiting.
Treatment Facility: A building or premises used for the provision of any service licensable under the Illinois Alcoholism and Other Drug Abuse and Dependency Act (20 ILCS 301/1-1 et seq.), including but not limited to emergency, outpatient, intermediate and residential service or care.
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 209
(Am. Ord. 2247, passed 12.05.05)
Use: Any purpose for which a structure or a tract of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained, or occupied; also, any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a structure or on a tract of land.
Use Regulations: The provisions of this Ordinance which identify permitted uses, impose use limitations, require adherence to performance standards, and regulate home occupations and accessory and temporary uses.
Utility Facilities: All lines and facilities related to the provision, distribution, collection, transmission, or disposal of water, storm and sanitary sewage, oil, gas, power, information, telecommunication and telephone cable, and includes facilities for the generation of electricity. These services may be provided by a public or a private agency. Telecommunications towers and accessory buildings are explicitly excluded from this definition.
Variation: A dispensation permitted on individual parcels of property as a method of alleviating unnecessary hardship by allowing a reasonable use of the building, structure or property, which, because of unusual or unique circumstances, is denied by the terms of this Ordinance.
Vehicle Repair: General repair, overall painting, engine repairing or rebuilding, reconditioning of motor vehicles or trailers (such as body or frame work) and fender straightening.
Vibration: The periodic displacement or oscillation of the earth.
Warehouse: A use engaged in storage, wholesale, and distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment.
Wetland: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that, under normal circumstances, does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
Wholesale Establishment: The sale of goods, merchandise and commodities for resale, without the collection of retail sales taxes.
Wing Wall: An extension of a façade of a structure that is constructed on a foundation for decorative or architectural purposes is of limited height, generally not exceeding four feet (4’), and does not create additional floor area. A wing wall cannot serve as a retaining wall. (Am. Ord. 2495, passed 08.04.08)
Yard: Open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except for the permitted obstructions listed in Article 1, Section I.
Village of Frankfort
Article 12: Rules and Definitions
September 17, 2001 210
Yard, Front: A yard extending along the full length of a front lot line and back to a line drawn parallel to the front lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required front yard.
Yard, Rear: A yard extending along the length of the rear lot line and back to a line drawn parallel to the rear lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required rear yard.
Yard, Side: A yard extending along a side lot line and back to a line drawn parallel to the side lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the width of the required minimum side yard, but excluding any area encompassed within a front yard or rear yard. Dimensions of minimum side yard specified in the district regulations of this Ordinance refer to the required width of each side yards, unless otherwise specified.
Yard, Side (Corner Lot): A yard on a corner lot, extending along the full length of the side lot line which abuts a street right-of-way and back to a line drawn parallel to said side lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required corner lot side yard.
Yard, Transitional: The required front, side, or rear yard, between a business or manufacturing district and a residential district.
Village of Frankfort
Article 13: Repealer, Severability, and Effective Date
September 17, 2001 211
ARTICLE 13: REPEALER, SEVERABILITY, AND EFFECTIVE DATE
Section A: Repealer
That all other ordinances or parts or provisions of ordinances of the Village of Frankfort which are inconsistent with this ordinance are hereby expressly repealed.
Section B: Severability
In the event any word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, provision, or section of this Ordinance or any portion thereof shall be held to be unconstitutional, unenforceable, or void, the same shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any remaining words, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, provisions, or sections thereof.
Section C: Effective Date
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effective from and after the date of its passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
PASSED, this 17th day of September , 2001; with 6 members voting AYE;
0 members voting NAY; and 0 members absent; the President not voting; with
members abstaining or passing and said vote being:
CYNTHIA CORSO HEATH aye JIM HOLLAND aye
AL KRUSEMARK, JR. aye TODD S. MORGAN aye
RICHARD TREVARTHAN aye R. DOUGLAS WALKER aye
APPROVED this 17th day of September , 2001
__________________________ ___________________________
THOMAS E. BARTKUS RAYMOND E. ROSSI
VILLAGE CLERK VILLAGE PRESIDENT
ATTEST:
_______________________________
THOMAS E. BARTKUS
VILLAGE CLERK
 
 
 
 
 




 



 


